CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LOWELL, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2012 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LOWELL, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
James D. Maatman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Charles R. Doyle 
M. Jack Fonger 
James W. Hodges 
William F. Thompson 
City Council 
____________ 
David M. Pasquale 
City Manager-City Clerk 
____________ 
Richard A. Wendt 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Betty R. Morlock 
Deputy City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lowell, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Code, as supplemented through December 15, 2008, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1971 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Zanne Ebersole, Editor, and Aline True, Quality Control Specialist, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Betty Morlock, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 91-1 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Lowell, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Lowell: 
    Section 1. That the Code entitle "Code of Ordinances, City of Lowell," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 24, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 7, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both by fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 4, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective April 20, 1991. 
    Passed and Adopted by the City Council this 1st day of April, 1991. 
/s/                                        
     Mayor James D. Maatman   /s/                                        
     Clerk David M. Pasquale   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Lowell, held on the 1st day of April, 1991. 
/s/                                        
     Clerk David M. Pasquale   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance
NumberIncluded/
OmittedSupplement
Number12-04 Included112-05 Included1Ref. of  8- 5-13 Included113-01 Included113-02 Included113-03 Included114-01 Included114-02 Included114-03 Included115-01 Included115-02 Included115-03 Included115-05 Included115-06 Included1 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Resolution of Adoption 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Lowell, pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Michigan, in order to secure the benefits of self-government, and to provide for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property, do hereby ordain and establish this Charter for the City of Lowell. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Printed herein is the Lowell Charter as adopted by the electors on March 7, 1960. Words appearing in brackets [] herein have been added by the editor for clarification. Obvious misspellings have been corrected and a uniform style of capitalization and punctuation has been used.

CHAPTER 1. - BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY 

Section 1.1. - Boundaries. 
    The following described territory, together with all territories that may be annexed thereto, shall constitute the territory and be known as the City of Lowell, and shall be subject to the municipal control thereof: 
    The West one-half of Section 1; all of Section 2; Section 3, except therefrom the North one-half of the North one-half thereof; that part of Section 10 lying North of Grand River; all that part of Sections 11 and 12 described as: 
Commencing on the North line of Section 12 at the North and South one-quarter line of said Section; thence South along the North and South one-quarter line to the North edge of the Grand Trunk Railroad right-of-way; thence Southwesterly along the North edge of said railroad right-of-way to the centerline of Segwun Avenue, also known as Hudson Street in the Village of Lowell, thence North along the centerline of said Segwun Avenue to the North bank of Grand River; thence Southwesterly along the North Bank of Grand River to the West line of Section 11; thence North on the West line of Section 11 to the North line of Section 11; thence East along the North lines of Sections 11 and 12 to the point of beginning; all being in Town 6 North, Range 9 West, Lowell Township, Kent County, Michigan. 
Section 1.2. - [Boundary Changes.] 
    Upon the annexation or detachment of territory, the boundaries of the city shall be changed without amendment to this section. 
    The Clerk shall maintain and keep available in his office for public inspection and distribution copies of the official boundary description and map of the current boundaries of the city. 
Section 1.3. - [Wards.] 
    The City shall consist of and constitute one single ward. 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2.1. - Records to be Public. 
(a)	After the effective date of this Charter, the City shall be vested with all the property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books and papers belonging to the Village of Lowell and to that part of Lowell Township being annexed hereby. 
(b)	No right or liability, either in favor of or against the Village of Lowell existing at the time this Charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by any change, resulting from the adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the Village of Lowell shall continue to be the debts and liabilities of the city and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected. 
Section 2.2. - [Inspection of Records.] 
    All records of the City shall be public, unless otherwise provided by law; shall be kept in City offices, except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to be elsewhere; and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
Section 2.3. - Definitions and Interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of this Charter: 
(a)	The word "City" shall mean the City of Lowell;
(b)	The word "Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Lowell;
(c)	The word "officer" shall include, but shall not be limited to the Mayor, the members of the Council and, as hereinafter provided, the administrative officers, deputy administrative officers, and members of the city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this Charter; 
(d)	The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships and associations, as well as to individuals; 
(e)	The words "printed" and "printing" shall include printing, engraving, stencil[ing], duplicating, lithographing, typewriting, photostating, or any similar method; 
(f)	Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include hand written script, printing, typewriting, and teletype and telegraphic communications; 
(g)	The word "publish" or "published" shall include publication of any matter, required to be published, in the manner provided by law or, where there is no applicable law, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City, qualified by law for the publication of legal notices, or, as an alternate therefor, shall be posted in at least one public place in each election precinct; 
(h)	The words "public utility" shall include all common carriers in the public streets; water, sewage disposal, electric light and power, gas, telephone and telegraph lines and systems, garbage collection, garbage disposal, refuse collection, refuse disposal and reduction plants, and such other and different enterprises as the Council may, from time to time, determine or designate; 
(i)	All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement to which any provision of the Charter is applied; 
(j)	The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
Section 2.4. - Official Performance. 
    Whenever this Charter requires the performance of an act by an officer, the act may be performed by a deputy or by a subordinate, under the officer's directions, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 2.5. - Public Records as Evidence. 
    All papers, books, or other records of any matter required to be kept by any of the several departments of the municipal government, either by law or by the provisions of any ordinance, shall be deemed public records of such department, and they, or copies, duly certified by the custodian thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of their contents in all suits at law or in equity, or in other proceedings. 
Section 2.6. - Quorum. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Charter, a quorum of any Board created by or under authority of this Charter shall consist of a majority of the number of its members as established by this Charter, or by the ordinance creating such commission or Board. The concurring vote of a majority of such established number of members of each such Board shall be necessary for official action by it. 
Section 2.7. - Sundays and Holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by law or ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 2.8. - Estoppel. 
    No estoppel may be invoked against the City. 
Section 2.9. - Penalties for Violation of Charter. 
    Any person or officer of the City found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of any violation of this Charter may be punished by a fine which, in addition to Court costs charged to him, shall not exceed Five Hundred Dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Court. For an officer of the City the punishment provided in this section shall be in addition to that of having the office declared vacant as provided in this Charter. This section shall not operate to limit or prejudice the power to remove officers or discharge employees as provided in this Charter. 
Section 2.10. - Chapter and Section Headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered as part of this Charter. 
Section 2.11. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 2.12. - Severability of Charter Provisions. 
    If any provision, section, or clause of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be found to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the Charter, which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, and, to this end, this Charter is declared to be severable. 
Section 2.13. - City Liability. 
    The City shall not be liable to pay damages for injuries which arise out of governmental functions, sustained by any person either to his person or property by reason of the negligence of the City, its officers or employees, nor by reason of any defective condition of or obstruction in any public place unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk, within sixty days after the injury resulting in such damages shall have occurred, a notice in writing, which notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred; the extent of such damages as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant and a statement that the person sustaining such damages intends to hold the City liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. 
    The City shall not be liable for any damage to person or property arising out of any such injury unless there shall have been first presented to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath setting forth particularly the time, place, nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof. No person shall bring any action against the City for any such damages until such claim shall have been filed with the clerk and until the Council shall have been given reasonable opportunity to act thereon, either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any Court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the City under this section that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim as in this section required were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 3.1. - General Powers. 
(a)	Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the City and its officers shall possess and be vested with all the powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities are, or hereafter may be, permitted by law to exercise or to include in their Charters. The enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this section or elsewhere in this Charter shall not be held to be exclusive. 
(b)	The City and its officers shall have power to manage and control its finances, rights, interests, buildings, and property, to enter into contracts, to do any act to advance the interest, good government, and prosperity of the City and its inhabitants, to protect the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare, and to restrain and prevent crime and vice. In the exercise of such powers, the City may enact ordinances, rules, and regulations and take such other action as may be required, not inconsistent with law. The power of the City shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	To declare as a hazard or nuisance any act or condition, upon public or private property, or both, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of rubbish and the growing of noxious weeds, which is, or may be dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City; to provide for the abatement thereof, and to provide that the cost of such abatement shall be charged as a special assessment against the real property on which the hazard or nuisance is located. 
(2)	To provide for the public welfare by:
(a)	Regulating trades, occupations, and amusements within the City, and prohibiting trades, occupations, and amusements which are detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of its inhabitants; 
(b)	Regulating the preparation, storage, transportation, and sale of foods, drugs, and beverages for human consumption; 
(c)	Collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish;
(d)	Regulating and restricting the locations of oil and gasoline stations;
(e)	Licensing, and regulating the number of vehicles, which carry persons or property for hire, fixing the rates of fare and charges, and determining the locations of stands for such vehicles; 
(f)	Licensing and regulating billboards and advertising signs and the locations thereof;
(g)	Regulating the construction, erection, alteration, equipment, repair, moving, removal, and demolition of buildings and structures and their appurtenances and service equipment; 
(h)	Establishing zones within the City and regulating therein the use and occupancy of lands or structures; the height, area, size and location of buildings; the required open spaces for light and ventilation of buildings, and the density of population; 
(i)	Regulating, limiting, and prohibiting the construction and use of buildings and lands in order to promote the public safety and to prevent fires; 
(j)	Regulating and controlling the use of streams, waters, and water courses within the City in any manner consistent with the provisions of law. 
(3)	To establish and reasonably control streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, and the space above and beneath them, and the use thereof by: 
(a)	Creating and vacating the same and acquiring and disposing of land, or any interest in land, required therefor, including any surplus land which may be incidental to or necessary for the purchase of land required; 
(b)	Providing a plan of streets and alleys within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the limits of the City; 
(c)	Requiring the owners of real property to build and maintain public sidewalks in the area of streets immediately adjacent to such property, and, upon the failure of any owner to do so, constructing and maintaining such sidewalks and assessing the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(d)	Compelling all persons to care for the untraveled portions of streets lying between the traveled portion and the property line which abut upon premises owned, controlled, or occupied by them, and to keep the same free from weeds and from objects which are offensive or hazardous to public health and safety, and, upon the failure to do so, cutting and removing such weeds and removing such objects and assessing the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(e)	Compelling all persons to keep sidewalks which are in the area of streets immediately adjacent to the premises owned, controlled, or occupied by them, free from snow, ice, dirt, wood, weeds, shrubbery, or any other object which obstructs such sidewalks, or which makes the same hazardous or offensive to the public health or safety; and, upon failure of such persons to do so, to cut and remove such weeds and to remove such objects, and to assess the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(f)	Providing for the grade of streets and requiring public utility users of streets to conform thereto with respect to their tracks or facilities located on, above, or under the streets or alleys; requiring railroads to keep their tracks and the street surface between the tracks, and for a distance of one and one-half feet on each side of them, in reasonable repair at all times; 
(g)	Regulating the speed of vehicles, trains, and locomotives upon or across the streets within the provisions and limitations of law, and the stopping and parking of the same upon the streets and at street crossings; 
(h)	Providing for and regulating the lighting of streets and alleys, whether such lights be located on public or private property; 
(i)	Preventing and abating the encumbering of streets and alleys or any part thereof;
(j)	Regulating the location of buildings and structures and of trees and shrubbery at and near street corners and street intersections with alleys and driveways, so as to provide for the public safety and welfare in the use of streets and alleys; 
(k)	Providing for and regulating the numbering of buildings upon property abutting streets and alleys and compelling the owners and occupants thereof to affix numbers thereto; 
(l)	Providing for the use by other than the owner, of property located on, above, or under the streets, alleys, and public places, in the operation of a utility, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation therefor to the owner thereof; 
(m)	Providing for the planting and general care and protection of trees and shrubbery within the streets and public places of the city and preventing the cutting of limbs and branches for the placing and maintenance of utility wires without the consent of the designated officer or agency of the city; 
(n)	Prohibiting or regulating of the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers within the City, and the right of the City to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated thereof because of any detachment from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation or in any manner whatsoever; 
Editor's note- A local government may not generally exclude mobile homes pursuant to section 7 of Act No. 419 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 125.1107). 
(o)	Providing for the control over all trees, shrubs and plants in the public streets, highways, parks, or other public places in the City, all dead and diseased trees on private property and trees on private property overhanging the street, sidewalk, or public places, including the removal thereof and assessing the cost thereof against the abutting property as a special assessment. 
(4)	To undertake any public work or make any public improvement or any repair or replacement thereof, either directly or by contract with public bodies or private persons; and to participate in any public work or public improvement under any lawful plan by which the whole or partial support of such work or improvement is provided by another governmental unit or agency; 
(5)	To construct, provide, maintain, extend, operate, and improve:
(a)	Within the City: a city hall, city office buildings, community buildings, police stations, fire stations, civic auditoriums, public libraries, and polling places; and 
(b)	Either within or without the corporate limits of the City or Kent County: Public parks, recreation grounds and stadiums, municipal camps, public grounds, zoological gardens[,] museums, airports and landing fields, cemeteries, levees, embankments, and structures for flood control and other purposes related to the public health, safety, and welfare; electric light and power plants and systems, public heating plant and systems, gas plants and systems, waterworks and water treatment plants and systems, sewage disposal plants and systems, storm sewers, garbage collection and disposal facilities, refuse and rubbish collection and disposal facilities, market house and market places, facilities for storage and parking of vehicles, hospitals, facilities for the landing of helicopters and air vehicles having like landing characteristics, and any other structure or facility which is devoted to or intended for public purposes within the scope of the powers of the City. 
(6)	To acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, or otherwise, real and personal property, and interests in property, either within or without the corporate limits of the City or of Kent County, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, including, but not by way of limitation, the uses and purposes set forth in this section; 
(7)	To join with any municipal corporation or with any other unit or agency of government, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract or otherwise, as may be permitted by law, in the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly or by one or more on behalf of all, of any property, facility or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately. 
CHAPTER 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS OF THE CITY 

Section 4.1. - Officers to be Elected, Terms of Office. 
(a)	The elective officers of the City shall be the five Councilmen and a Justice of the Peace. 
(b)	At each regular City election, three Councilmen shall be elected, two to serve for a term of two years and one to serve for a term of one year. The two receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of office of two years, the one receiving the third highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of office of one year. 
    In the event there is a vacancy in the office of Councilmen to be filled at such election pursuant to Section 4.9(a) of this Charter, the candidate receiving the fourth highest number of votes shall be elected to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(c)	The terms of office of Councilmen shall commence at the first regular meeting of the Council in January immediately following the regular City election at which they were elected, provided the term for Councilmen elected in November 2013, in November 2015, and for a four-year term in November 2017, shall commence at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday next following the election at which they were elected. 
(d)	The term of office of the Justice of the Peace shall be four years commencing on the 4th day of July next following his election. 
(Ref. of 8-5-13) 
Editor's note- Justices of the peace were abolished by section 9921 of Act No. 154 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 600.9921) which created the district court system. 
Section 4.2. - Officers to be Appointed, Terms of Office. 
(a)	The appointive officers of the City shall be a City Manager, a City Attorney, a Clerk, a Treasurer, a Finance Officer, if there be one, an Assessor, a Health Officer, a Chief of Police, a Fire Chief, and such other administrative officers as may be established by the Council. The Council may establish additional administrative offices and may combine any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the City, but the Council may not diminish the duties or responsibilities of the office of City Manager. The City Manager, Attorney, Clerk and Treasurer shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period, shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. 
(b)	All administrative officers of the City, except the City Manager, Attorney, Clerk and Treasurer, shall be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite period. Such officers shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall have their compensation fixed by the City Manager in accordance with budget appropriations. Such officers may be discharged by the City Manager at his pleasure. 
Section 4.3. - City Employees. 
    All personnel employed by the City, who are not elected officers or declared to be appointive officers by or under authority of this Charter, shall be deemed to be employees of the City. Each member of the police and fire forces of the City shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by Section 2 of Article XVI of the State Constitution, but shall not, because of such fact, be an officer of the City. 
Section 4.4. - Eligibility for Office in the City. 
(a)	No person shall hold any elective office of the City, unless he was a resident of the City, or of the territory annexed to the City, or both, for at least one year immediately prior to, and was a registered elector on, the last day for filing nominating petitions for such office or prior to the time of his appointment to fill a vacancy, nor shall he be in default to the City. For the purposes of the first election for Councilmen and Justice of the Peace the one year's residency and voter registration requirements shall apply to anyone who qualifies in the newly incorporated area within the boundaries as specified in this Charter. 
(b)	The Justice of the Peace shall, in addition, have the qualifications of that office prescribed by law. 
(c)	No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive City office who is in default to the City. The holding of office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be eliminated within thirty days after written notice thereof by the Clerk upon the direction of the Council, or, unless the officer in good faith contests his liability for the default in a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)	Each Supervisor and each member of a City Board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall have been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the day of his appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
(e)	No person who holds or has held the office of Councilman shall be eligible to hold any appointive office for which there is compensation paid by the City until two years have elapsed following the expiration of the term of office for which he was elected. This provision would not apply to such appointive positions as the Board of Review or the Light and Power Board where nominal compensation may be paid by the City; however, the Councilman must have resigned his office or his term expired before such appointment. 
(f)	No incumbent elective city officer shall become a candidate for any elective City office, except to succeed himself, without first resigning from his then incumbent elective City office. Provided, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to any incumbent elective City officer whose term of office will expire with the election at which he is to be a candidate for another elective City office. No appointive City officer or employee, shall seek any elective office of the City, unless he resigns from his position with the City. 
Editor's note- A one-year residency requirement for city office was upheld by Joseph v. City of Birmingham, 510 F. Supp. 1319 (E.D. Mich. 1981). 
Section 4.5. - Vacancies in Office. 
    Any elective City office shall be declared vacant by the Council upon the occurrence of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)	For any reason specified by law as creating a vacancy in office.
(b)	If no person is elected to, or qualified for, the office at the election at which such office is to be filled. 
(c)	If the officer shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of any act constituting a violation of this Charter. 
(d)	If any officer ceases to have the qualifications for eligibility for such office required by this Charter. 
(e)	If any officer shall absent himself continuously from the City for more than sixty days in any one calendar year without permission of the Council. 
(f)	In the case of members of the Council, if such officers shall miss four consecutive regular meetings of the Council or from seven regular meetings in any calendar year, unless such absences be for confining illness or be excused by the Council at the time they occur. 
(g)	If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.7. 
Section 4.6. - Vacancies in Boards and Commissions. 
    The office of any member of any Board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be declared vacant by the Council: 
(a)	For any reason specified by law as creating a vacancy in office;
(b)	If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of an act constituting misconduct in office or violation of this Charter; 
(c)	If such officer shall miss more than two consecutive regular meetings of such Board or commission, or twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absences shall be excused by such Board or commission at the time of such absence; 
(d)	If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.7. 
Section 4.7. - Removals from Office. 
    Removals by the Council of elective or appointive officers or of members of Boards or commissions may be made for any of the following reasons: 
(a)	For any reason specified by law for removal of City officers by the Governor;
(b)	For any act constituting a violation of this Charter;
(c)	Such removals by the Council shall be made only after hearing of which such officer has been given notice by the Clerk at least ten days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at his last known place of residence according to the records of the City. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against the officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross-examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause of his removal. A majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal may be being considered, shall be required for any such removal. 
Section 4.8. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers and of members of Boards and commissions shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be acted upon immediately. 
Section 4.9. - Filling Vacancies. 
(a)	If a vacancy occurs in any elective City office, the Council shall, within thirty days after such vacancy occurs, appoint a person who possesses the qualifications required of holders of said office. Each such appointee to an elective office shall hold office under such appointment until the Monday following the next regular City election. At such regular City election, a person possessing the qualifications for the office shall be elected to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(b)	If a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, it shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. In the case of members of Boards and commissions appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term. 
Section 4.10. - Term of Office Cannot be Shortened or Extended. 
    Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the term of the elective officials of the City and of officers of the City appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened. The terms of officers of the City may not be extended beyond the period for which any officer was elected or appointed. 
Section 4.11. - Increase or Decrease of Compensation. 
    The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any City officer, elective or appointive, or to any employee, agent, or contractor, after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. Nor shall the salary of any officer, elective or appointive, be increased or decreased after his election or appointment during any fixed term for which he was elected or appointed. 
Section 4.12. - Oath of Office. 
    Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by the Michigan Constitution and shall file the same with the Clerk, together with any bond required by this Charter or by the Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon be vacant, unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as set forth above. 
Section 4.13. - Surety Bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Council may require any officer or employee of the City to give a bond, to be approved by the Council, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of the office or employment concerned, in such sums as the Council shall determine. All such officers or employees who receive, distribute, or are responsible for city funds or investments shall be bonded. The resignation, removal, or discharge of any officer or employee, or appointment of another person to such office or employment, shall not exonerate such officer or employee or any sureties of such officer or employee from any liability incurred by such officer, employee or sureties. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City. Bonds required by this section shall not be renewed upon the expiration of the terms for which issued, but, in each case, a new bond shall be furnished. No official bond shall be issued for a term exceeding three years, unless the term of the officers concerned exceeds three years. The bonds of all officers and employees shall be filed with the Clerk, except that the Clerk's bond (unless he is covered within the scope of a blanket surety bond) shall be filed with the Treasurer. The requirements of this section may be met by the purchase by the City of one or more blanket corporate surety bonds covering all or any group or groups of the officers and employments of the City. Any officer or employee who is covered by a blanket surety bond need not be bonded individually for the purpose of qualifying for office. 
Section 4.14. - Giving Surety or Being Agent for Surety. 
    No officer, agent, or employee of the City shall become surety on the official bond of any City officer, agent, or employee, nor upon any bond or contract executed to or made with the City, nor except for himself or his immediate family, give or furnish any bail or recognizance in connection with any complaint or warrant charging the violation of this Charter or of any ordinance of the City. No officer, agent, or employee of the City shall be the agent of any surety or insurer in connection with any license granted by the City or with respect to which the approval of the Council or any officer of the City is required. 
Section 4.15. - Delivery of Office and its Effects by Officer to His Successor. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall resign, or be removed from office, or the term of office for which he has been elected or appointed, has expired, he shall, on demand, deliver to his successor in the office or to his superior, all books, papers, moneys, and effects in his custody as such officer or employee, and which in any way may appertain to his office or employment. Any person violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the general laws of the state, now or hereafter in force and applicable thereto. Every officer and employee of the City shall be deemed an officer within the meaning and provisions of such general laws of the state for the purpose of this section. 
Section 4.16. - Nepotism. 
    Unless the Council shall by unanimous vote, which vote shall be recorded as part of its official proceedings, determine that the best interests of the City shall be served, the following relatives of any elective or appointive officer are disqualified from holding any appointive office or employment during the term for which said elective or appointive officer was elected or appointed: Spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister or the spouse of any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city at the time of the election or appointment of said official. 
CHAPTER 5. - THE COUNCIL 

Section 5.1. - City Governing Body. 
    The five Councilmen shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the City. They shall be elected from the City at large. 
Section 5.2. - Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. 
(a)	At the first meeting of the Council in January, following each City election, the Council shall organize and elect one of its members to the office of Mayor and one to the office of Mayor Pro Tem. 
(b)	The Mayor shall preside at Council meetings. He shall be the chief executive officer of the City insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes. He shall be a conservator of the peace, and shall have the powers conferred by law upon sheriffs in times of emergency to suppress disorder, preserve the public peace and health and the safety of persons and property. He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as may require such authentication, under the provisions of law. He shall have an equal voice and vote with other members of the Council on all matters before the Council, but shall not possess the veto power. He shall do all acts required of him by law. 
(c)	The Mayor Pro Tem shall act in the stead of the Mayor in the case of the Mayor's absence or disability to act. He shall succeed to the office of Mayor in the case of a vacancy in that office, thereby creating a vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro Tem. The Council shall fill any vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, but until such vacancy is filled, the senior member of the Council from the standpoint of continuous service shall act as Mayor Pro Tem. As between persons of equal seniority, the person who received the highest number of votes at the time of his last election shall act. 
(Ref. of 11-6-07)
Section 5.3. - Compensation for Councilmen. 
    Each Councilman shall receive as compensation one hundred dollars per year. The Mayor shall receive the sum of fifty dollars per year in addition to such compensation. Such compensation shall be paid annually and except as otherwise provided in this Charter shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid the Councilmen for the discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the City during their tenure of office. Councilmen may be reimbursed for expenses actually incurred by them on City business or in the interest of the City when such reimbursement is approved by the Council. 
Editor's note- The compensation of elected officers is now determined by the local officers' compensation commission pursuant to Code of Ordinances, § 2-21 et seq. 
Section 5.4. - Powers, Duties, and Functions of the Council. 
    The Council shall determine all matters of policy of the City and adopt ordinances and necessary rules and regulations to make the same effective. Further the Council shall, subject to the limitations of law, raise revenue and make appropriations for the operation of the City government, provide for the public peace and health and safety of persons and property, investigate municipal affairs and, when it deems necessary, any office or department of the City, and do and perform all acts required of it by this Charter. In the event of any investigation by the Council, any officer or employee of the City who shall fail or refuse to obey any summons, or to give any evidence pertaining to such investigation, subject to such exceptions as are permitted by law, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation of this Charter. 
Section 5.5. - Meetings of the Council. 
(a)	Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month at a time determined by the Council at its first meeting in January following each City election at the usual place of holding meetings of the Council. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the Council shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next secular day which is not a holiday. 
(b)	Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, City Manager, or any two members of the Council on at least six hours' written notice to each member of the Council, designating the time, place and purpose of such meeting, and served personally or left at his usual place of residence by the Clerk or someone designated by him. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements for the calling of special meetings, any special meeting of the Council shall be a legal meeting provided all members are present; or provided all members shall in writing waive the above requirements for notice and at which a quorum of the Council is present. 
(c)	No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice or call of such meeting. If no notice or call of such meeting has been served, and the meeting is legal under the provisions of the second sentence of Section 5.5(b), the Clerk shall state the purpose of the special meeting at the beginning of the meeting and no other business shall be transacted. 
(d)	All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and the rules of order of the Council shall provide that citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(e)	Three members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the Council, but, in the absence of a quorum, any number of members less than a quorum may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a later date. 
(f)	The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business, and shall keep a journal in the English language of all of its proceedings, which shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be by a "Yes" or "No" vote and entered upon the record, except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. The people shall have access to the minutes and records of all regular and special meetings of the Council at all reasonable times. 
(g)	Each Councilman shall be required to attend all meetings of the Council unless excused in accordance with Sections 4.5(e) and 4.5(f). The Council may order the attendance of its members and other officers of the City at its meetings in such manner, and may enforce such fines for non-attendance, as may, by ordinance, be prescribed. The refusal of any member of the Council, or other officer of the City to attend such meetings or to conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat shall be deemed a violation of this Charter. The Police Chief shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, a Councilman shall not vote on any question in which he shall have a direct personal financial interest, other than as a citizen of the community, but on all other questions he shall vote, unless excused therefrom by a vote of at least four members of the Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-07)
Section 5.6. - Health. 
    The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. Unless and until a board of health is established for the City by ordinance, the Council shall constitute the board of health of the City, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute. 
Section 5.7. - Licenses. 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked, and may require and exact payment of such reasonable sums for any license as it may deem proper. 
Section 5.8. - Public Works. 
    Except as otherwise provided in and subject to the provisions of this Charter, the Council shall be charged and entrusted with all responsibilities for the control of the streets, buildings, and structures, waterworks, parks, sewers, sewage system and plants, municipally owned utilities, and other public improvements and works of the City. 
Section 5.9. - Cemetery Regulations. 
    The Council shall have the power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance, and protection of cemeteries, together with improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, owned or hereafter acquired by the City either within or without its corporate limits. A plan for the platting, sale and perpetual care of all lots, plots, and lands therein shall be provided. All ordinances pertaining to public health and welfare in the regulation and protection of public cemeteries shall apply equally to all cemeteries within the City belonging to, or under the control of any church or religious society, or any corporation, company or association. 
Section 5.10. - Streets and Alleys. 
    Except, insofar as limited by law, the Council shall have power, by ordinance or resolution, to establish, vacate, use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, (whether such places be located within or without the limits of the City) and the space above and beneath them. Such power shall include, but not be limited to, the proper policing and supervision thereof; the licensing and regulation, or the prohibition of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of sidewalks or streets of the City; and the licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings in the sidewalks or streets, and all vaults, structures, and excavations under the same. 
Section 5.11. - Trusts. 
    The Council may, in its discretion, receive and hold any property in trust for park, cemetery, or other municipal purposes. Any trusts now existing for the benefit of the Village of Lowell, or any portion of Lowell Township annexed hereby, shall be continued in full force in accordance with the cy pres doctrine. 
Section 5.12. - Restrictions on Powers of the Council. 
(a)	The Council shall not have the power to make any contract with or give any official position to any person who is in default to the City. Further, the Council shall not have the power to sell any park, except where such park or part thereof is not required under an official master plan of the City, or engage in any business requiring an investment of money in excess of ten cents per capita, unless it be a utility presently operated by the City, or, unless approved by three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(b)	Neither the Council nor any committee or member thereof shall direct or demand the appointment of any person to, his promotion within or to, or his removal from, any office or employment in the City government except those officers directly appointed by the Council. Except for purposes of inquiry authorized by it, the Council, its committees, and its members shall deal with the administrative officers and employees of the City solely through the City Manager concerning matters relating to the performance of their several official duties and employments. No action contrary thereto shall be valid or binding upon the City Manager or any officer or employee of the City. Any violation of the provisions of this paragraph shall constitute a violation of this Charter. 
(c)	Except in those cases where a larger majority is required by law, no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or passed, nor shall any appointment be made, nor any person removed from office as required or permitted by this Charter, except by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the Council. 
(d)	There shall be no standing committees of the Council.
CHAPTER 6. - CITY LEGISLATION 

Section 6.1. - Legislative Power. 
    The legislative power of the City is vested exclusively in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.2. - Prior Village Legislation. 
    All valid ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Village which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect at the time of the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect, until repealed or amended. Those provisions of any effective valid ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Section 6.3. - Introduction, Consideration and Style of Ordinances. 
(a)	Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. The style of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be, "The City of Lowell Ordains:". 
(b)	Each ordinance, after adoption, shall be identified by a number.
(c)	An ordinance or a part of an ordinance may be repealed or amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner provided in this section. An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number only. 
(d)	If a section of an ordinance is amended, the section shall be re-enacted and published at length. This requirement shall not apply to the schedules of stop streets, one-way streets, and of parking limitations contained in any traffic ordinance or the vehicular traffic regulating portion of the City's ordinance code. 
(e)	Each ordinance shall be recorded by the Clerk forthwith in the Ordinance Book, and the enactment of such ordinance and the effective date thereof shall be certified by him therein. 
(f)	The ordinances of the City shall be set forth in code form as soon as practicable after the city government is established. 
Section 6.4. - Publication of Ordinances. 
(a)	Before an ordinance may become operative, it shall be published in at least one newspaper which is of general circulation in the City or as noted in the alternate method provided for in Section 2.3(g) of this Charter. The effective date of an ordinance shall be stated therein, but shall not be less than ten days after publication, unless it is declared by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the Council to be an emergency ordinance. The publication of an ordinance in full as a part of the published proceedings of the Council shall constitute publication as required herein. 
(b)	All codes and other ordinance subject matter, which are or may be permitted by law to be adopted by reference, shall be adopted and published in the manner permitted and required by law. 
Section 6.5. - Penalties. 
    The Council shall provide in each ordinance for the punishment of violations thereof, but, unless permitted by law, no such punishment, excluding the costs charged, shall exceed a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the Court. Imprisonment for violations of ordinances may be in the city or the county jail. 
Section 6.6. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by the electors of the City and a referendum on an ordinance may be had by them by the submission of a petition therefor as provided in this chapter. 
Section 6.7. - Initiative and Referendary Petitions. 
    An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than fifteen per cent of the registered electors of the City. Such petition may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon, after his signature, the date and his place of residence by street and number. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was signed in the presence of the affiant. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. Any signatures obtained more than ninety days before the filing of such petition with the Clerk shall not be counted. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered voters of the City, or be improper as to form or compliance with the requirements of this section, the Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition, and ten days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 6.8. - Council Procedure on Initiative or Referendary Petitions. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall, either: 
(1)	If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition within thirty days after the receipt thereof, or determine to submit the proposal to the electors; or 
(2)	If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers within thirty days after receipt thereof or determine to submit the proposal to the electors. 
Section 6.9. - Same-Submission to Electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the City for any purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by law. 
Section 6.10. - Same-Status of Ordinance Adopted. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Should two or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 6.11. - Same-Ordinance Suspended. 
    The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition within forty days after passage of the ordinance to which such petition refers shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question, pending repeal by the Council or the final determination of the electors thereon. 
Section 6.12. - Recall. 
    Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the City in the manner provided by statute. A vacancy created by such recall shall be filled in the manner prescribed by this Charter and by statute. 
CHAPTER 7. - THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 

Section 7.1. - The City Manager. 
(a)	The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City government, in conformity with the provisions of this Charter. He shall be selected by the Council on the basis of training and ability alone, and shall serve at the pleasure of, and be subject to removal by the Council, but he shall not be removed from office during a period of ninety days following any regular City election except by the affirmative vote of four members of the Council. 
(b)	The Council shall appoint a City Manager within ninety days after any vacancy exists in such position and they may appoint an Acting Manager during the period of a vacancy in the office, or the City Manager, with the consent and approval of the Council, may designate an administrative officer or employee of the City to act as City Manager if he is temporarily absent from the City or unable to perform the duties of his office. No person who holds or has held any elective City office shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager or Acting City Manager during a vacancy in that office until two years have elapsed following the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
Section 7.2. - City Manager; Functions and Duties. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City government, and shall be vested with all administrative powers of the City not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, except that he shall not administer the City electric utility which shall be administered as provided in Chapter 16 of the Charter. He shall perform the duties of his office under the authority of and be accountable to the Council. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to: 
(a)	See that all laws and ordinances are enforced;
(b)	Supervise and coordinate the work of the administrative officers and departments of the City including those appointed directly by the Council but excepting the City Attorney and the Clerk's duties in keeping the Council records and as the clerical official of the Council; 
(c)	Prepare and administer the annual budget under policies formulated by the Council and he shall keep the Council advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City; 
(d)	Establish and maintain a central purchasing service for the City and he or his authorized representative to be the purchasing agent for the City; 
(e)	Subject to any employment ordinance of the City, employ or be responsible for the employment of all City employees, and supervise and coordinate the personnel policies and practices of the City; 
(f)	Keep informed and report to the Council concerning the work of the several offices and departments of the City and, to that end, he may secure from the officers and heads of all administrative departments such information and special reports as he or the Council may deem necessary; 
(g)	In case of conflict of authority between officers and administrative departments or, in case of absence of administrative authority occasioned by inadequacy of Charter or ordinance provisions, resolve the conflict or supply the necessary authority so far as may be consistent with law and the ordinances of the City, and direct the necessary action to be taken in conformance therewith, making a full report immediately to the Council; 
(h)	Attend all meetings of the Council, with the right to be heard in all Council proceedings, but without the right to vote; 
(i)	Recommend to the Council, from time to time, such measures as he deems necessary or appropriate for the improvement of the City or its services; 
(j)	Prepare and maintain an administrative code defining the duties and functions of the several offices and departments of the City which, when adopted as an ordinance by the Council, shall supplement this Charter in establishing the duties and functions, as established in this Charter, of each officer and department of the City; 
(k)	Furnish the Council with information concerning City affairs and prepare and submit such reports as may be required or which the Council may request, including an annual report which shall consolidate the reports of the several departments; 
(l)	See that all terms and conditions in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(m)	Possess such other powers and perform such additional duties as may be granted to or required of him, from time to time by the Council, so far as may be consistent with the provisions of law; 
(n)	Establish any rules necessary to carry out any of the foregoing duties.
Section 7.3. - City Clerk. 
(a)	The Clerk shall be the clerk and clerical officer of the Council. He shall attend all meetings of the Council, and shall keep its journal. 
(b)	He shall keep a record of all actions of the Council at its regular and special meetings.
(c)	He shall have the power to administer all oaths required by law and by the ordinances of the City. 
(d)	He shall be the custodian of the City seal, and shall affix the same to documents required to be sealed. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by this Charter. 
(e)	He shall give to the proper officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts or agreements to which the City is a part. 
(f)	He shall notify the Council of the failure of any officer or employee required to take an oath of office or to furnish any bond required of him. 
(g)	He shall certify all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council.
(h)	He shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as may be required of him by law, the ordinances or resolutions of the Council, or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.4. - City Treasurer. 
(a)	The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the City, the Clerk's bond, and all evidences of value or indebtedness belonging to or held in trust by the City. 
(b)	He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine, and shall report the same in detail to City Manager and Finance Officer. 
(c)	He shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district, and City taxes and moneys as are provided by law. 
(d)	He shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as may be required of him by law, the ordinances or resolutions of the Council, or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.5. - Deputy Clerk or Treasurer. 
    The Clerk and Treasurer may appoint and remove their deputies, subject to the budget allowances therefor and the approval of the City Manager in the case of appointments. Each deputy shall possess all powers and authorities of his superior officer. 
Section 7.6. - Finance Officer. 
(a)	The Finance Officer shall be the general accountant of the City, shall keep the books of account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of the City, and shall keep the Council and City Manager informed as to the financial affairs of the City. The system of accounts of the City shall conform to such uniform systems as may be required by law. 
(b)	He shall balance all the books of account of the City at the end of each calendar month, and shall make a report thereon, as soon as practical, to the City Manager. 
(c)	He shall, upon direction of the City Manager, examine and audit all books of account kept by any official or department of the City. 
(d)	The City Manager shall recommend to the Council for their approval the designation of a Finance Officer from among the administrative officers of the City. When the Council feels that a separate official is required, they may so designate by ordinance and the official will be an appointment and under the supervision of the City Manager and subject to removal by him. 
Section 7.7. - City Attorney. 
(a)	The City Attorney shall act as the legal advisor of and be responsible to the Council. He shall advise the City Manager concerning legal problems affecting the City administration and any officer or department head of the City in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(b)	He shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent the City in cases before the courts and other tribunals. 
(c)	He shall prepare or review all ordinances, regulations, contracts, bonds, and such other instruments as may be required by this Charter or by the Council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(d)	Upon request of the Council, he shall attend meetings of the Council.
(e)	He shall defend all officers and employees in all actions arising out of the performance of their official duties. 
(f)	He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or the Council. 
(g)	Upon the Attorney's recommendation, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the City has an interest, or to assist the City Attorney. 
Section 7.8. - Assessor. 
(a)	The Assessor shall possess all the power vested in and shall be charged with the duties imposed upon assessing officers by law. 
(b)	He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by law or the ordinances of the City. 
(c)	He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or the ordinances of the City or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.9. - City Planning. 
(a)	The Council shall provide for and maintain a Planning Commission which shall possess all of the powers and perform the functions of planning commissions as set forth in Act 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931, as amended ("Act 285"). The citizen members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council and they shall represent insofar as possible, different professions or occupations. Members of the Commission may be compensated for their service in such amount as may be established by the Council from time to time and in accordance with Act 285. 
(b)	The City Manager may appoint a Planning Director, subject to budget appropriations and the confirmation of the Commission, who shall perform the duties prescribed by the established rules of the Commission. 
(Res. 2-99, 2-1-99)
Section 7.10. - Zoning. 
    The zoning regulations of the Village of Lowell and that part of the Township of Lowell incorporated into the new City, existing on the effective date of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect in the areas to which they apply, until one year after the effective date of this Charter or until the Council shall adopt a zoning ordinance for the City, and shall, thereafter, maintain such ordinance current and in effect. At the discretion of the Council, the Planning Commission may be designated as the Zoning Board of Appeals, or a separate Board may be designated and appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. 
Section 7.11. - Additional Administrative Powers and Duties. 
    From time to time, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, the Council may, by ordinance, prescribe additional administrative powers and duties or diminish any powers and duties in a manner not inconsistent with this Charter, to be exercised and administered by appropriate officers and departments of the City. 
Section 7.12. - Merit System of Personnel Management. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for a merit system of personnel management for the City. 
Section 7.13. - Employee Welfare Benefits. 
    The Council shall have power to make available to the administrative officers and employees of the City and its departments and boards, an actuarial pension plan, and any recognized standard group plan of life, hospital, health, or accident insurance or any one or more thereof. 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal and budget year of the City and all of its agencies shall begin on the first day of July of each year. 
Section 8.2. - Budget Procedure. 
    On or before the second Monday in March of each year, each officer, department and board of the City, shall submit to the City Manager an itemized estimate of its expected income, if any, and expenditures for the next fiscal year, for the department or activities under its control. The City Manager shall compile and review such budget requests and shall then prepare his budgetary recommendations and submit them to the Council at its meeting nearest the third Monday in April of each year. He shall inform the Council of the additions or deletions made in the departmental budget requests and his reasons for making them. 
Section 8.3. - Budget Document. 
    The budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing year. It shall include at least the following information: 
(1)	A brief and concise budget summary, showing the estimated receipts and expenditures of each fund and the total of all funds. 
(2)	A statement of the detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each fund, itemized for each department and activity by objects of expenditure showing, in parallel columns, the expenditures for the preceding year, the appropriation and expenditures for the current year, and the recommendations of the City Manager as to the appropriations to be made for the ensuing year, including any appropriation for contingencies. Expenditures for the current year shall be computed as the actual expenditures to the last day of February, or the last day of the month preceding this for which he has a financial statement available, plus the estimated expenditures from that date to the end of the current fiscal year. 
(3)	Detailed statements of estimates of all anticipated income of the city from taxes and sources other than current taxes and borrowing, compared with the amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding year and for the current year. 
(4)	A statement of the estimated financial condition of each City fund reflecting the estimated surplus or deficit in each such fund and showing all transfers made from each such fund. 
(5)	A statement of the bonded or other indebtedness of the City showing the amount required in the ensuing year for retirement on the debt and necessary interest requirements. 
(6)	A statement of outstanding delinquent taxes and delinquent special assessments which have been levied during the current and preceding fiscal years of the City and a reasonable estimate of the amount expected to be collected during the next fiscal year of the City. 
(7)	An estimate of the amount of money proposed to be raised by taxation and the amount to be raised from bond issues which together with the estimated income from other sources will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(8)	Such other information as may be required by the Council.
Section 8.4. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget proposal shall be held before its final adoption. Notice of the time and place of holding such hearing shall be published by the Clerk at least two weeks in advance thereof. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public during office hours at the office of the Clerk for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing. 
Section 8.5. - Adoption of Budget. 
(a)	At the regular meeting held not later than the third Monday in May, the Council shall by resolution, adopt a budget for the next fiscal year and make an appropriation of the money needed therefor. Such resolution shall designate the sum to be raised by taxation for the general purposes of the City and for the payments of principal and interest on its indebtedness. Failure to adopt such resolution within the time herein set shall not invalidate either the budget or the tax levy therefor. 
(b)	Should the Council fail to adopt a budget for the next fiscal year on or before the first Monday in June, the budget proposal as recommended to the Council by the City Manager shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the Council and, without further action by the Council shall constitute an appropriation of the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year. It shall be deemed due and legal authority for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property subject to the provisions of Section 9.1. If any budget adopted in this manner requires an amount to be raised by taxes upon property in excess of the limitation provided in Section 9.1, the budget and appropriations and each item thereof shall be adjusted by the City Manager to conform to such limitations. 
Section 8.6. - Budget Control. 
(a)	Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such specific purposes, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. The Council, by resolution, may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one account, department, fund, or agency to another. 
(b)	The Council may make additional appropriations during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
(c)	Except in those cases where there is no other logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingency fund (or other similar fund). Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for the contingency fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account, and the expenditure then charged to such account. 
(d)	At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the City Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditure within the revenues. 
(e)	The balance in any budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall, subject to restrictions imposed or permitted by law, revert to the general fund. 
Section 8.7. - Collection and Deposit of Moneys. 
    The Council shall designate the depository or depositories of City funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City moneys. The Council shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized or permitted by the law, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Section 8.8. - Independent Audit; Annual Report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City Government at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audits shall be made by qualified accountants experienced in municipal accounting selected by the Council. An annual report of the City business shall be made available for distribution to the public by the City Manager in such printed form as will disclose pertinent facts concerning the activities and finances of the City Government including Justice Court. The Council shall provide the funds to defray the cost of the annual audit and report herein required in each annual budget of the City. 
Section 8.9. - Municipal Borrowing Power. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of law, the Council may, by ordinance or resolution, authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of powers vested in the City and permitted by law and may authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include but not be limited to the following types: 
(a)	General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City for the payment of such obligations. 
(b)	Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, but the proceeds of such notes may be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided in Section 8.6. 
(c)	In case of fire, flood, or other calamity, emergency loans due in not more than five years for the relief of the inhabitants of the City and for the preservation of municipal property. 
(d)	Special assessment bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such special assessments; such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts alone, or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the City. 
(e)	Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility which the City is authorized by this Charter to acquire or operate. 
(f)	Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the City.
(g)	Revenue bonds as authorized by law which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement or public utility and do not constitute a general obligation of the City. 
(h)	Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the Motor Vehicle Highway Fund or any other fund of the State which the City may be permitted by law to pledge for the payment of the principal and interest thereof. 
Section 8.10. - Limits of Borrowing Powers. 
(a)	The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed the maximum percentage permitted by statute, provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded money borrowed under the following sections of this Charter: 8.9(b) (tax anticipation notes), 8.9(d) (special assessment bonds even though they are also a general obligation of the City), 8.9(e) (mortgage bonds), 8.9(g) (revenue bonds), 8.9(h) (bonds in anticipation of State returned revenues), and any other obligations excluded by law from such limitation. The resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness. 
(b)	The amount of emergency loans which may be made under the provisions of Section 8.9(c) may not exceed the maximum amount permitted by law, and such loan may be made even if it causes the indebtedness of the City to exceed the limit of net bonded indebtedness fixed in this Charter. 
(c)	No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose, other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if such bonds are not sold within three years after authorization such authorization shall be null and void. 
(d)	The issuance of any bonds not requiring the approval of the electors shall be subject to applicable requirements of law with reference to public notice in advance of the authorization of such issues, filing of petitions for a referendum on such issuance, holding of such referendum, and other applicable procedural requirements. 
Section 8.11. - Preparation and Record of Bonds. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which it is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose. Any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter, except that, whenever the proceeds of any bond issue or part thereof shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the Council may authorize the use of said funds for the retirement of bonds of such issue or for any other purpose permitted by law. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and counter-signed by the Clerk, under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signature of the Mayor and the Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the Clerk or other designated officer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be cancelled. 
Section 8.12. - Deferred Payment Contracts. 
    The City may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment. Each of such contracts shall not extend over a period greater than ten years nor shall the total amounts of principal payable under all such contracts exceed an amount equal to one-half of one per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city in any one fiscal year. 
    All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION 

Section 9.1. - Power to Tax-Tax Limit. 
    The City shall have the power to assess taxes and levy and collect rents, tolls, and excises. The annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed that percentage allowed by statute of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City. 
Section 9.2. - Subjects of Taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, City taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by statute. 
Section 9.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or permitted by law. 
Section 9.4. - Tax Day. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by law, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the thirty-first day of December, or such other date as may subsequently be required by law, which shall be deemed the tax day. 
Section 9.5. - Preparation of the Assessment Roll. 
(a)	On or before the first Monday in March in each year, the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the City. Such roll shall be prepared as required by the general property tax act. Values shall be estimated according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. The records of the Assessor shall show separate figures for the value of the land, and of the building improvements thereon, and of personal property. The method of estimating all such values shall be as nearly uniform as possible. 
(b)	On or before the first Monday in March the Assessor shall give, by first class mail, a notice of any change from the previous year in the assessed value of any property or of the addition of any property to the roll to the owner as shown by such assessment roll. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
Section 9.6. - Board of Review. 
(a)	A Board of Review is hereby created, composed of three freeholders of the City who have the qualifications of holding elective City office, as set forth in Section 4.4 of this Charter, and who, during their term of office, shall not be city officers or employees or be nominees or candidates for elective City office. The appointment of members of such Board shall be based upon their knowledge and experience in property valuation. 
(b)	The members of the Board of Review shall be appointed by the Council, and may be removed for reasons of nonfeasance or misfeasance by the vote of four members of the Council. The first members shall be appointed during the month of July, 1960, for terms expiring on July 1, 1961, 1962 and 1963. Thereafter, one member shall be appointed in the month of June of each year, for a term of three years, commencing on the following July first. The Council shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board. 
(c)	The Board shall, annually, on the first day of its meeting, select one of its members chairman for the ensuing year. The Assessor shall be Clerk of the Board, and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote on any proposition or question. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. 
Section 9.7. - Duties and Functions of the Board of Review. 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are conferred by law upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and, if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day and no change in the status of any property after that day shall be considered by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by law no person, other than the Board of Review, shall make or authorize any change upon, or addition or corrections to, the assessment roll. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all proceedings of the Board and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. 
Section 9.8. - Meetings of the Board of Review. 
(a)	The Board of Review shall convene in its first session as provided by state law each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council and shall remain in session for at least six hours for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll. In each case in which the assessed value of any property is increased over or decreased from the amount shown on the assessment roll as prepared by the Assessor or any property is added to such roll by the Board, or the Board has resolved to consider at its second session such increasing or decreasing of an assessment or the adding of any property to such roll, the Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owner as shown by such roll, by first class mail, mailed not later than the second day following the end of the first session of the Board. Such notice shall state the date, time, place, and purpose of the second session of the Board. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
(b)	The Board of Review shall convene in its second session as provided by state law each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council and shall continue in session until all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard, but in no case for less than four hours. At the second session, the Board may not increase or decrease any assessment or add any property to the rolls, except in those cases in which the Board resolves at its first session to consider such increase or addition at its second session. 
Section 9.9. - Notice of Meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the annual meetings of the Board of Review shall be published by the Assessor not less than one week prior to each session of the Board. 
Section 9.10. - Certification of Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the first Monday in April, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the City for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. 
Section 9.11. - Clerk to Certify Tax Levy. 
    Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon the said roll against any property or any person in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or any ordinance of the City. 
Section 9.12. - City Tax Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll," and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in Section 9.11, the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged, assessed, or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread thereon the amounts of the general ad valorem City tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation of any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by law. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the City. 
Section 9.13. - Tax Roll Certified for Collection. 
    After spreading the taxes the Assessor shall certify the tax roll and attach his warrant thereto directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect prior to March first of the following year, from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on such roll, all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. On or before June first the roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer for collection. 
Section 9.14. - Tax Lien on Property. 
    On July first the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the City from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon, and all personal taxes shall become a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens to the extent provided by law and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges are paid. 
Section 9.15. - Tax Payment Due; Notification Thereof. 
(a)	City taxes shall be due on July first of each year. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the City tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall (1) publish, between June fifteenth and July first, notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and of the penalties and fees for the late payment thereof, and (2) mail a tax bill to each person named in said roll. In cases of multiple ownership of property only one bill need be mailed. 
(b)	Failure on the part of the Treasurer to publish said notice or mail such bills shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this chapter in case of late payment or non-payment of the same. 
Section 9.16. - Collection Charges on Late Payment of Taxes. 
    All taxes paid on or before the thirty-first day of August shall be collected by the Treasurer without additional charge. On the first day of September the Treasurer shall add to all taxes paid thereafter a penalty charge of one percent per month or fraction thereof but not to exceed a total of six percent for all months or fractions thereof that the taxes remain unpaid. Such penalty charges shall belong to the City and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes apply, collectable in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. If delivery of the tax roll to the Treasurer, as provided in Section 9.13, is delayed for any reason by more than thirty days after June first, the application of the penalty charge provided for herein shall be postponed thirty days for each thirty days or major fraction thereof of such delay. 
(Res. 3-99, 2-1-99)
Section 9.17. - Failure or Refusal to Pay Personal Property Tax. 
    If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal property tax assessed to him or them, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such person, firm or corporation to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue, in accordance with statute, the person, firm or corporation to whom it is assessed. 
Section 9.18. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes. 
    All City taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the County Treasurer in the manner and with like effect as provided by statute for returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional assessments, charges and fees hereinbefore provided which shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected, in accordance with statute, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. If by change in statute or otherwise, the Treasurer of the County of Kent is no longer charged with the collection of delinquent real property taxes, such delinquent taxes shall be collected in the manner then provided by statute for the collection of delinquent township, school and county taxes. 
Section 9.19. - State, County and School Taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county, and school purposes, the City shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of law relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For these purposes the Treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as are granted and imposed upon township treasurers by law. 
CHAPTER 10. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Section 10.1. - General Powers Relative to Special Assessments. 
    The Council shall have the power to provide for assessing and re-assessing the costs, or any portion thereof, of public improvement to a special assessment district and to determine, by resolution, with or without a petition that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
    The Council shall, in the exercise of its powers of financing the whole or a part of the cost of public improvements by special assessments upon districts benefited thereby, have power to provide for the following, but this list shall not be exclusive. 
(a)	Street improvements and facilities, including constructing, grading, widening, and, but not limited to, the paving of streets and alleys, curbs and gutters, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, and constructing and maintaining sidewalks; 
(b)	For the construction of public parking facilities as a public improvement;
(c)	For the assessment of single lots when any expenditure is made on any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or lands, or premises, which the City is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same; 
(d)	For the assessment of the cost of construction, removal, or abatement of any condition which the Council determines to be a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City; 
(e)	For installing a boulevard lighting system on any street as a public improvement; provided, that the property owners of a majority of the frontage on such street, or part thereof, to be so improved shall petition therefor. In each case, the special assessment district for a boulevard lighting system shall be limited to the frontage of the street or part of street upon which such system is placed; 
(f)	Whenever a single parcel of land will be required to pay twenty-five per cent or more of the cost of any public improvement and any portion of that property is acquired by condemnation, or otherwise, for the purpose of the public improvement, that portion of such property which is not acquired by the City may be assessed for its proportionate share of the cost of such public improvement, exclusive of that part of such cost representing damages for injury to improvements on such property and of the proceedings required to acquire such portion of property; 
(g)	All real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, shall be liable for the cost of public improvements benefiting such property, unless specifically exempted from special assessments by law. 
Section 10.2. - Detailed Procedure to be Fixed by Ordinance. 
(a)	The Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors in special assessment rolls, collection of assessments, refunds of excess moneys, and any other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by the special assessment method. 
(b)	Such ordinance shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1)	No resolution finally determining to proceed with establishing any special assessment district for the making of any public improvement shall be adopted by the Council, until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding; 
(2)	No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed, until after a meeting of the Council has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll; 
(3)	Ten days' notice of each meeting of the Council for a public hearing on the advisability of proceeding with any public improvement and to review any special assessment roll shall be given prior to the date and time of such meeting, which notice shall be published and sent to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the City, by first class mail; 
(4)	If, prior to the public hearing on the advisability of proceeding with the making of the improvement, written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district which will be required to bear more than fifty per cent of the amount of such special assessment, the resolution determining to proceed with the improvement shall be adopted only by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the Council. 
Section 10.3. - Additional Assessments; Correction of Invalid Special Assessments. 
(a)	Additional pro rata assessments to defray the cost of any public improvement may be made when any special assessment roll and/or the proceeds of sale of special assessment bonds issued in anticipation thereof proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incidental thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds or other evidence of obligation issued therefor; provided, that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twelve per cent of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the Council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of the review of the original special assessment roll. 
(b)	Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such re-assessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, except respecting the correction of the proceedings for the purpose of making the proceedings legal. Whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the re-assessment or, if the payments exceed the amount of the re-assessment, refunds shall be made. 
(c)	No judgment or decree nor any act of the Council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the City upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceedings might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
Section 10.4. - Disposition of Excess Special Assessments. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the City if such excess is five per cent or less of the assessment. If the assessment should prove larger than necessary by more than five per cent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed as shown by the current assessment roll of the City. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessment. 
Section 10.5. - Contested Assessments; Limitations on Suits and Actions. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment; (a) unless, within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or action stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal; and (b) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty days after confirmation of the roll. 
Editor's note- This type of section was held invalid as in conflict with the general property tax law (MCL 211.53) and the statute of limitations for personal actions (MCL 600.5813). See Wells v. City of Southfield, 14 Mich. App. 393, and Smuezynski v. City of Warren, 14 Mich. App. 464. 
Section 10.6. - Special Assessment Accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special account and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto and to repay any money borrowed therefor. 
Section 10.7. - Failure to Receive Notice. 
    Failure to receive any notice required to be so sent by this chapter or by ordinance shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
Section 10.8. - Deferred Payment of Special Assessments. 
    The Council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments from persons who, in the opinion of the Council and Assessor, by reason of poverty, are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof. In all such cases, as a condition to the granting of such deferred payments, the City shall require mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary, payable upon his death. 
Section 10.9. - Special Assessments a Lien on Property. 
    Upon confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessments thereon shall become a debt to the City from the persons to whom they are assessed and, until paid, shall be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this Charter for City taxes. 
Section 10.10. - Hazards and Nuisances. 
    When any lot, building, or structure within the City, because of age or dilapidation, the accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious weeds, or because of any other condition or happening becomes, in the opinion of the Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City, or of those residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the Council may, after investigation, give notice to the owner or owners of the land upon which such nuisance exists, or to the owner or occupant of the building or structure itself, by posting notice upon the premises, by publication, by personal service, or by registered or certified mail addressed to the address set forth in the current assessment roll of the City, or the records of the assessor, specifying the nature of the nuisance and requiring such owner or occupant to alter, repair, tear down, abate, or remove the nuisance within a time to be specified by the Council which shall be commensurate with the nature of the nuisance. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known or cannot be found, the Council may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the City which is qualified to do the work required, or may do the work by contract or by hire, and the cost of such abatement may be assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance is located, by special assessment. 
CHAPTER 11. - JUSTICE COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-This chapter is now obsolete. The justice court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, which created the district court system.

Section 11.1. - Establishment of Court. 
    There is hereby established a Justice Court in the City to be presided over by the Justice of the Peace elected in accordance with Sections 4.1 and 4.4. 
Section 11.2. - Justice of the Peace. 
    At each City election held in a year following an even numbered year which is divisible by four, there shall be elected one Justice of the Peace. No one shall be eligible for the office of Justice of the Peace who on the last day for filing nominating petitions has attained the age of seventy years. 
Section 11.3. - Compensation and Bond of the Justice. 
    The Justice of the Peace shall receive as his compensation the usual fees of this office as provided by statute. The Council may, however, by ordinance, whenever it deems that the best interests of the City will be served thereby, provide that the Justice of the Peace be paid an annual salary. 
    Any salary provided shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and charges to which such Justice would be entitled but for the provision of this section, except those for the performance of marriage ceremonies. 
    The Justice of the Peace shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give bonds to the Treasurer of the County of Kent in such sum as is provided by statute and to the City of Lowell in like amount. Such bonds shall be subject to the provisions of Section 4.12. 
Section 11.4. - Power and Jurisdiction; General. 
    The Justice of the Peace of the City shall have and exercise therein and within the county the same jurisdiction, powers and duties as are or may be conferred upon or required of Justices of the Peace in townships by statute and shall be subject to such general laws with respect to such Justices, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. They shall have concurrent jurisdiction with other Justices in the County of Kent as to all crimes, offenses, and misdemeanors when alleged to have been committed within the County of Kent whether within or without the City. 
Section 11.5. - Jurisdiction in Charter and Ordinance Cases. 
    The Justice of the Peace shall have authority to hear, try, and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed by this Charter and the ordinances of the City and to punish offenders for the violation of such Charter and ordinances as in such Charter or ordinances prescribed and directed. 
Section 11.6. - Extended Jurisdiction. 
    The Justice of the Peace shall also have: 
(a)	Jurisdiction to the amount of $500.00 in all civil matters ex contractu and ex delicto with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law. 
(b)	Such power and authority as can under Public Act 279 of 1909 be conferred by this Charter to set aside the verdict or judgment in any civil cause and grant a new trial therein, to be exercised in such manner and on such conditions as provided in said act. The filing of a motion for new trial or to set aside a verdict or judgment shall have such an effect on the time for taking an appeal from any judgment and upon the issuance and levy of execution or other similar process and sale thereunder and on other proceedings in said cause as provided in said act. 
(c)	Such additional powers and authority as may now or hereafter be conferred upon city Justices of the Peace by Statute. 
Section 11.7. - Procedure in Justice Court. 
    The proceedings in all suits and actions before the Justice and in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of the Justice, shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, be according to and governed by the statutes applicable to justice courts and to the proceedings before such courts. 
Section 11.8. - Place and Conduct of Court. 
    The Council may furnish necessary supplies and a suitable place for the conducting of court by the Justice. It may regulate the hours of court of said Justice and may make other necessary and proper rules and regulations for the conduct of the business of the court which are not inconsistent with this Charter or the statutes. 
Section 11.9. - Transfer of Cases. 
    In case of the absence, disability or disqualification of the Justice, any other Justice of the Peace or Municipal Judge of the County of Kent shall be qualified to act in the place of and for the Justice in the performance of any of the duties imposed upon him by statute or this Charter. 
Section 11.10. - Fees, Fines and Penalties; Prosecution of State Penal Cases. 
    All fees and fines, penalties, forfeitures and moneys collected or received by the Justice for any violation of the City Charter or ordinances shall be paid over to the City Treasurer on or before the 10th day of the next month after the collection or receipt thereof; and the Justice shall take the receipt of the Treasurer therefor and file the same with the Clerk. Failure of the Justice to comply with the foregoing provision shall constitute misconduct in office. 
    If the Justice be paid an annual salary, all fees, and all fines, penalties, forfeitures and moneys collected in City ordinance and Charter cases shall be credited to the general fund of the City. 
    All costs and fines recovered for the violations of the penal laws of the State, when collected by the Justice of the Peace, shall be disposed of as provided by statute. 
    The expenses of prosecution before the Justice for violation of the penal laws of the State, and of punishing the offenders, shall be paid by the County of Kent. 
Section 11.11. - Docket. 
    The Justice of the Peace shall keep, at the place of holding court, a docket in the manner required by statute. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Section 11.12. - Constables. 
    The City Council shall appoint one or more citizens of the City as constables for a term of one year commencing July 1st of each year. Such constables shall have like powers and authorities in matters of civil and criminal nature, and in relation to the service of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships. They shall have power also to serve all process issued for breaches of ordinances of the City. The bond of the constables shall be that required of constables in townships. 
Section 11.13. - Violations Bureau. 
    The Council shall have power and authority to establish by ordinance a Violations Bureau within the Court for the handling of such violations of ordinances and regulations of the City, or parts thereof, as prescribed in the ordinance establishing such bureau. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a charge of violating any of such ordinances may within the time specified in the notice of such charge answer at the Violations Bureau to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a fine, in writing pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to make such a plea and pay such fine in Court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. The creation of such a Bureau shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in Court should a person so choose. 
CHAPTER 12. - ELECTIONS 

Section 12.1. - Qualifications of Electors. 
    The residents of the City having qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan shall be electors of the City. 
Section 12.2. - Election Procedure. 
    The election of all City officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. The general election statutes shall apply and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to City elections, including but not limited to: qualifications of electors, establishment of precincts, verification of petitions, registration of voters, and voting hours. The Clerk shall give public notice of each City election in the same manner as is required by law for the giving of public notice of general elections in the state. 
Section 12.3. - Wards and Precincts. 
    The City of Lowell shall consist of one ward. The election precincts of the City shall remain as they existed on the effective date of this Charter, until altered by the Council. The City Council shall by ordinance from time to time establish convenient election precincts in accordance with this Charter and statutes. 
Section 12.4. - Primary Election. 
    A regular City primary election shall be held on the date prescribed by statute for the holding of general spring primary elections, except as hereinafter provided. 
    If upon the expiration of the time for filing nominating petitions for any elective City office, valid petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for such office to be elected at the following regular City election, then no primary election shall be held with respect to such office. 
    Candidates, equal in number to twice the number of persons, to be elected to each office at the next subsequent regular City election, who receive the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the respective offices for which they are candidates. The names of such candidates, together with the names of candidates who filed valid nominating petitions for any office for which no primary was held, shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission as nominees for the next subsequent regular City election. 
Section 12.5. - Regular City Election. 
    A regular City election shall be held on the first Monday in April of each year, but if some other date in the months of March or April is fixed by law for the holding of the state biennial spring election, then the regular City election may be held on the date so fixed. 
Section 12.6. - Special Elections. 
    Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least forty-five days in advance of such election, or when required by law. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more special City elections shall be called in any one year than the number permitted by law. 
Section 12.7. - Election Commission. 
    An Election Commission is hereby created consisting of the Clerk, Chief of Police and Assessor, and if the Clerk and Assessor positions are ever combined, the Mayor shall appoint the balance of the Commission. The Election Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by law relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
Section 12.8. - Nominations. 
    The method of nomination for all candidates for City elections shall be by petitions. Such petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less than twenty-five nor more than fifty registered electors of the City. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to said office at the following regular City election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than he is so permitted to sign, the signatures bearing the most recent date shall be invalidated. 
    Nominating petitions for candidates to be nominated at any regular City primary election, or to be elected at a special election shall be filed with the Clerk before five o'clock in the afternoon on the 28th day preceding each election. 
Section 12.9. - Form of Petitions. 
    The form of nominating petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Secretary of State for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk and no other forms shall be used by candidates for City offices. Before the Clerk shall furnish a nominating petition to any person, he shall enter on each petition form with typewriter or ink the name of the person to be nominated as a candidate and the name of the office for which he is to be a candidate. No petition which has been altered with respect to such entries shall be received by the Clerk for filing. 
Section 12.10. - Approval of Petition. 
(a)	The Clerk shall accept only nominating petitions which are on forms provided by him and which, considered together, contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for respective elective City offices as set forth in this Charter. The Clerk shall receive no nominating petition for any person named thereon as a candidate unless the petition is accompanied by an executed affidavit or other proofs establishing the facts which show the eligibility of such candidate for the office named in the executed affidavit. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. 
    Any petition filed in the office of the Clerk which is not accompanied by such executed affidavit or letter of consent or other proofs shall not be valid. 
(b)	The Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition, notify, in writing, any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this section, but the failure to notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements. Within four days after the last date for filing petitions, the Clerk shall make his final determinations as to the validity and sufficiency of each nominating petition and whether or not the candidate has the qualifications required for his respective elective City office by this Charter and shall write his determinations thereof on the face of the petition. 
(c)	The Clerk shall immediately notify, in writing, the candidate whose name appears thereon of his determinations. Such notice to any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient or who is found not to be qualified shall be delivered by personal messenger or by certified or registered mail. Any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient shall be allowed to file supplementary or replacement petitions before 5:00 o'clock P.M., at the then prevailing local time on the fourth day after the last day for filing original petitions; thereafter no further petitions may be filed. 
(d)	Withdrawal of a candidate's name from consideration on the ballot must be made in writing and in conformance with the time allowed by statute. 
(e)	All nominating petitions filed shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk, except during a four day period immediately following the last day for filing such petitions. 
Editor's note- The filing of any petition is permitted as long as it complies substantially with MCL 168.546. 
Section 12.11. - Form of Ballot. 
(a)	The form, printing and number of ballots or the preparation of the voting machines used in any City election shall conform as nearly as may be to the provisions of statute, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear. In all City elections, the names of qualified candidates or nominees for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be rotated systematically in the manner prescribed by statute for rotation of names. 
(b)	If two or more candidates or nominees for the same office have the same or similar surnames the Election Commission shall print the occupation and residence address under the respective names of each of such candidates or nominees on the ballots (or labels or slips to be placed on voting machines when used), provided, that for any of such candidates who is an incumbent of such office, the occupation shall be designated as "Incumbent." 
(c)	Except as provided in this section, there shall be no supplementary identification of candidates or nominees on the ballot. 
Section 12.12. - Canvass of Votes. 
    The Election Commission shall constitute the Board of Canvassers to canvass the votes cast at all elections. A majority of the members of such board shall be a quorum for the transaction of business of the board. The Board of Canvassers shall meet at the office of the Clerk at 10:00 o'clock in the forenoon on the second day following each City primary or election, and shall publicly determine the vote upon all questions and propositions, and shall declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected and which persons have been nominated for or elected to office and shall notify in writing the successful candidates of their election. The Clerk shall make under the corporate seal of the City duplicate certificates of the determinations of the board and shall file one certificate with the County Clerk and the other in his own office. 
Editor's note- Canvassing is now performed by the county, MCL 168.24a et seq., 168.30a et seq. 
Section 12.13. - Tie Vote. 
    If, at any City election, there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two or more persons having received an equal number of votes, then the City Council shall name a date for the appearance of such persons within one week after said election for the purpose of determining the election of such candidates by lot as provided by statute. 
Section 12.14. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any City election for any office or upon any proposition may be had in accordance with election statutes. 
CHAPTER 13. - CONTRACTS 

Section 13.1. - Contracting Authority of Council. 
(a)	The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the City is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(b)	All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.2 hereof, shall be authorized by the Council and shall be signed on behalf of the City by the Mayor and the Clerk. 
Section 13.2. - Purchase and Sale of Personal Property. 
    The Council shall establish, by ordinance, the procedures for the purchase and sale of personal property for the City, for the direction of the City Manager. The ordinance shall provide the dollar limit within which purchase of personal property may be made without the necessity of securing competitive bids, and the dollar limit within which purchases may be made without the necessity of prior Council approval. No purchase of personal property shall be made unless a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance is available therefor. 
Section 13.3. - Limitations on Contractual Power. 
(a)	The Council shall only have power to enter into contracts which, by the terms thereof, will be fully executed within a period of ten years, unless such contracts shall first receive the approval of a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon at a regular or special election. This qualification shall not apply to any contract for services with a public utility or one or more other governmental units, nor to contracts for debt secured by bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the City by law. 
(b)	The City shall not have power to purchase, sell, or dispose of any real estate unless:
(1)	In case of sale, there shall be at least two published advertisements for bids prior to adoption of a resolution for sale or disposal. 
(2)	Such action is approved by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the Council, and unless, 
(3)	In the case of real estate owned by it, the resolution authorizing the sale, lease, or disposal thereof shall be completed in the manner in which it is finally passed and has remained on file with the Clerk for public inspection for twenty days before the final adoption or passage thereof, and unless, 
(4)	It shall be in accordance with Section 5.12(a) of this Charter. 
(c)	Except as provided by ordinance authorized by Section 13.3 of this chapter, each contract for construction of public improvements or for the purchase or sale of personal property shall be let after opportunity for competitive bidding. All bids shall be opened in public by the City Manager or his authorized representative at the time designated in the notice of letting and shall be reported by him to the Council at its next meeting. The Council may reject any or all bids, if deemed advisable. If, after ample opportunity for competitive bidding, no bids are received or such bids as were received were not satisfactory to the Council, the Council may either endeavor to obtain new competitive bids or authorize the City Manager or other proper official of the City to negotiate for a contract on the open market. 
(d)	No contract shall be made with any person who is in default to the City.
(e)	No extra compensation shall be paid to any agent, employee, or contractor after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. 
Section 13.4. - Licenses and Franchises Remain in Effect. 
    All licenses and franchises granted by the Village of Lowell and in force within the City when this Charter becomes law, shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the time for which they were respectively granted. 
CHAPTER 14. - SUPERVISORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-This chapter is now obsolete. The election of supervisors is governed by MCL 46.401 et seq.

Section 14.1. - Number of Supervisors. 
    The City shall have the maximum number of representatives on the County Board of Supervisors to which it is entitled by law. 
Section 14.2. - Selection of Supervisors. 
    One representative of the City on the County Board of Supervisors shall be appointed by the Council at its first regular meeting in each December for a two-year term, which term shall commence on the 1st day of January following his appointment; except that initially all supervisors shall be appointed by the Council at the same time, one supervisor for a term ending December 31, 1960, and the other for a term ending December 31, 1961. Such representatives shall meet all requirements of Section 4.4 at the time of their appointment and may hold other elective or appointive City office or employment. In case any representative of the City on the Board of Supervisors shall be unable to perform the duties of his office for any reason, the Council may appoint another qualified person to serve temporarily in his stead. 
Section 14.3. - Duties of Supervisor. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the representatives of the City on the Board of Supervisors shall perform the statutory duties of Supervisors. In the performance of his duties each Supervisor shall represent the city, its inhabitants and its government to the best of his ability. 
Section 14.4. - Compensation for Supervisors. 
    Representatives of the City on the Board of Supervisors shall be entitled to retain any compensation and expense allowance paid to them by the county as members of the Board of Supervisors, but shall receive no extra compensation from the City for their work as Supervisors. 
CHAPTER 15. - UTILITY FRANCHISES AND MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP 

Section 15.1. - General Powers Respecting Utilities. 
    The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its corporate limits as authorized by law. 
Section 15.2. - Management of Municipal Utilities. 
    All municipally owned or operated utilities, except the Electric Utility, shall be administered as a regular department of the City Government, under the management and supervision of the City Manager. 
Section 15.3. - Rates. 
(a)	The Council shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such just and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the City and others with such public utility services as the City may provide except for electric utility rates. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users thereof, nor shall free service be permitted. Higher rates may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(b)	The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power, gas or sewage treatment and garbage disposal shall be so fixed as to at least meet all the costs of such utility including depreciation. 
(c)	Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the City of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other City departments or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial position of each utility and the results of its operation, which report shall be available for inspection at the office of the Clerk. 
Section 15.4. - Collection of Municipal Utility Rates and Charges. 
(a)	The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the City. Such ordinance shall provide at least: 
(1)	That, except as otherwise provided by law, the City shall have as security for the collection of charges for the furnishing of water a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance. 
(2)	The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 
(3)	That suit may be instituted by the City before a competent tribunal for the collection of such rates or charges. 
(b)	With respect to the collection of rates charged for water, the City shall have all the powers granted to cities by Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939 [MCL 123.161 et seq.], as amended. 
Section 15.5. - Disposal of Utility Plants and Property. 
    Unless approved by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special election, the City shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way dispose of any property, easements, equipment, privilege, or asset belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned public utility which is needed to continue operating such utility. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the City. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of machinery or equipment of any City owned public utility which are worn out or useless or which have been, or could with advantage to the service be, replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment, to the leasing of property not necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property or easements for other needed property or easements. The provisions of this section shall not extend to vacation or abandonment of streets, as provided by law. 
Section 15.6. - Granting of Public Utility Franchises. 
(a)	Public utility franchises and all renewals, and extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted only by ordinance. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years. 
(b)	No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Council shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Council nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all the terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered, unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council, shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. 
(c)	A franchise ordinance, or renewal or extension thereof, or amendment thereto, which is subject to revocation at the will of the Council may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted and shall have so been on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
Section 15.7. - Conditions of Public Utility Franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the City, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the City to impose or require: 
(a)	To repeal the same for misuse, non-use, or failure to comply with the provisions thereof;
(b)	To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)	To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)	To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)	To use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them; 
(f)	To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
Section 15.8. - Regulation of Rates for Franchised Utilities. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares, and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares, and charges shall, in no event, include a value predicated upon the franchise, good-will or prospective profits. 
Section 15.9. - Use of Public Places by Utilities. 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and other public places of the City by the City and by other public utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
Section 15.10. - Sale and Assignment of Franchises. 
    The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow another to use the same, unless the Council consents. Nothing in this Section shall limit the right of the grantee of any public utility franchise to mortgage its property or franchise nor shall restrict the right of the purchaser, upon foreclosure sale, to operate the same, except that such mortgagee or purchaser shall be subject to the terms of the franchise and provisions of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 16. - BOARD OF LIGHT AND POWER 

Section 16.1. - City Electric Utility. 
    The City's electric utility facilities and services shall constitute a department of City government. The electric utility of the City shall be under the control and direction of an appointee board to be known as the Board of Light and Power. The Board shall be composed of five members who shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve for terms of three years, provided, for those members first appointed after the effective date hereof, one member shall serve through June 30, 2009, two members shall serve through June 30, 2010, and two members shall serve through June 30, 2011. Members appointed shall serve their respective terms unless removed by the Council under the provisions of Section 4.6 and 4.7 of this Charter. The term of office of any person who is appointed to fill a vacancy shall commence on the date of appointment to fill out the period of the vacancy. The Board shall organize at its first meeting in July each year and shall elect one of its members Chairman. The Board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month at a meeting place designated by the Board with the approval of the Council. Special meetings may be called at the request of the Chairman or any two members in the manner provided in this Charter for call special meetings of the Council. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep a journal of its meetings, and its proceedings shall be filed with the Clerk as a public record. Members of the Board shall receive nominal compensation, which amount shall be set by the Council each year by resolution. Members shall be allowed reasonable expenses when actually incurred by them upon authority of the Board. 
(Ref. of 11-6-07)
Section 16.2. - Appointees of the Board of Light and Power. 
(a)	The Board shall appoint a Superintendent of Light and Power who shall be responsible to the Board and serve at its pleasure. The Board shall set his compensation. The Superintendent shall have control and direction and be responsible for the supervision of all of the electric light and power facilities and the properties of the City pertinent thereto, and shall be responsible for the economical and proper operation and maintenance thereof. As the administrative agent, he shall have the control and direction of the employees of the Board, subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
(b)	The Superintendent shall have power to employ or discharge all personnel deemed by him to be necessary for carrying on the supervision, operation, maintenance, and general conduct of the electric utility of the City. Such salaries and hourly rates of pay as are established within the department shall be consistent with the salaries and rates of pay established by the Council for City employees performing comparable work, but shall not be so limited for other employees of the Board. 
Section 16.3. - Responsibilities of the Board for City's Electric Utility. 
    Subject to the general direction of the Council, the Board shall have charge of the City's electric services, and shall organize and conduct the affairs of the City's systems for the generation, purchase, and distribution of electric light and power in a manner consistent with the best practices therefor. The Board shall make contracts concerning the electric facilities of the City, subject to the overall control of the Council relating to all departments of the City. The Board shall submit a budget each year to the City Manager before the second Monday in March who in turn shall submit it to the Council without alteration. The Council will act on said budget in the same manner as that required by this Charter for the general City budget. The Board shall not be subject to the limitations of Section 8.6 of this Charter but must present the Council each year with an independent audit and obtain approval from the Council as to its program of extensions and improvements of the City's electric facilities and be subject to the provisions of Sections 8.9 through 8.12 of this Charter inclusive, in the matter of borrowing powers. 
Section 16.4. - Purchases and Sale of Personal Property by Board of Light and Power. 
    The Board of Light and Power shall establish the procedures for the purchase and sale of personal property which may, in whole or in part, be through the officer charged with the functions of making purchases for the City. Subject to the approval of the Council, the Board shall provide the dollar limit within which purchases of personal property may be made without the necessity for securing competitive bids, and the dollar limit within which purchases may be made by the Superintendent without the necessity for Board approval. 
Section 16.5. - Property of Board of Light and Power. 
    The Board shall have the power to acquire personal property, and interests therein in the name of the City, for its purposes, and shall have the power to dispose of personal property by sale, exchange, or lease. The Board may recommend acquisition and disposal of real property or any interest therein by sale, exchange, lease, or otherwise to the Council and subject to the limitations on the sale of property by the City contained in Sections 13.3 and 15.5 of this Charter. 
Section 16.6. - Power of Board of Light and Power to Fix and Charge Rates. 
    The Board shall have full power and authority to fix all rates for electricity, which shall become effective thirty days after the same have been filed with the Clerk as a public record. Such rates shall not be fixed any lower than will produce the revenue required to pay all operating, maintenance, depreciation, and obsolescence expenses of the City's electric utility system, together with a sufficient amount to provide for necessary plant expansions. The City shall be charged and shall pay for light and power used at the same rates as are or would be charged to and paid by other customers using like amounts of electricity. The Board and the Council shall agree upon rates and conditions upon which the Board will furnish electricity and services for street lighting. 
Section 16.7. - Appropriations to the Board of Light and Power Forbidden. 
    No appropriations of money shall be made by the Council for the operating expenses of the City's electric utility, other than to pay for light and power actually used by the City. No free service shall be furnished by the City's electric utility to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the City. In all cases where the cost of any public utility services to the City cannot be metered, the same shall be estimated and the annual cost thereof shall be paid by the City. Such cost may be pro rated and paid monthly. 
Section 16.8. - Board Fund Control. 
    Subject to the provisions of this Charter, and the general accounting procedures of the City which shall be consistent with and meet any requirements of law, the Board shall have and exercise full control over all its funds. Such funds and revenues shall be in a bank account separate from other City funds. Except as provided in Sections 16.9 to 16.12 inclusive, such funds shall be used only to defray the cost of operating the City's electric plant or plants and distribution system, necessary overhead, plant and system expansions, debt service, and other incidental and pertinent expenses of operating, maintaining, improving, extending and changing the plant and system, including allowances for depreciation and obsolescence. All checks or warrants drawn for the payment of money, under authority of the Board, shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board, or in his absence, his authorized representative and countersigned by the Superintendent, as Council may direct. 
Section 16.9. - Payments to City. 
    The Board of Light and Power shall annually, pay to the Treasurer for the use and benefit of the City, an amount in lieu of taxes, which payment shall be in recognition of and compensation for all benefits received from the City in the use of City streets, services and facilities, said amount to be negotiated by the Board and the Council. 
Section 16.10. - Loans by the Council to the Board of Light and Power. 
    The Council shall have the power to loan money to the Board from funds of the City which are not appropriated or budgeted for expenditures within the term of such loan. Each such loan shall be based upon the payment of reasonable interest by the Board to be determined by the Council, and the repayment thereof to the City in substantially equal annual or monthly installments, provided, however, that the Board may repay the entire balance, with accrued interest, at the time that any installment is due. 
Section 16.11. - Utility Reserve Fund. 
(a)	There is hereby created a public utility reserve fund in the amount of twenty percent of the undepreciated original cost of the electric utility of the City, which reserve fund shall be maintained for the purpose of accumulating and holding available such money which, in addition to insurance carried by the Board or the City, may be deemed by the Board of Light and Power to be prudently necessary for the protection, improvement, replacement, and extension of the City's electric public utility plants and facilities. Such fund shall not be allowed to fall below the sum of ten per cent of the current replacement value of the said electric utility, as estimated by the Board of Light and Power to be prudently necessary for the protection, improvement, replacement, and extension of the City's electric public utility plants and facilities. Such fund shall not be allowed to fall below the sum of ten per cent of the current replacement value of the said electric utility, as estimated by the Board of Light and Power and approved by the Council, including the value of any fire, wind, explosion, or other disaster type of insurance carried on the utility and its facilities, except for the purpose of alleviating disaster. The Council may, at any time, and for so long as it deems desirable, by a vote of three or more of its members, increase the amount held and reserved in the City's public utility fund to a sum larger than the amount required to be maintained by this section. 
(b)	Monies placed in the City's public utility reserve fund shall not be used for any purpose other than the purpose of the fund, as stated in this section, unless the proposition to do so is approved by a majority of the electors of the City who are the owners of property which is assessed for taxes by the City, and the lawful husbands and wives of such persons, voting on such proposition at a regular or special election. This subsection shall not prohibit the investment and reinvestment of such monies in any manner permitted by law. 
Section 16.12. - Annual Report of Board of Light and Power. 
    An annual report shall be prepared by the Board within sixty days after the completion of the annual audit, which report shall clearly show the financial position of the electric utility system of the City by a profit and loss statement, balance sheet, and such other information as may be pertinent thereto. Such report shall be published in a manner determined by the Board, and sufficient copies filed with the City Clerk for distribution to the City Council and each newspaper published in the City. 
CHAPTER 17. - SCHEDULE 

Section 17.1. - Status of Schedule Chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to inaugurate the government of the City of Lowell under this Charter and to provide for the transition from the former governments of the Village of Lowell and the Township of Lowell to the new city status under this Charter. It shall constitute a part of the Charter of the City of Lowell only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end. 
Section 17.2. - Election to Adopt Charter. 
    This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the territory comprising the proposed City of Lowell, at an election to be held on Monday, March 7, 1960, between the hours of 7:00 o'clock A.M. and 8:00 o'clock P.M. All provisions for such election shall be held in the manner provided by law, except as in this Charter provided. Proper and sufficient notice of such election and of the registration therefor shall be given by the Secretary of the Charter Commission as provided by law. If, at such election, a majority of the qualified electors of the proposed City vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, the Secretary of the Charter Commission shall do and perform all other acts which are required by law to carry this Charter into effect and to consummate the incorporation of the City. 
    The election shall be conducted by the officers of the Village of Lowell and the Township of Lowell charged with the conduct and supervision of elections following usual election procedure. 
Section 17.3. - Form of Ballot. 
    The form of the ballot for the submission of this Charter shall be as follows: 
Instructions: A cross (X) in the square before the word "Yes" is in favor of the proposed Charter, and a cross (X) in the square before the word "No" is against the proposed Charter. 
Shall the proposed Charter of the City of Lowell which was framed by the Charter Commission elected August 31, 1959, be adopted? 
( ) Yes 
( ) No 
Section 17.4. - Election of Officers. 
(a)	At the election upon the adoption of this Charter, the first elective officers of the City under this Charter shall be elected, viz: Five councilmen and one Justice of the Peace to be elected from the City at large. The two councilmen receiving the highest number of votes shall hold terms beginning on the effective date of this Charter and extending until the Monday next following the regular city election on the first Monday in April, 1962. The next three candidates for Councilmen having the next highest number of votes shall have terms beginning on the effective date of this Charter and extending until the Monday following the regular city election on the first Monday in April, 1961. The Justice of the Peace's term of office will commence on the effective date of this Charter and he shall hold office until the election qualification, and assumption of office on July 4, 1961 of his successor, following the regular city election held in 1961. Thereafter, the successors of all such officers shall be elected at the regular city elections provided by this Charter, and shall hold office for the terms established thereby. 
    The nomination and election of such first elective officers shall be non-partisan, and no primary shall be held in connection therewith. 
(b)	Candidates for such offices shall be nominated by the filing of petitions signed by not less than twenty-five nor more than fifty of the qualified electors of the territory comprising the proposed City of Lowell, and filed with the Secretary of the Charter Commission not later than five o'clock P.M., Eastern Standard Time, on Monday, February 1, 1960, at the office of the Village Clerk of Lowell. The Secretary of the Charter Commission shall publish notice of the last day and time for filing such nominating petitions, which notice shall be published in The Lowell Ledger on or before January 6, 1960. Such petitions shall be in the form designated by the Secretary of State for the use in the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. All petitions filed in connection with such election shall be furnished in the first place by the Secretary of the Charter Commission at the office of the Clerk for the Village of Lowell and said Secretary shall receive no other petitions. The manner of approval of nominating petitions and those qualified to sign shall be in general as outlined in Sections 12.8 through 12.10, inclusive, of this Charter. 
(c)	Mrs. Laura E. Shepard, the Secretary of the Charter Commission, Mr. John Arehart, and Mr. Harold Englehardt shall constitute the Board of Canvassers for such election, and shall perform the duties required by law respecting such election and the canvass of the votes cast thereat. Evelyn Wittenbach, Esther Fahrni, Olive Collins, Florence Staal, Thelma Hahn, Dorris Alexander, Mary Ann Ayres, Angeline Mulder and Theo Schutt are appointed Election Inspectors of said election. 
(d)	Monday, the 8th day of February, 1960, shall be the last day of registration for such election. Under the direction of the Election Inspectors the Clerk of the Village of Lowell and the proper officials of Lowell Township will act as registrars for the purpose of registering the electors of the proposed City for the special election to be held on March 7, 1960. Those persons presently registered in the Village of Lowell and in that portion of Lowell Township which is proposed to incorporate into the new City will be eligible to vote without further registration if their registrations are in order under law. 
Section 17.5. - Form of Ballot for City Officers. 
    At the election held for the election of the first City officers, the names of the several candidates for such offices shall be placed on ballots containing no party designation with respect to the candidate and in the following order: Candidates for the office of Councilman and candidates for the office of Justice of the Peace. The names of candidates on such ballots shall be rotated so that the name of each candidate for an office will head the list of names of candidates for that office approximately an equal number of times. 
Section 17.6. - Voting at Charter Election. 
    Each person voting at the election on the adoption of this Charter may, in addition to voting on the adoption of this Charter, vote for five Councilmen from the city at large, and one Justice of the Peace. 
Section 17.7. - Canvass of Votes. 
(a)	The Board of Canvassers, designated in Section 17.4(c) of this Schedule, shall meet at 4:00 o'clock P.M. at the Village Hall on the day following the election on the adoption of this Charter, and canvass the votes cast at such election. 
(b)	If the canvass of the votes cast at such election shows this Charter to have been adopted, the votes cast for the several first City officers shall then be canvassed. Those to be declared elected and their terms of office shall be as specified in Section 17.4 of this Schedule. 
Section 17.8. - Effective Date of Charter. 
    If the canvass of votes thereon shows this Charter to have been adopted, it shall take effect and become law as the Charter of the City of Lowell for all purposes on Friday, March 11, 1960, at 12:01 o'clock A.M., at which time the control of the officers of the Village of Lowell and the Township of Lowell over any of that part of the new City shall cease and be superseded by that of the officers of the City of Lowell. 
Section 17.9. - First Meeting of City Officers. 
    On or before the effective date of this Charter, each person who is elected to an office of the City shall appear before the Clerk of the Village of Lowell and take and subscribe to his oath of office. The officer receiving such oath shall file the subscribed copy of such oath with the City Clerk within ten days after the effective date of this Charter. The first officers of the City shall assemble at 8:00 o'clock, P.M., Eastern Standard Time, on Friday, March 11, 1960, in the Village Hall of the City of Lowell. The meeting shall be called to order by the Chairman of the Charter Commission, who shall introduce the new City officials to the public, and call the meeting of the Council to order. He shall preside for the election of the Mayor from among the Councilmen and then turn the meeting over to the Mayor and the Council shall proceed with the business before it. 
Section 17.10. - Continuation of Appointed Officers. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this Charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the Village shall continue in that City office or employment which corresponds to the City office or employment which they held in the Village prior to the effective date of the Charter and they shall be subject in all respects to the provisions of this Charter; except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this Charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for which originally elected or appointed. 
Section 17.11. - Council Action. 
    In all cases involving the transition of the Village government from that under the Village to the City, which are not covered by this chapter, the Council shall supply necessary details and procedures and may adopt such rules, regulations, resolutions, and ordinances as may be required therefor. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a regular meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Lowell held on the 12th day of January, 1960, the following resolution was offered by Commissioner William M. Jones, Jr. 
    RESOLVED, That the Charter Commission of the City of Lowell does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed Charter for the City of Lowell and the Secretary of this Commission is directed to transmit the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan, in accordance with the provisions of Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 [MCL 117.1 et seq.], as amended, for his approval. 
    The resolution was seconded by Commissioner Ernest C. Foreman, and adopted by the following vote: 
YEAS: 7NAYS: 0ABSENT: 2LAURA E. SHEPARD,Secretary of the Charter Commission of the
City of Lowell, Michigan 
    Attested by the following Commissioners: 
William M. Jones, Jr. 
Robert E. Reagan 
Peter Speerstra 
Ernest C. Foreman 
David F. Coons 
Elmer G. Schaefer 
Wesley A. Roth 
Orval I. McKay 
Herbert Elzinga 
    Certified to be a true copy. 
LAURA E. SHEPARD,Secretary, Charter Commission 
    APPROVED: February 5, 1960 
(Signed)  G. Mennen Williams,
Governor-State of Michigan 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Election
 DateSectionDisposition 3- 7-60 1.1-17.11 1.1-17.11 11- 2-997.9 7.9 11- 2-999.16 9.16 11- 6-075.2(a) 5.5(a) 16.1  8- 5-13 4.1 4.1  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Lowell, Michigan." 
Charter reference- Authority to codify, § 6.3(f). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" means the Home Rule Charter of the City of Lowell, Michigan and includes any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" means the City of Lowell, Michigan. 
    City council. The words "city council" or "council" mean the city council of the City of Lowell, Michigan. 
    City manager. The words "city manager" mean the city manager of the City of Lowell, Michigan, or his designee. 
    Code. The words "Code" or "this Code" mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Lowell, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded. When the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The words "the county" mean the County of Kent in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. A word importing gender shall extend and be applied to both genders and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well. 
    Health officer or health department. The words "health officer" or "health department" mean the county health officer or the county health department. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" mean respectively the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated, as amended. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Lowell, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency shall mean and include such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and word "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Shall/may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" mean the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Captions. 
    Headings and captions used in this Code following the chapter, article, division and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-5. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes in this Code are explanatory only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-7. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section of this Code, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-8. - Reference to offices. 
    Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the city, exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code, when not inconsistent with this Code, shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)	Authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money;
(2)	Establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons;
(3)	Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets;
(4)	Pertaining to zoning;
(5)	Which is not of a general and permanent nature;
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. No offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code shall be affected. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendment procedure. 
    This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows, when to: 
(1)	Amend any section:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION ____________ (or SECTIONS ____________ AND ____________) OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF LOWELL, MICHIGAN. 
(2)	Insert a new section or chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF LOWELL, MICHIGAN, BY ADDING A NEW SECTION (____________ NEW SECTIONS or A NEW CHAPTER, as the case may be) WHICH NEW SECTION (SECTIONS or CHAPTER) SHALL BE DESIGNATED AS SECTION ____________ (SECTIONS ____________ AND ____________) (or proper designation if a chapter is added) OF SAID CODE. 
(3)	Repeal a section or chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL SECTION ____________ (SECTIONS ____________ AND ____________, CHAPTER ____________, as the case may be) OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF LOWELL, MICHIGAN. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability. 
(a)	It is the legislative intent of the city council in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. If any provision or section of this Code is held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
(a)	Except as provided in chapter 27 hereof with respect of municipal civil infractions or unless another penalty is expressly provided in this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this Code or any rule, regulation or order adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment of not more than ninety-three (93) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(c)	The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any injunctive relief, or revocation of any permit or license. 
(d)	This section shall not apply to the failure of officers and employees of the city to perform municipal duties required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 1-20-99)
Charter reference- Limitations on penalties, § 2.9. 
Sec. 1-14. - Open meetings. 
(a)	The city council shall comply with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), as amended. 
(b)	All boards, commissions, committees, etc., which are empowered to exercise governmental or proprietary functions shall comply with such act. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Boundaries of the city, § 1.1 et seq.; general powers, § 3.1; officers generally, § 4.1 et seq.; enactment of legislation, § 6.1 et seq.; administrative service, § 7.1 et seq.; finance, § 8.1 et seq.; taxation, § 9.1 et seq.; special assessments, § 10.1 et seq.; justice court, § 11.1 et seq.; elections, § 12.1 et seq.; contracts, § 13.1 et seq.; utility franchises and municipal ownership, § 15.1 et seq.; board of light and power, § 16.1 et seq.
Cross reference- Airport board, § 3-26; board of cable television, § 8-46; parks and recreation commission, § 14-26; planning commission, § 16-26; parking violations bureau, § 21-86.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-1. - Number and terms of office of councilmen. 
    There shall be five (5) councilmen. At each regular city election, three (3) councilmen shall be elected, two (2) to serve for a term of four (4) years and one (1) to serve for a term of two (2) years. The two (2) receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of office of four (4) years, the one (1) receiving the third highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of office of two (2) years. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1)
Charter reference- City council generally, § 5.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Date of odd-year primary elections. 
    All regularly scheduled city odd-year primary elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in August. 
(Code 1971, § 2-2; Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 3-4-13) 
Sec. 2-3. - Sale of city personal property. 
    All sales of personal property which have become obsolete and unusable shall be based on competitive bids whenever possible. If the amount of any sale is estimated to exceed value limits as may be established from time to time by policy or procedure and approved by the city council, the city manager, unless otherwise directed by the city council, may sell personal property either through the solicitation of sealed bids which shall be submitted sealed to the city council and shall be opened at the time and place stated in a notice to be published not less than one (1) week prior to such opening or by public auction either in person or through the use of electronic auction services. The sale of personal property, the value of which is estimated to be less than the value limits established by policy or procedure and approved by the city council may be made by the city manager upon written declaration that such property is obsolete and unusable and provided further that due and diligent effort be made to secure competitive bids on either a formal or informal basis. 
(Code 1971, § 2-5; Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 3-4-13) 
Charter reference- Purchase and sale of personal property, § 13.2. 
Secs. 2-4-2-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-21. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, amending Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.5c), as amended, there is hereby created in and for the city, a commission to be known as the "Lowell Local Officers Compensation Commission" which shall determine the salaries of councilmembers including the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § 2-6(a), 3-2-87)
Sec. 2-22. - Membership, appointment. 
    The compensation commission shall consist of five (5) members who are registered electors of the city, appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city council. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the compensation commission. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § 2-6(b), 3-2-87)
Sec. 2-23. - Term of office. 
    The terms of office of compensation commission members shall be five (5) years, except that for the members first appointed, one (1) each shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years. The first members of the compensation commission shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this ordinance. Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § 2-6(c), 3-2-87)
Sec. 2-24. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the compensation commission shall be filled in the same manner as initial appointments for the remainder of the unexpired term of the appointment vacated. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § 2-6(d), 3-2-87)
Sec. 2-25. - Salaries, expenses. 
(a)	The compensation commission shall determine the salary of each councilmember including the mayor, which determination shall be the salary unless the city council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the councilmembers elected to and serving on the city council, rejects it. 
(b)	The determination of the compensation commission of the salaries of councilmembers including the mayor shall be effective thirty (30) days following its filing with the city clerk, unless rejected by the city council. If the determination is rejected, the existing salaries shall prevail. 
(c)	Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to councilmembers including the mayor shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § 2-6(e, f, g), 3-2-87)
Sec. 2-26. - Meetings, quorum, action. 
(a)	The compensation commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15) session days in each odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within forty-five (45) calendar days of its first meeting. A session day means any calendar day on which the compensation commission meets and a quorum is present. 
(b)	A majority of the members of the compensation commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the compensation commission. 
(c)	The compensation commission shall take no action or make any determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the compensation commission. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § 2-6(h, i, j), 3-2-87)
Sec. 2-27. - Compensation of compensation commission. 
    The members of the compensation commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, § 2-6(k), 3-2-87)
Secs. 2-28-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- General powers of city, § 3.1; authority of city manager to establish and maintain a central purchasing service for city, § 7.2(d); finances generally, § 8.1 et seq.; contractual powers, § 13.1 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-46-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-71. - Bidding and purchasing procedure. 
    All purchases of materials, supplies or services shall be conducted in accordance with a bidding and purchasing policy developed by the city manager and approved by the city council as may be amended from time to time in the same manner as originally developed and approved. 
(Ord. No. 91-9, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 11-19-12) 
Sec. 2-72. - Emergency purchase procedure. 
    In case of an emergency, a department head may purchase materials, supplies or services without meeting the requirements of the bidding and purchasing policy established pursuant to section 2-71 with the prior approval of the city manager. Emergency purchases shall be reported by the city manager to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(Code 1971, § 2-30; Ord. No. 12-05, § 2, 11-19-12) 
Sec. 2-73. - Petty cash purchases. 
    The city council may, by resolution, provide for a petty cash fund and establish procedures to be carried out by the city manager. 
Secs. 2-74-2-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT 

Sec. 2-80. - Contract with construction manager. 
    The city may, if approved by the city council, negotiate and enter into a negotiated contract with a construction manager for the construction of public improvements, provided that all subcontracts for construction services shall be competitively bid and approved by the city council in accordance with section 13.3 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 2-81. - City Charter provisions. 
    As permitted by section 13.3(c) of the City Charter, the provisions of this division 3 shall apply even though they may be in conflict with the provisions of section 13.3 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 2-82. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-01, § 3, adopted March 4, 2013, repealed § 2-82, which pertained to substation construction contracts exempt from competitive bid and derived from Ord. No. 01-5, § 1, 10-15-01. 
Chapter 3 - AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to provide, operate and maintain airport, § 3.1(b)(5).
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT BOARD 

Sec. 3-26. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a board of the city to be known as the airport board to accomplish the public purpose and whose powers, duties and responsibilities shall be as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-1), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-27. - Purpose. 
    The airport board shall oversee the management, operation and use of the city's airport and periodically advise and make recommendations to the city council on its management, operation and use. Such oversight responsibilities shall include: 
(1)	Periodic review of the management, operation, maintenance, and use of the airport;
(2)	Acting as a liaison between airport users and the city;
(3)	Periodic review and evaluation of the performance of the airport manager or management company; 
(4)	Periodic review of all operational and lease contracts involving the airport including facilities located thereon to assure continued compliance with the provisions of such contracts; 
(5)	Periodic review and recommendation to the city council on the establishment and adjustment of rates and charges for services provided at the airport including, but not limited to, landing fees, tie-down fees and storage fees; 
(6)	Recommending to the city council capital improvement projects for the airport;
(7)	Promoting the use of the airport; and
(8)	Planning the future use and operation of the airport.
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-2), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-28. - Composition. 
    The airport board shall consist of seven (7) members, four (4) of whom shall be registered electors of the city and three (3) of whom may, but need not be, registered electors of the city. Every member of the board shall be a voting member. All members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-3), 1-4-88; Ord. No. 95-4, § 1, 6-19-95)
Sec. 3-29. - Term of office. 
    The terms of office of airport board members shall be three (3) years, except that for the first voting members appointed, two (2) members shall be appointed for a three (3) year term, two (2) members shall be appointed for a two (2) year term, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a one (1) year term. The first nonvoting members shall be appointed to three (3) year terms. Except for the initial appointment of board members where a member's term shall commence upon appointment, all terms of office shall commence on January first. If a board member's term has expired, and a successor has not been appointed, the board member shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-4), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-30. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the airport board shall be filled in the same manner as initial appointments for the remainder of the unexpired term of the appointment vacated. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-5), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-31. - Removal from office. 
    A board member may be removed from the airport board by the city council at any time for cause. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-6), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-32. - Compensation. 
    Members of the airport board shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-7), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-33. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the airport board, except as otherwise permitted by law, shall be open to the public and held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), as amended. Meetings of the airport board may be called by the board chairperson or any two (2) of its members. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-8), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-34. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members of the airport board shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the board. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-9), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-35. - Chairperson. 
    The members of the airport board shall annually in January of each year elect one (1) of its members as chairperson. The chairperson shall be responsible for conducting all meetings of the airport board. Another member of the board, selected by board members present, may serve as temporary chairperson for a meeting at which the chairperson is absent. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-10), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-36. - Contracts, expenditures. 
    The airport board may advise and make recommendations to the city council regarding the entering into of contracts or the expenditure of city funds in connection with the airport, but may not itself enter into contracts or commit city funds. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-11), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-37. - Rules, regulations. 
    The airport board shall, from time to time, recommend rules and regulations for the operation and use of the city airport to the city council. To be effective, such rules and regulations shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-12), 1-4-88)
Sec. 3-38. - Annual report. 
    The airport board, with the assistance of city staff and the airport manager or management firm, shall prepare annually a report to the city council on the management, operation and use of the airport. Such report shall be published in a manner determined by the airport board and in sufficient copies for distribution to the city council and all newspapers published in the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1(26-13), 1-4-88)
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LICENSE 

Sec. 4-21. - Interpretation. 
    This chapter shall be interpreted in harmony with Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of the Extra Session of 1933, (MCL 436.1 et seq.) as amended ("Act 8"), and the rules promulgated thereunder, and where the provisions of this chapter and the Act or rules conflict, the provisions of Act 8 or rules shall control. 
Sec. 4-22. - Definitions. 
    All terms and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted using the definitions provided in Act 8. 
Sec. 4-23. - Approval of the city required. 
    No recommendation for approval by the city required for the granting of a license to sell, distribute or convey liquor, spirits, alcoholic beverages, etc., shall be given: 
(1)	If the city council shall find that the conduct of the applicant for a license has been such as to reasonably justify the conclusion that the applicant would either intentionally violate or neglect to comply with the provisions of the Act and this chapter. 
(2)	Until the city council shall be satisfied that adequate off-street parking is available.
Sec. 4-24. - Conduct on the premises. 
(a)	Prohibitions. No licensee, or agent, servant, or employee of a licensee shall: 
(1)	Either directly or indirectly sell, furnish, or deliver any alcoholic beverage, beer, or wine to any person unless such a person shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years; nor shall any licensee, either directly or indirectly, by himself, or by any agent, servant or employee, at any time sell, furnish, or deliver any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the influence of intoxicating beverages. 
(2)	Be in an intoxicated condition upon the licensed premises or allow an intoxicated person to frequent, loiter or be employed upon the licensed premises. 
(3)	Allow in or upon his licensed premises any improper conduct, disturbances, entertainment or advertising materials. 
(4)	Suffer or allow in or upon licensed premises the annoying or molesting of patrons or employees by other patrons or employees. 
(5)	Permit the licensed premises to be frequented by or become the meeting place, hangout, or rendezvous for known prostitutes, or those who are known to engage in the use, sale or distribution of drugs or any other illegal activity or business. 
(6)	Allow upon licensed premises slot machines, punch or pullboards, dice games, or any gambling or gaming devices, machines or apparatus, or gambling or gaming of any kind whatsoever. The presence of any such device, machine or apparatus upon the premises of any licensed establishment shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(7)	Serve to or permit any patron to consume an alcoholic beverage or spirit unless such patron is either seated or standing at a bar or seated at a table or counter. 
(8)	No licensee shall have or permit any inside connection, entrance, doorway, or aperture, between licensed premises and the premises of another person. 
(9)	Permit the sale of alcoholic beverages and spirits upon any portion of the premises which shall have been leased, sold or the right to possession of which shall have been transferred to another person not licensed. 
(b)	Price List. Every licensee shall have posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises a plainly visible printed list or menu showing the various types and prices of alcoholic drinks which he offers for sale. 
Sec. 4-25. - Application and recommendation. 
(a)	The restrictions and requirements set forth in this chapter shall be applicable:
(1)	To all new applicants for a license, and such applicants shall not receive a favorable recommendation unless and until he complies with all of the requirements and restrictions herein set forth. 
(2)	To transfers of any license, whether the transfer is of ownership, location or both.
(b)	All personal property taxes and all real property taxes and all other obligations due and payable to the city, including installments of special assessments, which shall relate to any premises for which recommendation for approval of a license is sought, or to which or from which transfer of a license is sought, shall be paid in full before the city council shall recommend the issuance or transfer of such license. 
(c)	Prior to the applicant's approval of a license by the state liquor control commission to sell alcoholic beverages and spirits for consumption on the premises, or for a transfer of such license, the city council shall recommend for approval of the license. A fee in an amount to be established from time to time by the city council shall be paid by the applicant before the city council considers the request. Upon receipt of the request from the state liquor control commission, the city manager shall transmit the same to the city police chief, who shall endorse thereon his recommendations concerning the application. The city manager shall also transmit such request to the city treasurer, who shall endorse thereon a statement as to whether there is any default to the city in connection with the payment of any of the taxes and other obligations due the city. The request shall likewise be referred by the city manager to the city fire chief and to the county health department for appropriate investigations to be made of the persons and premises involved to determine whether or not the premises conform to all applicable and appropriate city, county and state fire and public health requirements. The city manager shall have the authority to request of the applicant such additional information as may be necessary to determine whether the requirements of this chapter have been met. The findings of all such investigations shall be reported to the city council and the favorable recommendation of the application shall be by a majority vote of the members of the council. 
(d)	If any other provisions of this Code or any ordinances of the county, or any statutes of the state, shall impose greater restrictions than herein set forth, then such provisions ordinances or statutes shall control. 
Sec. 4-26. - Authority of city council. 
    This chapter shall not operate to limit any power or authority vested in the city council by virtue of any existing constitutional or statutory provision, and shall be considered to be only supplementary to the exercise or use of such vested authority and not in derogation thereof. 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Fowl prohibited at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow chickens or other domestic fowl which may be in his possession or under his control, to run at large within the city or to go upon the premises of another within the city without the consent of the owner of the premises or the occupant of the premises, if other than the owner occupies the premises. 
(Code 1971, § 5-1)
Sec. 5-2. - Livestock at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow his horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats or any other domestic farm animal that he may have possession or control of to run at large in any public highway, street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1971, § 5-2)
Sec. 5-3. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall: 
(1)	Cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird;
(2)	Throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird; 
(3)	Except a police officer acting in his official capacity, molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof; 
(4)	Ride, drive or lead any horse, pony, donkey or mule other than in the traveled roadway of streets and public ways except when upon privately owned property with the consent of the owner; 
(5)	Who shall be the owner thereof, fail to provide shelter to a domestic animal so as to assure its health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 8, 5-4-81)
Secs. 5-4-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 5-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Leashed means keeping a dog on a suitable physical restraint not more than eight (8) feet in length. 
    Owner means every person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who permanently or temporarily keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits such dog to remain on, in or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Unconfined means a dog being outside of a building, fence or enclosure of its owner. 
    Unrestricted means a dog is off the premises owned or occupied by the dog's owner, unless the dog is in a closed automobile or shipping receptacle. 
    Vicious dog means any dog which, without provocation, has bitten a person or domestic animal or, which by its actions, gives indications that it is apt to bite, without provocation, any person or domestic animal. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-22. - Owner's and other's responsibility. 
(a)	Owning a dog in the city is a privilege with corresponding responsibilities for the dog's care and custody and for the protection of the general health, safety and welfare. This section is to be construed so as to impose upon the dog's owner the primary responsibility for complying with the requirements of this section. 
(b)	Any person other than the owner who is seventeen (17) years of age or older and who knowingly or negligently permits any dog to be in violation of any of the restrictions herein set forth shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, §§ 1, 2)
Sec. 5-23. - Running at large. 
    No dog shall be unrestricted unless it is leashed. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Sec. 5-24. - License, rabies immunization. 
    No dog shall be kept in the city at any time unless licensed as required by law and unless wearing its license tag and evidencing rabies immunization. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Sec. 5-25. - Dog in heat. 
    No female dog shall be beyond the premises of such owner when it is in heat. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Sec. 5-26. - Vicious dog. 
    No vicious dog shall be unconfined unless securely muzzled and led by a leash. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Sec. 5-27. - Barking dog. 
    No dog shall at any time, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling cause annoyance to people in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Sec. 5-28. - Rabies generally. 
(a)	Any person who has in his possession a dog which has contracted rabies, which has been subjected to rabies, which is suspected of having rabies or which has bitten any person, shall, upon demand of any peace officer or the health officer, produce and surrender the dog to be held for observation. 
(b)	Any owner of a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing the symptoms of rabies shall immediately notify the police department of his possession of such dog. 
(c)	Any person who shall have in his possession a dog which has contracted rabies or which has been subject to the same or which is suspected of having rabies or which has bitten any person, shall upon the demand of the dog warden, chief of police or health officer, produce and surrender such dog to the dog warden, to be held for observation as provided for by state law. It shall be the duty of any person harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing symptoms of rabies, to immediately notify the dog warden or the health officer that such person has such a dog in his possession. Whenever a dog is brought to the dog pound for having bitten a person, the dog warden may if deemed necessary and advisable, and after holding such dog a sufficient length of time to meet the requirements of the health department for investigation, cause such a dog to be destroyed as a vicious dog. 
(Code 1971, § 5-23; Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Sec. 5-29. - Disposal of dead dogs. 
    It shall be the duty of the dog warden, upon notice, to pick up any dead dog that may be found within the limits of the city and remove and dispose of such dog. 
(Code 1971, § 5-24)
Sec. 5-30. - Dog warden generally. 
(a)	Position established; salary; dog pound provided for. The council may appoint a dog warden who shall hold office at the pleasure of the council and whose salary shall be fixed by the council. Any person so appointed to the office of dog warden for the city will be responsible to the chief of police. 
(b)	Authority. The dog warden shall have the same authority as any member of the police department relative to the picking up of the dogs anywhere within the city limits. 
(c)	Duty to answer complaints. The dog warden shall answer complaints relative to dogs. 
(d)	Record of dogs. The dog warden shall keep a careful and accurate record of all dogs impounded. 
(e)	Duty to notify owners of impounded dogs. It shall be the duty of the dog warden as soon as any dog may be received by him to notify the owner of such dog, if known, and if such owner is unknown, it shall be the duty of the dog warden to attempt to ascertain who the owner is and notify him. 
(f)	Receipts and reports. The dog warden when delivering the dog to the owner shall make out a receipt describing the dog and stating the hour and date of delivery. 
(Code 1971, § 5-20)
Sec. 5-31. - Seizure, impoundment. 
    Any dog found unrestricted and not leashed in the city may be seized and impounded by the dog warden, animal control officer or any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-5-87, § 1)
Sec. 5-32. - Disposal of unclaimed dogs. 
    All dogs placed under this article may be kept by the dog warden and if the owner cannot be ascertained, the dog shall be disposed of to the county animal shelter. 
(Code 1971, § 5-21)
Sec. 5-33. - Impoundment fees and charges. 
    The owner of the dog shall be responsible for payment of impoundment fees and charges that are set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 5-34. - Limited on number. 
    Except in a kennel as permitted by the city's zoning ordinance, no person shall possess, harbor, shelter or keep more than three (3) dogs other than dogs under six (6) months of age born to a female dog under the care, custody or control of such person. 
(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 7-6-93)
Sec. 5-35. - Injury to property; waste products. 
    No person owning or possessing a dog shall cause or permit such dog to: 
(1)	Go upon (a) any public property, including parkways, or (b) private property, without the permission of the owner of such private property, and bruise, break, tear up, crush or injure any flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever or to defecate thereon. 
(2)	Be on public or private property not owned or possessed by such person, unless such person is accompanying such dog, has in his or her possession an appropriate device for scooping dog excrement for disposal in a suitable receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person, and promptly uses such device to remove excrement of such dog, provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to guide dogs for the visually handicapped and aid dogs for the physically handicapped. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 2-2-98)
Secs. 5-36-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS 

Sec. 5-51. - Scope. 
    Owning a cat in the city is a privilege with corresponding responsibilities for the cat's care and custody and for the protection of the general health, safety and welfare. This article is to be construed so as to impose upon the cat's owner the primary responsibility for complying with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Sec. 5-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Leashed means keeping a cat on a suitable physical restraint not more than eight (8) feet in length. 
    Owner means every person having a right of property in such cat, and every person who permanently or temporarily keeps or harbors such cat or has it in his care, and every person who permits such cat to remain on, in or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Unconfined means a cat being outside of a building, fence or enclosure of its owner. 
    Unrestricted means a cat is off the premises owned or occupied by the cat's owner, unless the cat is in a closed automobile or shipping receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-53. - Running at large. 
    The owner of any cat shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Code any time the cat is in violation of any of the following restrictions: 
(1)	No cat shall be unrestricted unless it is leashed.
(2)	No female cat shall be unconfined when it is in heat.
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Sec. 5-54. - Seizure and impoundment. 
    Any cat found unrestricted and not leashed in the city may be seized and impounded by the animal control officer or any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Sec. 5-55. - Rabies prevention. 
    Any person who has in his possession a cat which has contracted rabies, which has been subjected to rabies, which is suspected of having rabies or which has bitten any person, shall, upon demand of any animal control officer, police officer or the health officer, produce and surrender the cat to be held for observation. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Sec. 5-56. - Exposure to rabies. 
    Any owner of a cat which has been attacked or bitten by another cat or other animal showing the symptoms of rabies shall immediately notify the police department of his possession of such cat. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Sec. 5-57. - Limit on number. 
    No person shall possess, harbor, shelter, or keep more than three (3) cats other than cats under six (6) months of age born to a female cat under the care, custody, or control of such person. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Sec. 5-58. - Cat nuisance. 
    A person having custody of a cat shall not permit such cat to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor, or in any other manner. 
(Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 11-20-89)
Chapter 6 - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate, prohibit trades, occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a).

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Records. 
    Every auctioneer licensed as required by this chapter shall keep a particular account of all property sold by him, the person from whom received, to whom sold and the price sold for, which shall be open to the inspection of the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 6-4)
Sec. 6-2. - Deception. 
    No person licensed under this chapter shall make use of any deception or fraud in auction sales, or shall deliver any inferior quality of property. 
(Code 1971, § 6-5)
Secs. 6-3-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-21. - Required. 
    No person shall conduct the business of auctioneer, or sell or offer to sell at auction any real estate, goods or merchandise of any description until he procures a license. 
(Code 1971, § 6-1)
Sec. 6-22. - Application; bond. 
    Any person desiring to engage in the business of auctioneering shall make application to the city in writing, specifying the length of time he wishes to engage in such business and shall specify particularly the kind or kinds of property he desires to sell, and shall pay to the clerk such sum, for one (1) year, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 6-2)
Sec. 6-23. - Revocation; violations. 
    Whenever any person shall violate any of the foregoing provisions relative to auctioneers and be convicted thereof, he shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-13. In addition to the foregoing penalty, such license may be revoked by the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 6-7)
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate construction, repair, location, demolition, etc., of buildings, § 3.1(b)(2)(g)-(i), (b)(3)(j), (k).
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; nuisances, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivisions, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 22; zoning, App. A.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 7-26. - State construction code adopted. 
    Pursuant to the state construction code act of 1972, Act No. 230 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1972 (MCL 125.1501, et seq.), as amended specifically by Act 245 of Michigan of 1999, the city hereby adopts and assumes responsibility for administering and enforcing the state construction code including the state building code, the Michigan Electrical Code, the state mechanical code, and the state plumbing code, and the city is hereby designated the enforcing agency to enforce the provisions of such codes within its political boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 00-1, § 1, 3-20-00)
Sec. 7-27. - Construction board of appeals. 
    There is hereby created a construction board of appeals. 
(1)	Membership. The construction board of appeals shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the mayor for two (2) year terms. Each member shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of members of the construction board of appeals. During the absence of a member, the mayor shall designate a qualified substitute. The mayor may appoint alternate members who may sit on the construction board of appeals in the absence of any regular members. Such alternates shall meet the same qualifications as required for regular members of the construction board of appeals and, while sitting on the board, shall have the power and authority of the regular member. The board shall elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson and the building official shall act as or designate a clerk to serve as secretary to the construction board of appeals, who shall keep a detailed record of all proceedings on file in the building official's office. No member of the construction board of appeals shall speak to or vote on any appeal in which that member has any direct personal or financial interest nor shall any member participate in any matter where participation is prohibited by city Charter, city ordinance or state law. Compensation, if any, of members of the construction board of appeals shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(2)	Duties and procedure. The construction board of appeals shall have the duties and use the procedure set forth in the State Construction Code Act of 1972, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), as amended, and shall hear appeals from a decision of the enforcing agency or officer regarding or from the application of any provision of the state construction code. 
(Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 4-4-88)
Sec. 7-28. - Permit, plan review, inspection and other fees. 
    Permit, plan review, inspection, extra service and penalty fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 4-4-88)
Secs. 7-29-7-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE, DAMAGED OR DETERIORATED STRUCTURES 

Sec. 7-46. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections of the state construction code adopted by the provisions of article II of this chapter are hereby amended as set forth: 
    Section 120.1 is amended to read: 
    "120.1 Unsafe structures. All buildings or structures that are or hereafter shall become damaged, unsafe, unsanitary, or deficient in adequate exit facilities, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public health, safety or welfare, or which involve illegal or improper use, occupancy or maintenance, or which are damaged by wear and tear, deterioration, depreciation, fire, collapse, or act of God, to such an extent that the cost of repair and rehabilitation to place it in a safe, sound and sanitary condition exceeds the assessed value of the building or structure at the time when the repairs or rehabilitation are to be made, shall be deemed unsafe buildings or structures. All unsafe structures shall be taken down or removed or made safe and secure, as the building official may deem necessary and as provided in this section. A vacant building, unguarded or open at door or window, shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe within the meaning of this code." 
    Section 120.2 is amended to read: 
    "120.2 Examination and record of unsafe structure. The building official shall examine every building or structure reported as or appearing as dangerous, unsafe structurally, constituting a fire hazard, unsanitary, deficient in adequate exit facilities, or otherwise dangerous to human life or the public health, safety or welfare, and shall cause a report to be filed in a docket of unsafe structures and premises, stating the use of the building or structure, and the nature and estimated amount of damages, if any, caused by the collapse, failure, or other deficiency in the building or structure." 
    Section 120.3 is amended to read: 
    "120.3 Notice to owner. If a building or structure is found to be unsafe, damaged, deteriorated, or dangerous, the building official shall serve by personal service upon the owner, manager or other responsible person of the building or structure and/or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the building or structure whose name appears upon the current tax rolls, a written notice which shall: 
(1)	Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(2)	Include a description of the repairs and improvements required to bring the structure into compliance with the basic building code and/or a description of the damage, deficiencies or other conditions making the building unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to human life or the public health, safety or welfare. Additionally such description shall include a listing of zoning violations; 
(3)	Set a reasonable time limit within which the owner is required to make the repairs and improvements or make the building or structure adequate and safe or to demolish and remove the building or structure, which time limit shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than ninety (90) days from the date of the service of the order; 
(4)	Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification or withdrawal of the notice by petition to the construction board of appeals; 
(5)	Require the person thus notified to immediately declare to the building official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the offer. 
If the person addressed with an unsafe notice cannot be found within the city after diligent search, then such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such person and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and such procedure shall be deemed adequate." 
    Section 120.4 is amended to read: 
    "120.4 Restoration of unsafe structure. A building or structure condemned by the building official may be restored to a safe condition provided change of use or occupancy is not contemplated nor compelled by reason of such reconstruction or restoration except that if the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of its assessed value, at the time when the repairs or rehabilitation are to be made, such structure shall be made to comply in all respects with the requirements for materials and methods of construction or structures as provided in the basic building code." 
    Section 120.5 is amended to read: 
    "120.5 Appeals. The construction board of appeals is hereby empowered to authorize modification of any order of the building official in accordance with section 124.0 of the basic building code." 
    Section 120.6 is amended to read: 
    "120.6 Order to demolish. If the owner fails to comply with the order to repair or demolish, the building official shall order removal of the structure and the city manager shall take steps to secure removal of the structure either by city personnel or by an outside contractor. In the event of expense being incurred by the city in the demolition or removal of any structure, the city manager shall file a certified statement of the expense thereof with the city treasurer and the city assessor, setting forth the legal description of the land against which the expense was incurred. The city treasurer shall collect the account, which shall be a personal debt of the property owner which may be assessed as a lien against the property until paid in full." 
(Ord. of 12-3-84)
Secs. 7-47-7-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISPLAY OF STREET NUMBERS ON BUILDINGS 

Sec. 7-50. - Display of street numbers generally. 
    The owners and occupants of all residences and other buildings in the city shall cause the correct street number assigned by the city in accordance with United States Postal Service regulations be displayed in accordance with this Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 7-1-91)
Sec. 7-51. - Display of street numbers on single-family residential buildings. 
    Every single-family residential building in the city located ninety (90) feet or less from the public street on which it fronts shall have Arabic numbers displayed on the premises identifying the correct street address. Such numbers shall be; 
(1)	Not less than three (3) inches high;
(2)	Facing the public street;
(3)	Adjacent to the principal entrance of the residence;
(4)	In contrast with the immediate background on which they are displayed; and
(5)	In a position to be plainly visible from the street.
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 7-1-91)
Sec. 7-52. - Display of unit and street numbers of multifamily residential buildings. 
    Every unit of a multifamily residential building shall have Arabic numbers displayed on the premises identifying the unit by separate number or, where applicable, correct street address. Said numbers shall be; 
(1)	Not less than three (3) inches high;
(2)	Facing the public or private street it fronts;
(3)	Adjacent to the principal entrance of the residential unit;
(4)	In contrast with the immediate background on which they are displayed; and
(5)	In a position to be plainly visible from the street.
    In addition, if the units in a multifamily building do not have separate street addresses, the correct street address of the multifamily building or complex shall be displayed in Arabic numbers not less than three (3) inches high on the identification or project sign at the entrance of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 7-1-91)
Sec. 7-53. - Display of street numbers on other than residential buildings. 
    Every commercial, industrial, public and other nonresidential building in the city located ninety (90) feet from the public street on which it fronts shall have Arabic numbers displayed on the premises identifying the correct street address. Such numbers shall be: 
(1)	Not less than four (4) inches high;
(2)	Facing the public street;
(3)	Adjacent to the principal entrance of the building;
(4)	In contrast with the immediate background on which they are displayed; and
(5)	In a position to be plainly visible from the street.
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 7-1-91)
Sec. 7-54. - Display of street numbers for buildings located more than ninety feet from public street. 
    The size of the street numbers displayed on premises more than ninety (90) feet from the public street on which it fronts shall increase by one (1) inch for each additional twenty (20) feet or fraction thereof the premises is located from the street. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 7-1-91)
Sec. 7-55. - Display of street numbers for buildings not visible from the street. 
    In addition to the display of street numbers on premises required elsewhere in this Article IV, every premises not visible from a public street shall have the correct street number displayed on a post or regulation United States Postal Service mailbox on the same side of the public street and directly in front of the premises. Such numbers shall be not less than three (3) inches high and not greater than ten (10) feet from the public street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 7-1-91)
Secs. 7-56-7-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 7-60. - Purpose. 
    The moving of buildings and structures within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article to protect against and minimize damage to public and private property and to prevent injury to persons; to provide for the orderly and prompt movement of such buildings and structures within the public right-of-way; to minimize interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, interruption of utility services and other adverse effects of such movement; to ensure the restoration of a site from which a building or structure is removed and the completion of the construction and improvement of the site to which the building or structure is moved to; and to ensure compliance with all applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-61. - Moving permit required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall move any building or structure having a floor area of greater than fifty (50) square feet or a height of greater than fourteen (14) feet upon the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a moving permit from the city's public works department. This article shall not apply to, and no moving permit shall be required for, the movement of buildings and structures which do not begin or end within the city limits and where there will be no interruption in the orderly flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic within the public rights-of-way or in the provision of utility services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-62. - Application for moving permit. 
    The person responsible for the movement of a building or structure requiring a moving permit pursuant to this article shall complete an application in a form prepared by the city and file it with the public works department. The application shall include the following: 
(1)	The name, address, telephone number and name of contact person for the mover;
(2)	The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the building or structure;
(3)	A description of the building and structure to be moved including its vertical, horizontal and total height with rigged dimensions; 
(4)	The purpose for the move;
(5)	As applicable, the location in the city from which, and the location in the city to which, the building or structure is to be moved; 
(6)	The proposed date and time of day, estimated length of time and proposed route of the move; 
(7)	For buildings or structures to be located or relocated in the city, photographs showing the building's or structure's four side elevations and a full set of construction plans for the building or structure as it is proposed to be completed after the move; and 
(8)	Such other information as the public works department shall determine is necessary to assure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-63. - Submission of application. 
    An application for a moving permit shall be filed with the public works department at least twenty-one (21) business days before the proposed moving date. The public works department may extend the moving date beyond twenty-one (21) business days from the date of filing the application if additional time is required to make arrangements for the move such as, but not limited to, the temporary routing or rerouting of vehicular traffic, the temporary relocation of utilities or the temporary interruption of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-64. - Conditions for approval of moving permit. 
    The public works department shall approve an application for a move only if all of the conditions are satisfied: 
(1)	The building's or structure's size is such that it can, in the reasonable judgment of the public works department, be moved without causing damage to property or injury to persons; 
(2)	The building or structure is, in the reasonable judgment of the public works department, structurally safe and fit for moving; 
(3)	If the building or structure will be located or relocated within the city limits, the building or structure, upon its move, will comply or promptly be made to comply with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations and all building, electrical, heating, ventilation and air conditioning, plumbing and other permits required to comply with such ordinances, rules and regulations shall have been obtained; and 
(4)	The public works department shall have been provided with a certificate of insurance showing the applicant for the moving permit as the insured and evidencing general liability insurance covering damage to property and injury to persons in such coverage amounts as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council and with the city shown as an additional insured with respect to the move. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-65. - Moving permit fee. 
    The city council may from time to time by resolution establish a fee covering the city's administrative costs related to the issuance of a moving permit which, if established, shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for a moving permit and shall be nonrefundable whether or not the permit is issued or the move occurs and is completed. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-66. - Issuance of moving permit. 
    Upon payment of any applicable fee and compliance with the conditions and other requirements of this article, the applicant for a moving permit shall be issued the permit by the public works department. The public works department may specify on the permit the date and time of day of the move, the route that is to be followed within the city and such other conditions to protect against and minimize damage to public and private property and to prevent injury to persons and to assure orderly and prompt movement which minimizes interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, interruption of utility services and other adverse affects of such move. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-67. - Compliance with moving permit. 
    Once a moving permit has been issued by the public works department, all persons involved in such move or causing such move shall comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. A violation of such terms and conditions shall be deemed to be a violation of this article and, in addition to such other remedies as are authorized by law, the public works department may suspend or terminate the permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-68. - Obtaining utility clearances and other permits. 
    The person issued a moving permit shall provide the public works department before the day of the move the following: 
(1)	Written approvals and clearances from all applicable electrical, telephone, gas, cable television, fiber optics, water, sanitary sewer and other affected utilities stating that all applicable connections have been properly shut-off and, where necessary, all obstructions along the moving route will be cleared without delaying the move; 
(2)	Documentation that utility users whose utility(ies) are expected to be interrupted by the move have been notified in writing of the date and time of the move and the estimated period of time of interruption of utility service(s) at least fifteen (15) business days prior to commencement of the move; and 
(3)	A copy of all other permits required by other governmental bodies or agencies in connection with such move. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-69. - Notice of move. 
    The person seeking a moving permit shall provide or cause to be provided to the public works department written notice of the proposed date and time of the move at least twenty-one (21) business days prior to the move date, provided, however, the public works department shall approve the date and time of such move and no building or structure shall be moved without such approval. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-70. - Approval of move route. 
    The person issued a moving permit shall move the applicable building or structure within the city only along a route approved by the public works department after its consultation with other city departments. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-71. - Expeditious move. 
    All moves of buildings and structures shall proceed as expeditiously as possible and in a manner that minimizes the obstruction of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. No building or structure shall be left idle on any street or other public right-of-way except in the case of an unavoidable occurrence. The public works department shall immediately be notified by the person issued the moving permit of such occurrence and what steps will be taken to complete the move. While such building or structure remains idle in the public right-of-way, the person issued the permit shall be responsible for placing warning devices visible during the day and night time on and around the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-72. - Observation of move. 
    During the move of a building or structure pursuant to this article, employees of the public works department may observe the move and shall have the authority to require the person issued the moving permit to take any steps necessary to protect against and minimize damage to public and private property and to prevent injury to persons and to assure orderly and prompt movement which minimizes interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, interruption of utility services and other adverse affects of such move. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-73. - Filling excavations and cleaning up site. 
    A person issued a moving permit pursuant to this article for the move of a building or structure from a site within the limits of the city shall, within seven (7) days of the removal of the building or structure from the site, remove or cause to be removed all equipment and clean up all refuse, debris and waste from the site and shall within such seven (7) days fill or cause to be filled any excavation left upon the site, unless such excavation shall be used for the erection of a new building or structure commencing within thirty (30) days of the moving of the building or structure. Any excavation required to be filled under this section shall be filled even with the grade of the surrounding land with appropriate soils. Until any excavation shall be filled or used for the erection of a new building or structure, the person issued a moving permit pursuant to this article shall erect or cause to be erected barricades at least three (3) feet in height around any such excavation. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-74. - Reimbursement of city costs. 
    In addition to the payment of a moving permit fee pursuant to section 7-65 hereof, the person issued a moving permit shall reimburse the city its actual costs, determined on a cost accounting basis, of the dedication of equipment and personnel related to the move including, but not limited to, the use of personnel to perform the observation prescribed in section 7-72 hereof, and the use of personnel and equipment to direct and reroute vehicular traffic and to provide an escort for the move. Subject to section 7-73 hereof, such amounts shall be due and payable by the person issued the moving permit within thirty (30) days after being invoiced. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-75. - Cash deposit for damages and reimbursement of city expenses. 
    At the time of the issuance of a moving permit, the person issued the permit shall make a cash deposit of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to the city treasurer to guarantee the payment of the cost of repair of any damages to public property caused by the move including any damages to street surfaces, sidewalks, street lighting, public buildings and all other damage to public property and to guarantee the reimbursement of city costs in accordance with section 7-74 hereof. In the event the cost of repairing such damage and reimbursement of city costs exceeds the cash deposit, the city shall send the person issued the permit an invoice for the difference, which amount shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the date of the invoice. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Sec. 7-76. - Cash deposit for completion of work. 
    In the case of the location or relocation of a building or structure within the limits of the city, at the time of the issuance of a moving permit, the person issued the permit or the owner of the building or structure shall make a cash deposit of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to the city treasurer to guarantee that the building or structure will be completed in accordance with construction plans on file with the public works department and in compliance with applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations. Such cash deposit shall be released when such work has been completed, provided, however, if the work is not completed within six (6) months of the date of the moving permit the cash deposit shall be forfeited to the city in addition to the other remedies the city is entitled by law to pursue to enforce completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 8-20-01)
Secs. 7-77-7-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 7-80. - Adoption by reference. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., which is on file with the city clerk be and is hereby adopted as the city's Property Maintenance Code for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings as structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of the code of ordinances of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 7-81 below. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 9-18-06)
Sec. 7-81. - Revisions. 
(a)	Insert "City of Lowell" in Section 101.1 of the Property Maintenance Code.
(b)	Insert "$45.00 per hour" in Section 103.5 of the Property Maintenance Code.
(c)	Insert "12 inches" in Section 302.4 of the Property Maintenance Code.
(d)	Insert "April 1 to November 1" in Section 304.14 of the Property Maintenance Code.
(e)	Insert "October 15 to May 15" in Section 602.3 of the Property Maintenance Code.
(f)	Insert "October 15 to May 15" in Section 602.4 of the Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 9-18-06)
Sec. 7-82. - Conflict. 
    All other ordinances or parts of ordinance in the code of ordinances in conflict with this article are being repealed. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 9-18-06)
Secs. 7-83-7-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMPLETION OF EXTERIOR FEATURES OF STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, adopted May 7, 2007, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. VI, §§ 7-80-7-82. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as Art. VII, §§ 7-100-7-102.

Sec. 7-100. - Completion of exterior features of structures. 
    When a building permit has been issued by the city for construction of a structure, construction of an addition to a structure or changes to a structure for which such a permit is required, the exterior features of the structure or part of a structure for which the permit shall have been issued shall be fully completed within the following time limits: 
(1)	For a residential structure, the exterior features shall be completed within twelve (12) months of the issuance of the initial permit. 
(2)	For a commercial, industrial or other structure, the exterior features shall be completed within eighteen (18) months of the issuance of the initial permit. 
(3)	For a residential structure for which the initial building permit was issued on or before (insert the first day of the month twelve (12) months prior to the month the ordinance is effective) all exterior features shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section. 
(4)	For a commercial, industrial or other structure for which the initial building permit was issued on or before (insert the first day of the month eighteen (18) months prior to the month the ordinance is effective) all exterior features shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section. 
(5)	The time for completion of all exterior features may be extended by the building official only after approval for good reason by the construction board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 5-7-07)
Sec. 7-101. - Exterior features. 
    Exterior features shall include all elements of the exterior of the structure and the related real property including, but not limited to, siding or exterior finishing, exterior doors, windows, garage doors, roof coverings, painting or staining of the exterior of the structure, garage floors, sidewalks, driveways and approaches, parking lots or parking areas, appurtenant or auxiliary structures, lighting and other elements needed to complete the exterior of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 5-7-07)
Sec. 7-102. - Separate violation. 
    Each day on which the exterior features are not complete after the time limit established by section 7-100 shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 5-7-07)
Chapter 9 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to construct, provide, maintain, operate, etc., cemeteries, § 3.1(b)(5)(b); to enact cemetery regulations, § 5.9.
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.

Sec. 9-1. - Enforcement. 
    The responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter, including the rules and regulations, shall be vested in the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 8-2)
Sec. 9-2. - Jurisdiction. 
    The city manager shall have jurisdiction over all areas and their facilities, which are designated as public cemeteries and the construction, maintenance and operation of public cemeteries. 
(Code 1971, § 8-3)
Sec. 9-3. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized to make necessary cemetery rules and regulations to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The rules and regulations shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Any change or alteration in the rules and regulations shall be submitted to the city council for approval. No such rule or regulation shall become effective until approved by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 8-4)
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General powers of council, § 3.1.
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 16; zoning, App. A.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Code adopted. 
    The rules and regulations prescribed and set forth in the 2012 edition of the National Fire Prevention Association ("NFPA"), Fire Code and documents listed in Chapter 2 thereof prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion (the "NFPA Fire Code") is hereby adopted by reference as the fire prevention code of the city. 
    The purpose and intent of this code is to prescribe minimum requirements and controls to safeguard life, property or public welfare from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handing or use of substances, materials or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the use or occupancy of buildings, structures, sheds, tents, lots or other premises. 
    All matters within the intent of this code and not covered by this code shall comply with the referenced standards listed in the NFPA Fire Code of the NFPA where the NFPA Fire Code standards do not apply. Copies of all referenced publications shall be made available to the public upon written request to the fire chief. 
(Code 1971, § 10-1; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 03-6, § 1, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
(a)	Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the NFPA Fire Code it shall mean the city.
(b)	Whenever the word "authority having jurisdiction" is used in the NFPA Fire Code, it shall mean the fire chief or his or her authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 03-6, § 2, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 12-04, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 10-3. - Modifications. 
    The board of appeals shall have the power to modify any provisions of the NFPA Fire Code as provided for by such code upon written application by the owner or lessee of a premises, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided the intent of the code shall be observed and public safety preserved. The particulars of such permitted modification and the decision of the board of appeals shall be entered upon the records of the city and its fire department and a copy provided to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 03-6, § 3, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 12-04, § 3, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 10-4. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Should any provision of state law require a permit covering the same operations, business, activity or material for which the NFPA Fire Code requires a permit, such code provision or state law shall prevail and it shall not be necessary to obtain the permit as required by the NFPA Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 03-6, § 4, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 12-04, § 4, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 10-5. - False fire alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sound a fire alarm in the city except in cases of fire or supposed fire or when ordered to do so by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 10-7; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 2-16-93)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 1993, renumbered former § 10-2 as § 10-5. 
Secs. 10-6-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 10-21. - Fire chief generally. 
(a)	Duty on alarm of fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief on an alarm of fire to immediately go to the scene of the fire, and direct such action and measures as he deems most advisable for the effectual extinguishment of the same, and to discharge his duties fully as set forth herein. 
(b)	Control over fires, members of fire department. The chief shall have full control, at all fires, over the members of the fire department and shall have police power at all fires. 
(c)	Responsibility for fire apparatus. It shall be the duty of the chief to be in full charge of all fire apparatus and such other property as may belong to the fire department, and he shall make and keep an inventory thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 10-2)
Sec. 10-22. - Assistant fire chief. 
    It shall be the duty of the assistant fire chief to assist the chief in all duties at fires and in the absence of the fire chief to assume command and he shall have all powers as fire chief. 
(Code 1971, § 10-3)
Sec. 10-23. - Compensation of fire department members. 
    Members of the fire department shall be appointed and the officers, firefighters and employees of the department shall receive such compensation as the city manager may prescribe from time to time. 
(Code 1971, § 10-4)
Sec. 10-24. - Use of fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, injure or disturb in any manner any fire truck, fire hose, fire hydrant or any firefighting apparatus. 
(Code 1971, § 10-5)
Secs. 10-25-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 10-41. - Open fires on public grounds. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any public street, alley, road, or other public ground. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1a, 5-16-88)
Sec. 10-42. - Open fires on private land. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such open fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land, nor shall any open fire be kindled or maintained in any outdoor container unless such container: 
(1)	Has been manufactured according to nationally accepted standards for refuse-burning equipment and bears the label of approval of any nationally recognized testing agency such as, but not limited to, Underwriter's Laboratory or the American Gas Association; or 
(2)	By its design and construction can be reasonably expected to operate without causing a smoke or odor nuisance or health hazard. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1b, 5-16-88)
Sec. 10-43. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not prevent: 
(1)	The burning of wood, charcoal, coke or other accepted fuel for the preparing of food in any form in an approved container or utensil while being used in a safe and sanitary manner. 
(2)	The use of approved gaseous or liquid fired salamanders commonly employed in conjunction with building and construction operations when being used in accordance with accepted safety standards. 
(3)	Roofers, tinners, plumbers or other mechanics pursuing a business requiring the use of fire or for the purpose of boiling tar, pitch or oil used in the regular course of an appropriate business or trade, and while being used in a safe manner. 
(4)	Open burning specifically permitted in writing by the fire chief for fire department purposes after determination by the fire chief that such open burning will occur under the following circumstances: 
a.	The area is adequately protected by firemen or fire department trainees;
b.	The fire will be of short duration;
c.	The atmosphere is relatively free of pollutants.
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1c, 5-16-88)
Secs. 10-44-10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 10-50. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of city resources in response to an incident involving hazardous materials, this article authorizes the imposition of charges to recover actual costs incurred by the city in responding to calls for assistance in connection with a hazardous materials incident or emergency. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-51. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Assessable costs means those costs for services incurred by the city in connection with a hazardous material incident or emergency, including, but not limited to, the actual labor and material costs of the city (including, without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation, costs of material disposal and costs of contracted labor) whether or not the services are provided by the city or by a third party on behalf of the city; service charges and interest; attorneys' fees, litigation costs and any costs, charges, fines or penalties to the city imposed by any court or state or federal governmental entities. 
    Hazardous material incident or emergency means any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of hazardous materials occurs or is reasonably imminent. 
    Hazardous materials means those elements, substances, wastes or by-products, including, but not limited to, combustible liquid, flammable gas, explosives, flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable reactive matter, water reactive matter, petroleum products, anti-freeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, which are or are potentially harmful to the environment or human or animal life, or which pose an unreasonable or imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or property, or to the ecological balance of the environment. 
    Release means any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment, including, but not limited to, the air, soil, groundwater and surface water. 
    Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any other legal entity responsible for a hazardous material incident or emergency or any owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of real and personal property from which or onto which there is a hazardous material incident or emergency and their heirs, estates, successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-52. - Cost recovery authorization and procedure. 
(a)	The city may recover all assessable costs in connection with a hazardous material incident or emergency from any or all responsible parties jointly and severally. 
(b)	The city treasurer or his or her designee shall determine the total assessable costs and shall determine whether to assess any, all or part of such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such determination, the city treasurer shall consider the following: 
(1)	The total assessable costs;
(2)	The risk the hazardous material incident or emergency imposed on the city, its residents and their property; 
(3)	Whether there was any injury or damage to persons or property;
(4)	Whether the hazardous material incident or emergency required evacuation; and
(5)	Whether there was any damage to the environment.
(c)	After consideration of the factors in subsection (b) immediately above, the city treasurer may allocate assessable costs among and between responsible parties including allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally against more than one (1) responsible party regardless of whether a responsible party has other legal liability therefor or is legally at fault. 
(d)	If the city treasurer determines not to assess all or a part of assessable costs against any responsible party, such determination shall not in any way limit or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to other parties. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-53. - Billing and collection of assessable costs. 
    After determining to assess assessable costs against a responsible party, the city treasurer shall mail an itemized invoice to the responsible party at its last known address. Such invoice shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing and any amounts unpaid after such date shall bear a late payment fee equal to one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof that the amount due and any previously imposed late payment fees remain unpaid. If a responsible party shall appeal any assessable costs pursuant to section 10-54 hereof, such costs, if upheld, shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the date of determination of the appeal and any late payment fees shall apply thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-54. - Procedure for appealing assessable costs. 
    Any responsible party who receives an invoice for assessable costs shall be given an opportunity to appear before the city council to request a modification of assessable costs. A responsible party who desires to appear before the its [city] council shall file a written request to appear before the city council with the city clerk within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of the invoice assessing assessable costs. Upon receipt of such request the city clerk will place the responsible party on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled city council meeting, which meeting shall be at least fourteen (14) calendar days after the date on which the responsible party files the request to appear. Any filed request to appear shall specifically identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the assessed costs should be modified. Any reason, basis or argument for modification of assessable costs not set forth in the request to appear shall be deemed by the responsible party. Failure to timely file a written request to appear shall constitute a waiver of the responsible party's right to appear before the city council; and shall further constitute the responsible party's agreement to pay the assessable costs. After a responsible party has been an opportunity to appear before it, the city council shall promptly determine whether to confirm, modify or void the payment of assessable costs. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-55. - Assessable costs a lien upon property. 
    Assessable costs assessed against a responsible party not paid when due, including late payment fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible party in the city upon which or related to which the hazardous material incident or emergency occurred. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by city charter for city real property taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The city treasurer shall, prior to March 1 of each year, certify to the city assessor the fact that such assessable costs are delinquent and unpaid. The city assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount of the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-56. - Other remedies. 
    In addition to the remedy set forth in section 10-55 above, the city shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-57. - No limitation of liability. 
    The recovery of assessable costs pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of a responsible party under other applicable, local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-58. - Normal fire protection. 
    The authority to recover assessable costs pursuant hereto shall not include the costs of ordinary fire protection or suppression services not related to the release of hazardous materials which are normally and customarily provided by the city's fire department. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
Sec. 10-59. - Severability. 
    Should any provision or part of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other provision or part which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 4-1-96)
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 10-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Act 256 means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act 256 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2001 as amended from time to time. 
    Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and are classified as provided in Act 256. 
    Consumer fireworks mean fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling requirements promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission and are identified as such in Act 256. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks mean large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible and audible effects by combustion, deflagration or deterioration and are identified as such in Act 256. 
    Fireworks mean any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks mean ground and handheld sparkling devices as provided in Act 256. 
    Minor means any individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    National holiday means the following legal public holidays: 
(a)	New Years' Day, January 1.
(b)	Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January.
(c)	Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February.
(d)	Memorial Day, the last Monday in May.
(e)	Independence Day, July 4.
(f)	Labor Day, the first Monday in September.
(g)	Columbus Day, the second Monday in October.
(h)	Veteran's Day, November 11.
(i)	Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November.
(j)	Christmas Day, December 25.
    Retailer means a person who sells consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks for resale to an individual for ultimate use. 
    Special effects means a combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical or opera production or live entertainment. 
    Wholesale means any person who sells consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks to a retailer or any other person for resale. "Wholesaler" does not include a person who sells only display fireworks or special effects. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-61. - Sale of consumer fireworks. 
    A retailer or other person may not sell consumer fireworks within the city unless such person has obtained and has in effect a valid consumer fireworks certificate issued by the state department of licensing and regulatory affairs and otherwise complies with the requirements of Act 256 and any rules and regulations promulgated thereto included those related to storage. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-62. - Sale of low-impact fireworks. 
    A retailer or other person may not sell low-impact fireworks unless such person is actively registered, in accordance with Act 256, with the low-impact fireworks retail registry maintained by the state department of licensing and regulatory affairs. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-63. - Compliance with applicable ordinances and codes. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a retailer or wholesaler of fireworks located within the city must comply with the applicable requirement of the city's zoning ordinance and building codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-64. - Use of consumer fireworks. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks in the city on the day proceeding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday. On any other day, no person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-65. - Fireworks safety. 
    No person shall endanger the life, health or safety of any other person by the sale, use, possession, transport, display or discharge of any fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-66. - Prohibition on or near certain property. 
    No person shall, at any time, ignite, discharge, use or display any fireworks upon another person's property or within fifteen (15) feet of another person's property without such property owner's permission. No person shall, at any time, ignite, discharge, use or display any fireworks in a public street or right-of-way, a public park, school property or any other place of public assembly without the approval of the owner of such property or, in the case of a public park, street or right-of-way, the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-67. - Permits. 
    Provided the applicable provisions of Act 256 are complied with, upon application in accordance with this section, the city may issue a non-transferrable permit for the use of agricultural or wildlife fireworks (as defined in Act 256), articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects manufactured for outdoor pest control or agricultural purposes or for public or private display. After a permit has been issued, the sale, possession, transportation or use of such fireworks for the purpose described in the permit only may be made. A permit may not be issued to a minor. The issuance of a permit shall be approved by the city council and shall be based on the competency and qualifications of the operator of such fireworks as required by Act 256 and the time, place and safety aspects of the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-68. - Permit application. 
    An application for a permit, on the form prescribed by the city, shall be made for use of fireworks requiring a permit at least forty-five (45) days in advance of such use. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-69. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a fireworks permit as established from time to time by the city council shall accompany the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-70. - Proof of financial responsibility. 
    In order to receive a permit for articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks use, the applicant shall furnish proof of financial responsibility by a bond or insurance in an amount, character, and form deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an act or omission on the part of the applicant or an agent or employee of the applicant, and to protect the public. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-71. - Storage of fireworks. 
    The storage of fireworks by retailers and wholesalers shall at all times be in compliance with the requirements of Act 256. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 10-72. - Possession of consumer fireworks by minor. 
    A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Chapter 11 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to limit accumulation of rubbish and noxious weeds; to collect and dispose of garbage and rubbish, § 3.1(b)(1), (b)(2)(c), (b)(3)(d), (e).
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; nuisances, Ch. 12.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Premises means land, buildings, or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored. 
    Refuse means all solid wastes of a community, including garbage, ashes, rubbish, dead animals, street cleanings, and solid market and industrial wastes, but not including body wastes. 
    Responsible authority means the legally designated authority of the city who shall be authorized and directed to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter, or his authorized representative. The city manager is hereby designated as such responsible authority. 
(Code 1971, § 11-1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-2. - Control of refuse. 
    The city manager is directed to control the storage, collection, and disposal of refuse within the city, to provide for public refuse collection and disposal, and to regulate the establishment, maintenance, and operation of private refuse collection and disposal. 
(Code 1971, § 11-2)
Sec. 11-3. - Adoption of additional regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized and may propose, after a public hearing has been held, to adopt written regulations for the collection and disposal of refuse. 
(Code 1971, § 11-3)
Sec. 11-4. - Right of entry. 
    The city manager shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 11-4)
Sec. 11-5. - Responsibility of owners, occupants. 
(a)	The owner or the occupant, of any premises within the city shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or allow to be placed or deposited on his premises any refuse, except as designated by the terms of this chapter. 
(b)	Any person responsible for refuse on any premises shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of such refuse. 
(Code 1971, § 11-5)
Sec. 11-6. - Depositing garbage. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any garbage or rubbish in any alley, street, creek, lake, park, or other public place or premises within the city. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any garbage or rubbish upon the private property of any other person within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any garbage or rubbish, except for bulk items, leaves, yard waste and ashes, upon his own private property within the city unless the same shall be enclosed in a suitable can, vessel, tank or container which shall be watertight and which shall be fitted with a cover suitable to keep out water and to exclude flies and animals and to keep odors and other harmful material from escaping therefrom. Such container shall be kept covered except when garbage is being deposited in or removed from such container. On the day garbage or refuse is to be collected it may be contained in closed or sealed polyethylene bags. 
Sec. 11-7. - Accumulation of piles of lumber, trees and branches. 
    The accumulation of piles of lumber, trees or branches or other refuse which may serve as a breeding place for rodents and insects, is unlawful. Should the owner refuse to remove such lumber, trees or branches after written notice by the city, the city may remove the same and charge the expense to the owner. Should the owner refuse payment, the city may levy a special tax therefor against the owner's real and personal property. 
(Code 1971, § 11-11)
Sec. 11-8. - Old machinery, junked automobiles and other dangerous objects. 
    All old machinery, junked automobiles and other dangerous objects shall be removed or securely fenced or barricaded, unless otherwise prohibited by this Code, by the owners thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 11-13)
Secs. 11-9-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, adopted August 16, 2010, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II, sections 11-26 and 11-27 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1971, §§ 11-30 and 11-31.
Charter reference- Authority to provide for collection and disposal of garbage, § 3.1(b)(2)(c).

Sec. 11-26. - Finding of necessity. 
    It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of persons and property within the city to provide for: 
(1)	The collection of solid waste within the city and its disposal, and
(2)	The issuance of licenses to waste haulers in connection therewith.
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-27. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases, even if otherwise defined in this Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
    Disposal site shall mean any of the following: 
(1)	A solid waste transfer facility;
(2)	An incinerator;
(3)	A sanitary landfill;
(4)	A solid waste processing plant; or
(5)	Any other solid waste handling or disposal facility utilized in the disposal of solid waste. 
    Garbage shall mean decomposable solid waste which consists of rejected food waste being the waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter intended for or used as food or utilized for preparation, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables and of animal and fowl excrement. 
    Rubbish shall mean non-putrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials or litter of any kind. 
    Solid waste shall mean garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, solid commercial and solid industrial wastes and animal wastes. 
    Waste hauler shall mean any person engaged in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste within the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-28. - License required. 
(a)	No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste within the city, and no truck or vehicle shall be used for such purposes unless properly licensed by the city. 
(b)	Such license shall be issued by the city for such period as the city may specify.
(c)	It shall be an express condition of each license that the waste hauler shall comply with all provisions of this article. 
(d)	An application for a license shall be filed by a waste hauler with the city clerk in the form prescribed by the city manager. 
(e)	A separate license shall be required for each truck or vehicle to be used in the collection, delivery and disposal of solid waste. 
(f)	As a part of its application, a waste hauler shall furnish to the city clerk evidence of ownership or a leasehold interest in each truck or vehicle it seeks to license. 
(g)	As a part of its application, a waste hauler shall furnish the city clerk evidence of workmen's compensation, contractor's public liability and contractor's motor vehicle bodily injury and property damage insurance in such coverage amounts as shall be established from time to time by the city manager. All insurance coverage shall provide that the city clerk shall receive thirty (30) days' advanced notice of cancellation or non-renewal. 
(h)	A waste hauler shall display conspicuously on each truck or vehicle required to be licensed such tag or sticker as is furnished by the city for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-29. - License term and fee. 
    The period of a license and the license fee shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-30. - No transfer of license. 
    No licensed waste hauler shall transfer or attempt to transfer its license without approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-31. - Revocation of license. 
    The city, after notice and the opportunity for a hearing before the city manager, may revoke the license of a waste hauler who fails to comply with the requirements of this article or applicable state or federal laws, rules and regulations. The license of such waste hauler shall not thereafter be granted or renewed until such time as the waste hauler has remedied all violations and has demonstrated compliance with the requirements of this article and applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-32. - License not required. 
    No license shall be required for any person hauling garbage or rubbish on a non-commercial basis either for that person or on a gratuity basis for some other person. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-33. - Transportation of solid waste. 
    All solid waste shall be collected, hauled and transported in the city by a licensed waste hauler in a licensed truck or vehicle. Except as provided in section 11-34, all transportation of solid waste shall be in a truck or vehicle that shall have all openings closed and all doors or covers secured by an adequate latch or restraining mechanism to keep them closed or covered while transporting solid waste. It shall be the responsibility of the driver or licensed waste hauler of assuring that the available doors and covers are in the proper position. Special covering shall be used where conditions require for the control of odor, vermin, liquids, dust or smoke. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-34. - Open transportation. 
    Transportation of certain items of solid waste shall be allowed in open licensed trucks or vehicles only under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)	The items are of such size or nature that they cannot be transported in a closed truck or vehicle, provided, that such items shall not consist of loose garbage or rubbish. 
(2)	All transported items shall be transported and secured in such a manner as to prevent leakage, blowing or spillage of the items transported or their contents on any public street or other public and private property. 
(3)	The transportation of solid waste disposal containers on trucks or vehicles designed for such transportation, provided, such containers are fully secured and covered so as to prevent any blowing, spillage or leakage. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-35. - Inspection. 
    The city shall have the right to inspect all trucks and vehicles and related equipment for which a license must be obtained both prior to the issuance of the license or at any time during the period the license is in effect to determine compliance with this article and applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-36. - Time for collection and transport. 
    Waste haulers shall only collect and transport solid waste within the city on such day or days and during such time during the day as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-37. - Disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensed waste hauler to dispose of any solid waste collected in the city at other than a disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-38. - Compliance with laws, rules and regulations. 
    Waste haulers shall comply with the requirements of this article and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto as well as all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, Part 115 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended, MCL 324.11501, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Sec. 11-39. - Enforcement of article; adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The enforcement of this article shall be duty of the city manager, who is hereby authorized to adopt reasonable rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city council to carry out the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 8-16-10)
Secs. 11-40-11-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORAGE OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES, BOATS AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 11-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat means a vehicle for use on the water which is self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled either mechanically or manually. 
    Dismantled or partially dismantled machinery and equipment means machinery and equipment from which some part or parts which are ordinarily a component of such machinery or equipment have been removed or are missing. 
    Dismantled or partially dismantled motor vehicle or boat means a motor vehicle or boat from which some part or parts which are ordinarily a component of such motor vehicle has been removed or is missing. 
    Inoperable machinery and equipment means any item or piece of machinery or equipment which by reason of dismantling, disrepair, or other cause is incapable of functioning or being operated as it was intended to function or be operated. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle or boat means a motor vehicle or boat which by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other cause is incapable of being propelled under its own power, and an unlicensed motor vehicle or boat without a current valid registration. 
    Motor vehicle means any wheeled or unwheeled vehicles for use on land, in or on water, or in the air which is self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled either mechanically or manually. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, § 1, 1-4-90)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-47. - Restrictions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to store on, place on, or permit to be stored or placed on or allowed to remain on any platted or unplatted parcel of land within the city a dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle or boat, or dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable machinery or equipment, or any parts thereof, except as it may be permitted under the pertinent provisions of the city's zoning ordinance unless the dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle, boat, machinery, or equipment, or parts thereof, is kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. Provided, however, that any bona fide owner, co-owner, tenant, or cotenant may store, permit to be stored or allow to remain on the premises of which he is the owner, co-owner, tenant, or cotenant, one dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle, for a period of not to exceed fifteen (15) days if that motor vehicle is registered in his name. This section shall not be construed to permit the parking or placing of dismantled or partially dismantled motor vehicles, boats, machinery or equipment on any street, public property or public place in the city or in any yard, as now or later defined by the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, § 1, 1-4-90)
Sec. 11-48. - Nuisance. 
    The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle, boat, machinery, or equipment, or any parts thereof on any platted or unplatted parcel of land in violation of the terms of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 90-1, § 1, 1-4-90)
Chapter 11.5 - HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 11.5-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "historic district ordinance" for the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)	Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving districts which reflect elements of the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history; 
(2)	Stabilize and improve property values in such districts;
(3)	Foster civic beauty; and
(4)	Strengthen the local economy.
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Act means the Historic Districts, Sites and Structures Act, Act 169 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1970, as amended. 
    Alteration means work that changes the details of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
    Board means the State Historic Review Board of the Michigan Historical Commission within the Michigan Department of State. 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the city. 
    Center means the Michigan Historical Center, formerly known as the Bureau of History of the Michigan Department of State. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not affect a resource. 
    Commission means the historic district commission established pursuant to section 11.5-4 hereof. 
    Committee means a historic district study committee appointed by the city council established pursuant to section 11.5-9 hereof. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Fire alarm system means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire or by-products of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke alarms. 
    Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one (1) resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, designation and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering of the state or a community within the state, or of the United States. 
    Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under section 26-5 hereof. 
    Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscape area, or a formal or man made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
    Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, organization, group, institution or governmental entity or agency. 
    Proposed historic district means an area or a group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an existing established historic district. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Resource means one (1) or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces located within a historic district. 
    Smoke alarm means a single-station or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke and not connected to a system. As used herein, "single-station alarm" means an assembly incorporating a detector, the control equipment and the alarm sounding device into a single unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation. "Multiple-station alarm" means two (2) or more single-station alarms that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one (1) alarm causes all integrated separate audible alarms to operate. 
    Standards means the United States Secretary of Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67 and as may be amended from time to time. 
    State means the State of Michigan. 
    Work means construction, installation, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96; Ord. No. 05-1, § 1, 2-7-05)
Sec. 11.5-4. - Historic district commission. 
    The commission is hereby established and shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council to serve for three-year terms except that the initial appointment of members shall be staggered with one (1) member appointed for a one-year term, two (2) members appointed for a two-year term and two (2) members appointed for a three-year term. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Two (2) members shall be appointed from a list of recommended appointees containing at least twice the number of individuals as member(s) to be appointed submitted by the Lowell Area Historical Association or other local preservation organization and one (1) member, if available within the city and willing to serve, shall be a registered architect in the state. 
    Members shall serve without compensation and shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event of a vacancy on the commission, the mayor shall, within sixty (60) days of the occurrence of such vacancy, appoint a person, subject to confirmation of the city council, to serve the remainder of the unexpired term of the person vacating the position. 
    Any person shall be entitled to appear at any meeting of the commission and be heard on any matter before the commission before the commission reaches a decision on that matter. 
    The commission shall meet quarterly or more frequently upon the request of any two (2) members. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96; Ord. No. 04-2, § 1, 3-15-04)
Sec. 11.5-5. - Permits. 
(a)	A permit shall be obtained before any work within a historic district affecting the (i) exterior appearance, including signage, of a resource, or (ii) if required by subsection (e) hereof, interior arrangements of a resource is performed. The person proposing to do such work shall file an application for a permit with the building inspector. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
(2)	Address of resource;
(3)	Description of proposed construction, installation, addition, alteration, repair, movement, excavation or demolition; 
(4)	Identification of existing structural materials and proposed structural materials to be used in the work; 
(5)	Drawings showing existing and proposed elevations of proposed exterior features of resource; 
(6)	If signage is to be included in the work, location, size, material, colors, letter style, hanging device and illumination method, if any, of such signage; 
(7)	Certification that the resource will have a smoke detector or fire alarm system; and
(8)	Any other information which in the opinion of the commission is reasonably required in order for it to properly review the application. 
    Upon receipt of an application the building inspector shall promptly refer it along with all supporting materials to the commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the commission has acted on the application by issuing either a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. 
(b)	A certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed shall be void if the work is not begun within twelve (12) months and completed within eighteen (18) months of the date of issuance. The commission may grant one six (6) month extension to complete the work provided the applicant requests an extension in writing prior to the expiration of the original eighteen (18) month period. The city council may by resolution determine to require a security deposit be deposited with the city at the time certificates of appropriateness are issued to assure completion of the work within the required time period. The imposition of the fee shall be uniformly applied to all certificates of appropriateness and the fee shall be established by resolution. 
(c)	An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the board. The appeal must be filed in writing with the board within sixty (60) days of the date the decision of the commission is communicated to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of its evidence or argument supporting its position in writing with the appeal. The board will consider the appeal in accordance with the provisions of the Act. An appellant still aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal the decision to the Kent County Circuit Court. 
(d)	When reviewing an application for a permit, the commission shall follow the standards. Other design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the standards and are established or approved by the center. In addition, the commission shall consider the following: 
(1)	The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area; 
(2)	The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and the surrounding area; 
(3)	The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; 
(4)	Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds relevant; and
(5)	Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the property where the work will be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the State Construction Code. 
    The commission shall not deny a permit for considerations not prescribed in this subsection (d). 
(e)	The commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a resource and except for noting compliance with the requirements to install a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm, shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless specifically authorized to do so by the local legislative body or unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in subsection (d) above. 
(f)	If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the commission considers valuable to the city, state or nation and the commission determines that the alteration or loss of such resource will adversely affect the public purposes of the city, state or nation, the commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(g)	Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the commission if any of the following conditions exist and if the commission determines that the proposed work is necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)	The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants; 
(2)	The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing and environmental clearances; 
(3)	Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; or 
(4)	Retaining the resource is not in the best interest of the community.
(h)	The business of the commission shall be conducted at public meetings held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended. Public notice of the time, date and place of commission meetings shall be given in accordance with Act 267, a meeting agenda shall be a part of such notice and shall include a list of permit applications to be considered at the meeting. 
(i)	The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of its duties shall be available to the public in accordance with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, Act 442 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended. 
(j)	The commission shall adopt rules of procedure and design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties in this chapter. 
(k)	The commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specific minor classifications of work to the building inspector. The commission shall provide the building inspector with written standards for issuance of such certificates of appropriateness. Quarterly the commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued by the building inspector, to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities shall continue. 
(l)	Upon a finding by the commission that a resource within a historic district is threatened with demolition by neglect, the commission may do either of the following: 
(1)	Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to the demolition by neglect, or 
(2)	If the owner does not, after receiving written notice to make such repairs, make such repairs within a reasonable time as set forth in the notice, enter the resource or cause its agent to enter the resource and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect, the cost of which shall be billed to and paid by the owner of the resource and if not paid may by action of the city council be placed as a lien upon the resource and collected in the same manner as the collection of delinquent property taxes. 
    The commission or its agent may enter the resource for the purposes of this subsection (l) after obtaining an appropriate order from the Kent County Circuit Court. 
(m)	When work has been done upon a resource without a permit and the commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require the owner of the resource to restore the resource to the condition it was in before the work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner of the resource does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time established by the commission, the commission may seek an order from the Kent County Circuit Court requiring the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with an order of the court, the commission or its agent may, upon proper authorization of the court, enter upon the resource and undertake work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The cost of such work shall be billed to and paid by the owner of the resource and if not paid the city council may place a lien upon the resource and such lien shall be collected in the same manner as the collection of delinquent property taxes. 
(n)	The commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed and application for permit denials with the building inspector. A permit shall not be issued until the commission has acted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If an application for a permit is denied, the decision shall be binding on the building inspector. A denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the commission of the reasons for the denial and, if appropriate, a notice that the application may be resubmitted for commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include notification of the applicant's right to appeal to the board. The failure of the commission to act within sixty (60) days after the date an application is filed with the building inspector shall be considered to be an approval of the request made in the application, unless the applicant and the commission shall otherwise agree in writing. 
(o)	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a resource or to prevent work on a resource pursuant to a permit issued by the building inspector before the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96; Ord. No. 05-1, § 2, 2-7-05)
Sec. 11.5-6. - Regulation of signs. 
    All exterior signs and interior signs that affect the exterior appearance of a resource in a historic district shall be subject to review and approval by the commission. A certificate of appropriateness will be issued by the commission upon its approval. The review and approval shall be made in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1)	The provisions of Chapter 20 of "Appendix A - Zoning" of the Code of Ordinances; and
(2)	The following standards which are established to insure that the size, shape and types of signs are consistent with the character of the historic district: 
a.	Message-permitted signs shall be restricted to those signs which identify the name of the establishment and/or the primary business or service provided within and in the case of a resource occupied by professional offices, signage may list occupants; 
b.	Advertising related to businesses or services not provided on the premises of the resource shall be prohibited, unless the commission shall determine that such advertising is historically appropriate; 
c.	Internally lit signs, flashing signs and signs that otherwise appear to be in motion are prohibited; 
d.	Banners and flags bearing emblems, symbols or messages shall be permitted on an interim basis and shall be reviewed annually to insure their sightly condition and appropriate appearance; 
e.	Signs shall not be placed so as to conceal or disfigure an architectural feature of a resource; 
f.	The number, style and size of signs shall be visually compatible with the resource on which they are attached; and 
g.	Painted and metal signs, wood signs, and signs painted on masonry and other materials approved by the commission are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96; Ord. No. 97-1, § 1, 10-20-97)
Sec. 11.5-7. - Acceptance of gift or grant. 
    The city council may accept State or federal grants; may participate in State and federal programs that benefit historic preservation; may accept public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes; and may appoint the commission to administer on its behalf such grants and gifts. The city treasurer shall be custodian of all funds of the commission. The commission shall annually report to the city council any money it shall receive or expend. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-8. - Right of appeal. 
    Pursuant to the Act any person, resource property owner or historic preservation organization in the city aggrieved by a decision of the commission may appeal the decision to the Kent County Circuit Court, provided, however, a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision of the commission must first exhaust its appeal rights to the board pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-9. - Historic district study committee. 
(a)	The city council may, by ordinance, establish one (1) or more historic districts. Such historic districts shall be administered by the commission. Before establishing, modifying or eliminating a historic district, a study complying with this section, including reports and hearings, shall be conducted by a committee. The committee shall be comprised of a majority of persons who have a demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation and shall have a representative from one (1) or more historic preservation organizations in the city. The committee shall do the following: 
(1)	Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved by the center; 
(2)	Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the resources located within such proposed district; 
(3)	Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of Interior for the inclusion of resources in the national register of historic places, as set forth in 36 C.F.R., part 60, and criteria established or approved by the center, if any; 
(4)	Prepare a preliminary report that at a minimum includes the following:
a.	The charge of the committee;
b.	The composition of the committee;
c.	The proposed historic district(s) studied;
d.	The boundaries of the proposed historic district(s), including a map;
e.	The history of the proposed historic district(s); and
f.	The significance of the proposed historic district(s) including the identification of a sufficient number of resources to represent the variety of resources found within the proposed district(s) as related to the evaluation criteria used; 
(5)	Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendation to the city planning commission, the center, the Michigan Historical Commission and the State Historic Preservation Review Board; and 
(6)	Make copies of the preliminary report available to the general public pursuant to subsection (d) hereof. 
(b)	Not less than sixty (60) days after transmittal of the preliminary report as provided in subsection (a)(5) hereof, the committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended. Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Act 267. In addition, notice of the hearing shall be mailed by first-class mail not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing to the owners of property within the proposed historic district at the addresses of such owners as shown on the city's most recent ad valorem property tax roll. 
(c)	After conducting a public hearing, the committee and the city council shall have one (1) year, unless additional time is authorized by the city council, to take the following action: 
(1)	The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendations and the recommendation, if any, of the city planning commission to the city council. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district(s) the final report shall include the draft of a proposed ordinance(s). 
(2)	After reviewing a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district(s), the city council may, in its discretion, adopt or reject an ordinance(s) to establish same. If the city council adopts an ordinance establishing a historic district(s), the city clerk shall file a copy of the ordinance(s), including a legal description of the property(ies) located within the historic district(s) with the Kent County register of deeds. The city council shall not consider for adoption an ordinance establishing a historic district less than sixty (60) days after it has received a written petition from a majority of property owners within the proposed historic district as shown on the city's most recent ad valorem property tax roll. Provided, however, the city council at its discretion may establish, modify or eliminate a historic district without receiving a petition of property owners. 
(d)	Any document prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by the committee in the performance of its duties pursuant to this chapter shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Act 442 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-10. - Historic districts. 
(a)	The city council may by ordinance (i) establish a historic district, (ii) modify the boundaries of an existing historic district, or (iii) eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying or eliminating a historic district, a committee shall, except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, comply with the procedures set forth in section 11.5-9 hereof and shall in connection therewith consider any previous committee reports related thereto. 
(b)	If the committee is considering the elimination of a historic district it shall follow the procedures set forth in section 11.5-9 hereof, but with the intent of determining whether: 
(1)	The historic district has lost the physical characteristics that originally enabled its establishment, 
(2)	The historic district is no longer significant as originally determined, or
(3)	The historic district was originally established pursuant to defective procedures.
(c)	Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historical, architectural, archaeological, engineering and/or cultural significance within a proposed historic district, the city council may adopt a resolution requiring that until it makes a final determination regarding the establishment of such historic district all work within the proposed historic district shall be subject to review and approval by the commission in accordance with this chapter in the same manner as if the proposed historic district were established. Such review and approval may continue for not more than one (1) year or until such time as the city council approves or denies the establishment of the historic district, whichever occurs first. 
(d)	If the city council determines that work within an established or proposed historic district will cause irreparable harm to a resource, the city council may, by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six (6) months. The city council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six (6) months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to the resource is still present. A pending permit application related to a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-11. - Historic district roster. 
    The commission shall maintain a roster of historic districts in the city. The roster shall include (i) a description of the characteristics of each district which justifies its designation, (ii) a description of the particular features which should be preserved in the district and (iii) the location and boundaries of the district. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-12. - Advice and guidance to property owners. 
    The commission, upon request of a property owner, may render advice and guidance with respect to any proposed work in a historic district. In providing such advice and guidance, the commission shall be guided by the purposes and standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-13. - Other duties of commission. 
    The commission may: 
(1)	Assist and collaborate in studies and programs designed to identify and evaluate structures, sites and areas worthy of preservation; 
(2)	Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic groups, public agencies and citizens interested in historic preservation; 
(3)	Inspect and investigate structures, sites and areas which it has reason to believe worthy of preservation; 
(4)	Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures, sites and areas worthy of preservation and encourage and advise property owners regarding the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of resources in historic districts and other officially recognized property of historic interest; 
(5)	Consider methods other than those provided in this chapter for encouraging and achieving historic preservation and make recommendations to the city council and other public and private bodies and agencies related thereto; 
(6)	Establish such policies, rules and regulations as it deems necessary to administer its duties and responsibilities; and 
(7)	Use its own funds, gifts, state and federal grants or other resources received for historic preservation purposes in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-14. - Acquisition of historic resources. 
    If efforts to have private interests preserve a historic resource fail or if the city council determines the public ownership of a historic resource is appropriate and in the public interest, the city may acquire the resource using available public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds from the issuance of properly authorized revenue bonds. Such acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the commission. The commission shall be responsible for maintaining publicly owned historic resources using its own funds or other public funds committed for that use by the city council. Upon recommendation of the commission, the city council may sell a historic resource retaining, if appropriate, protective easements assuring historic preservation of the resource. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-15. - Violation of chapter. 
(a)	A person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-13 hereof. 
(b)	In addition, a person violating this ordinance shall be subject to the civil penalties and other remedies provided for in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Sec. 11.5-16. - Downtown Lowell Historic District. 
    The following designated area within the city is hereby designated a historic district and shall be subject to the terms, conditions and requirements of this Chapter 11.5 of the Code of Ordinances: 
    The boundaries of the Downtown Lowell Historic District are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Downtown Lowell Historic District of the City of Lowell, Michigan," which map includes the legal descriptions of the properties included in the Historic District, is made a part of Chapter 11.5 of the Code of Ordinances and shall be kept by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 96-7, § 1, 11-4-96)
Chapter 12 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Hazards and nuisances, § 10.10.
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 11; offenses, Ch. 13; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 17; vegetation, Ch. 23.

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the word "nuisance" is hereby defined as any person doing an unlawful act or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(1)	Injuries or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or
(2)	Offends decency; or
(3)	Is offensive to the senses; or
(4)	Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; or 
(5)	In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or
(6)	Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Sec. 12-2. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
Sec. 12-3. - Illustrative enumeration. 
    The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)	Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation;
(2)	The storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon such property and such building materials are intended for use in connection with such construction; building materials shall include but shall not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure (all unused building materials shall be removed from the premises by the contractor prior to issuance of any occupancy permit or final acceptance by the building inspector); 
(3)	The storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except domestic refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other material or other cast-off material of any kind whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use; 
(4)	Storage on any property of junk vehicles except in a completely enclosed building; for the purposes of this chapter the term "junk vehicles" shall include any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason such as being in a state of disassembly, disrepair, stripped, dismantled, unregistered or unlicensed; 
(5)	The existence of any structure or damaged partial structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable if a dwelling, nor useful of any other purpose for which it may have been intended; 
(6)	The existence of any vacant building, garage or other outbuilding unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals; 
(7)	The existence of any incomplete structures unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time; 
(8)	Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin;
(9)	All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises;
(10)	All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches; 
(11)	The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death;
(12)	The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances; 
(13)	Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained; 
(14)	Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground; 
(15)	Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities.
Sec. 12-4. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city, the city manager shall give ten (10) days' written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
Sec. 12-5. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain: 
(1)	An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances; 
(2)	The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;
(3)	A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
(4)	A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance;
(5)	A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
Sec. 12-6. - Service of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as any other legal process may be served pursuant to law. 
Sec. 12-7. - Abatement by city. 
    Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same, the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement. 
Sec. 12-8. - Emergency abatement by city. 
    When, in the opinion of the city manager there is actual and immediate danger to the public or occupants of a particular premise caused by a nuisance on such premise, the city manager is hereby authorized and empowered, without any notice or hearing to order and require such premises to be vacated. The city manager shall immediately post the premises warning of the dangerous condition, and shall then abate such nuisance and prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement. 
Sec. 12-9. - City's costs. 
    Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provision of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which costs shall be collected as ad valorem taxes. 
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5; nuisances, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 17; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21; vegetation, Ch. 23.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic liquor means and includes any spirituous, vinous, malt, fermented liquor, beer, wine, spirits, alcoholic liquids and compounds whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume, which are fit for beverage purposes. 
    Minor means a person, male or female, under the age of seventeen (17) years of age except when used in article VIII hereof, the word shall have the same meaning as used in the state alcohol control laws from time to time in effect. 
    Police officer means regular, commissioned police officer or any reserve police officer, or any officer or agent of any law enforcement agency of this state or any other state or any federal officer. 
    Public place means street, alley, park, public building or any place of business or assembly opened to or frequented by the public or any place which is opened to the public view or to which the public has access. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 5, 5-4-81)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-2. - Aiding and abetting. 
    Any person who aids, abets, counsels, procures, commands, assists or encourages the commission of any offense prohibited by this chapter shall be punishable as a principal. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 15, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-3. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, or peep into, or be found loitering around, or within view of any window not on his own property, with the intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
Sec. 13-4. - State law misdemeanors. 
    Every act prohibited by state law as a misdemeanor, is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully rewritten herein and prohibited and whoever violates the provisions of this section within the limits of the city upon conviction thereof shall be punished by the same penalty provided by the state law. 
(Code 1971, § 18-21)
Sec. 13-5. - Off-the-road vehicle. 
    No person shall operate an off-the-road vehicle within the limits of the city except upon routes approved by the city council. For the purposes of this section, an off-the-road vehicle shall mean a motor driven off-road recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. It includes, but is not limited to a multitrack or multiwheel drive or low pressure tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel or three-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind, but does not include a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes, a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function, or a registered aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 13, 5-4-81)
Secs. 13-6-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 13-21. - Interference with police. 
(a)	No person shall at any time interfere with or resist any police officer, while in the performance of his duty. 
(b)	No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of any police officer to escape or attempt to escape the custody of such officer. 
(c)	No person shall obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any police officer in the discharge of his duties including resisting any traffic arrest. 
(Code 1971, § 18-31)
Sec. 13-22. - Impersonating a police officer. 
    No person shall falsely impersonate any member of the police department of this city or any official police agency of this state or any other state or other federal agency by wearing of a uniform or presenting a badge or identification card or carrying any weapon such as a night stick or chemical mace or by carrying handcuffs designated to be carried by such law enforcement agency. 
(Code 1971, § 18-39)
Cross reference- Police generally, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 13-23. - False reporting, information. 
    No person shall: 
(1)	Report an incident with the knowledge that the information reported, conveyed, circulated or provided is false; 
(2)	Knowingly furnish to any police officer or other official or employee of the city a false name, address, age or date of birth in connection with the investigation of the commission of any violation of this Code or any other city, state or federal law; 
(3)	Knowingly make or furnish to any police officer or other official or employee of the city when such officer, official or employee is acting in his official capacity, a false or fictitious report of the purposed commission of any violation of this code or any violation of any city, state or federal law; 
(4)	Impersonate, attempt to impersonate, falsely pretend to be, or hold himself out as a police officer or other officer or employee of the city without due authority. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 7, 5-4-81)
Secs. 13-24-13-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 13-41. - Posting in public places prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, tack or in any manner to attach any circular, notice, picture, sign, card, advertisement or any other document in printing or any writing to any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, or to any tree in any public place within the city, or on the railing to any bridge or sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 3-1)
Sec. 13-42. - Damaging, defacing or removing property. 
(a)	No person shall remove, deface or disfigure any street or traffic sign or any other public property belonging to the city. Any person who commits any of the acts aforesaid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor under this section. 
(b)	Any person who shall wilfully destroy, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor under this section. 
(Code 1971, §§ 18-40, 18-41)
Sec. 13-43. - Fraudulent schemes. 
    No person shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device, to obtain money or other valuable things from another person, nor shall any person aid or assist such trick or scheme to obtain money or other valuable things. 
(Code 1971, § 18-29)
Sec. 13-44. - Trespass. 
    No person shall: 
(1)	Without the lawful authority of the owner or occupant of any lands, enter upon the lands or premises of another; 
(2)	Operate an all-terrain vehicle or recreational vehicle of any kind or type on the land of others without prior permission from the landowner; 
(3)	Be upon the land or premises of another without lawful authority, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant or the agent or servant of occupant, fail or refuse to leave forthwith and depart therefrom; 
(4)	Any person who commits any of the acts prohibited by this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 6, 5-4-81)
Secs. 13-45-13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 13-61. - Breach of peace. 
    Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace and disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-62. - Noise control. 
    Each of the following acts is declared unlawful and prohibited but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive namely: 
(1)	Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person. 
(2)	Construction noises. The erection (including excavating therefore) demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, on Sundays, and other days, except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless prior approval is obtained from the city manager. 
(3)	Sound amplifiers. Use of any loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any purpose except by speakers in the course of a public address which is noncommercial in character and when so used shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.	The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
b.	Operations are permitted each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted hours shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. without prior city manager approval. 
c.	Sound amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten (10) miles per hour except when the truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. 
d.	Sound shall not originate within one hundred (100) yards of schools or churches.
e.	The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the sound amplifying equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
f.	No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of fifteen (15) watts of power in the last state of amplification. 
(4)	Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(5)	Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(6)	Blowers. The discharge into the open air of air from any noise creating blower or power fan unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise. 
(7)	Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise, or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner. 
(8)	Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horns or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(9)	Radio and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons. 
(10)	Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets, or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons. 
(11)	Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except of any whistle or siren to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(12)	Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions of this section shall apply to or be enforced against: 
a.	Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged in emergency business. 
b.	Highway and construction. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the city or the state, during the night, when public safety, welfare, and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Code 1971, §§ 18-46, 18-47)
Sec. 13-63. - Fighting. 
    No person shall fight any other person on any public street, alley, highway, public parking lot or any other place used by the general public or opened to public view, except athletic exhibitions authorized or permitted under the laws of the state and under proper supervision and direction. 
(Code 1971, § 18-27)
Sec. 13-64. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be intoxicated in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-65. - Unlawful crowds. 
    It is unlawful for persons to collect in crowds, which shall be defined as three (3) or more persons, for unlawful or mischievous purposes in any street, alley, public building or place within the city, who shall refuse to disperse upon request of any police officer. 
(Code 1971, § 18-32)
Sec. 13-66. - Obstructing passage. 
    No person shall stand or congregate on any public or private street, alley, sidewalk or other place open to the public so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public or cause other persons to fear for their safety. 
(Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 5-16-88)
Sec. 13-67. - Interference. 
    No person shall improperly, lewdly, wantonly, or wrongfully accost, ogle, insult, lay hands on, or, by gesture, movement of body or otherwise, wrongfully molest any person in any public place so as to interfere with or abuse other persons or culpably offend their dignity or sensibilities. 
(Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 5-16-88)
Sec. 13-68. - Prowling. 
    No person shall: 
(1)	Prowl about a public place or the premises of any other person in the day or night without the authority or the permission of the owner of such premises; 
(2)	Lurk, lie in wait or be concealed in a business, yard, or other premises with intent to commit any crime or offense whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 11, 5-4-81)
Secs. 13-69-13-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 13-86. - Assault. 
    No person shall intentionally place or attempt to place any other person in fear of imminent serious physical injury. 
(Code 1971, § 18-26)
Sec. 13-87. - Assault and battery. 
    Within the city, no person shall strike, beat, wound, imprison or inflict physical violence upon another unless it can be shown to have been necessary to protect his life or physical well being or that of his family. 
(Code 1971, § 18-25)
Secs. 13-88-13-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 13-106. - Operation of vehicles upon sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, moped or any other vehicle, which may threaten pedestrians, propelled by the rider's feet or to run any motor vehicle, upon any sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 22-1)
Sec. 13-107. - BB guns, bow and arrow, air rifles, slingshots, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or discharge any BB gun, air rifle, toy pistol, bow and arrow (except as provided in section 13-112 hereof), slingshot, catapult or any other toy shooting apparatus, gun or implement that might result in damage or destruction of life or property in the city limits except in shooting ranges approved by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 04-4, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 7-6-09)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, adopted July 6, 2009, changed the title of section 13-107 from "BB guns, air rifles, slingshots" to "BB guns, bow and arrow, air rifles, slingshots, etc." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 13-108. - Firearms. 
    Discharging. No person shall discharge any firearms within the city except in duly approved firing ranges, or in the firing of salutes by military companies by permission of the council or the city manager, or by a police or other officer of the law in the lawful discharge of duty. 
(Code 1971, § 18-3)
Sec. 13-109. - Articles in windows in upper stories of buildings. 
    No person shall place or keep or allow to be placed or kept, any pot, jar, box, or plants or flowers or other heavy or like thing in or upon the window sill of any building, or in any other open place bordering upon any of the public streets of the city above the first story thereof without having such things protected from falling outward by strong wire or iron guards being securely fastened on the outer side. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 2, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-110. - Throwing objects. 
    No person shall throw or pick up with the intent to throw any rock, brick, rubbish, snowball, baseball or other missile into or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public place in a manner which endangers or is likely to endanger any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 3, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-111. - Barbed wire, open wells, abandoned refrigerators. 
(a)	No person within the city shall build or permit to be built a barbed wire fence upon or along any street, alley or sidewalk or upon that area adjacent to any street, alley or sidewalk. 
(b)	No person owning property within the city shall permit any open wells, cisterns, cesspools or other similar openings which could trap persons in that area. Such openings shall be securely sealed to prevent small children from removing the covers. 
(c)	No person shall store, maintain or discard or dispose of any unused refrigerator or ice box or any other container or appliance capable of containing a child and having a self locking door on the exterior without first complying with one or more of the following safety precautions: 
(1)	Removal of all exterior locks.
(2)	Removal of all doors or covers.
(3)	Storing the appliance in such manner as to make entry inaccessible by causing the doors or covers to be firmly pressed against the wall, ground or floor. 
(Code 1971, § 18-38)
Sec. 13-112. - Hunting with bow and arrow. 
    A person may hunt for game with bow and arrow within the city limits provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The person has a currently effective license from the state to hunt the game he/she is hunting; 
(2)	The person is hunting on a parcel or contiguous parcels of property under sole ownership containing ten (10) acres or more; 
(3)	The person has the current written permission of the owner of the property in which he/she is hunting; 
(4)	The person complies at all times with all applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations related to the transportation, possession and use of a bow and arrow; and 
(5)	That hunting with a cross bow is prohibited.
    Three (3) years after the effective date of this section the city council shall review the effect of the application of this section and determine whether it shall be removed or amended. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 7-6-09)
Secs. 13-113-13-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-131. - Indecent or obscene language. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use indecent or obscene language. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-132. - Indecent or obscene conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-133. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
Secs. 13-134-13-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING 

Sec. 13-151. - Keeping or occupying building for gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, within the city, to directly or indirectly keep or occupy, or assist in keeping or occupying any common gambling house, or any building or room therein, or place within the city where gaming is permitted or suffered, or to suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, any apparatus used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling in any place within the city. 
Sec. 13-152. - Gambling and frequenting prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deal in, play or engage in gaming such as faro, roulette, dice, cards, or other device or game of chance, hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise for the purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing or to knowingly attend or be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is taking place. 
Sec. 13-153. - Cappers, steerers, loiterers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work or occupation of a roper, steerer, doorman, or capper so-called for any gambling room, gaming house, or place where gaming is carried on, or for any gambling, game of chance, trick or device, or for any place where gambling or games of chance may be permitted or allowed or are being carried on. It shall be unlawful for persons to knowingly frequent, attend, or be found present in any of such places. 
Sec. 13-154. - Keeping gaming room for hire, gain or reward. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain for hire, gain or reward, a gaming room or gambling table or any game of skill or chance, or partly of skill and partly of chance, used for gaming, or to knowingly suffer a gaming room or gaming table, or any such game to be kept, maintained or played on any premises within the city occupied or controlled by him, or for any person to aid, assist or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such gaming room, gaming table or game within the city. 
Sec. 13-155. - Gambling place and equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, within the city, to directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building or room, or any part thereof, or any place with apparatus, books, or any device for registering bets, or buying or selling pools upon the result of a game, competition, political competition, appointment, or election, or any purported event of like character, or to register bets, or buy or sell pools, or to be concerned in buying or selling pools, or to knowingly permit any grounds or premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid. 
Sec. 13-156. - Policy or pool tickets and confiscation of articles of gaming. 
    It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person to be in possession of any policy or pool tickets, slips or checks, memoranda, or any combination thereof, bet slips, numbers slip or slips, or of any article associated and/or connected with commercial gambling. Any and all such articles may be confiscated and destroyed by the police department, or used in evidence in any prosecution for violation of this Code. 
Secs. 13-157-13-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROSTITUTION 

Sec. 13-176. - Prostitution generally. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be in or near any place frequented by the public or any public place for the purpose of inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly receive or offer to or agree to receive any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
Sec. 13-177. - Houses of ill fame-Keeping, maintaining. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain a house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
Sec. 13-178. - Same-Patronizing. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to patronize, frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to accept the solicitation of or solicit a prostitute for the practice of fornication, prostitution or lewdness. 
Sec. 13-179. - Same-Leasing premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to lease to another any house, room or other premises, in whole or in part, for any of the uses or purposes set forth in sections 13-177 and 13-178 or to knowingly permit house, room or other premises to be used or occupied for such purposes. 
Sec. 13-180. - Soliciting and accosting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, male or female, seventeen (17) years of age or older, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties as an enforcement officer. 
Secs. 13-181-13-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC NUDITY 

Sec. 13-190. - Public nudity prohibited. 
    No person shall engage in public nudity. No business establishment including, but not limited to, owners, officers, persons in charge of or in control of premises shall permit persons to engage in public nudity. 
    As used herein "public nudity" shall mean knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals, pubic area or anus with less than a full opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple or areola. Public nudity does not include a woman's breast feeding of a baby, whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding. 
    For the purposes of this section public place means, in addition to the definition contained in section 13-1 hereof, any premises used or controlled, in whole or in part, for the purpose of displaying an individual's genitals, pubic area or anus or the nipple or areola of a female's breast for payment or promise of payment and which is open to the general public as a business, club or association. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 12-2-96)
Sec. 13-191. - Public nudity prohibited; public nuisance. 
    Any premises in which public nudity is offered, promoted, allowed or encouraged shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 96-9, § 1, 12-2-96)
Secs. 13-192-13-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 

Sec. 13-196. - Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children. 
    No person shall by any act, or by any word encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 12, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-197. - Curfew. 
(a)	Minors under 12. No minor under the age of twelve (12) years, except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, shall loiter, idle, congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley, park or other public place between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)	Minors under 15. No minor under the age of fifteen (15) years, except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, shall loiter, idle, traverse, congregate or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley, park or other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)	Minors under 17. No minor under the age of seventeen (17) years, except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, shall loiter, idle, congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley, park or other public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(d)	Exceptions. Under the following situations, a person seventeen (17) or less years of age in or upon any street, highway, alley, park or other public place during the applicable hours in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above shall not be considered in violation of this section: 
(1)	When accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or some adult over the age of twenty-one (21) delegated by the parent or guardian. 
(2)	When returning home by a direct route and within thirty (30) minutes of the termination of a school activity, or an activity of a religious, public service or other community organization. 
(3)	When going to and returning from lawful employment by a direct route within thirty (30) minutes of the beginning and ending of the period of employment. 
(4)	When necessary in the event of an emergency where injury or death to persons or damage to property is threatened. 
(5)	When lawfully married and under the direction of a police officer.
(e)	Aiding and abetting violation. No person of the age of seventeen (17) or over shall assist, aid, abet or encourage any person under seventeen (17) years of age in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(f)	Parental responsibility. No parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care and custody of any person under seventeen (17) years of age shall knowingly allow, permit or encourage violation of this section. 
(g)	Juvenile violation. Arrests and prosecution of persons under the age of seventeen (17) for violation of this section shall be in accordance with section 17 and other provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939 (MCL 712A.1 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 14, 5-4-81)
Sec. 13-198. - Offenses involving minors. 
(a)	No person shall sell or deliver to any minors in the city either directly or indirectly, nor shall any person furnish to any minor in any form whatsoever any alcoholic liquor; provided, that the sale or delivery of an alcoholic liquor to a minor upon the authority of a prescription of a physician licensed by the state shall not be a violation of this section. 
(b)	No minor in the city shall purchase, consume or knowingly possess or transport or have under his control in any vehicle any alcoholic liquor; and for the purpose of this paragraph, it shall be presumed that a minor is knowingly in possession of or is knowingly transporting alcoholic liquors if they are found in a motor vehicle under the control of such minor. 
(c)	No minor in the city shall make any false statements or give false information or identification to any person regarding his age in order to secure the sale or the furnishing of alcoholic liquors. 
(d)	No person in the city shall make false statements or give false information regarding the age of any minor in order to procure the sale or furnishing of alcoholic liquors to such minor. 
(Code 1971, § 18-43)
Secs. 13-199-13-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DISHONORED CHECKS 

Sec. 13-211. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that a significant number of checks are written and dishonored within its geographical boundaries causing serious financial loss and hardship to citizens and merchants therein. In addition, the city finds that the financial loss and hardship incurred by its citizens and merchants seriously impacts on the stream of commerce and the general public by causing increases in the costs of goods and services. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police and legal services by persons who are placing dishonored checks into the stream of commerce. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 11-24-94)
Sec. 13-212. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Address of record means the address that appears on the check or the last known address of record with the secretary of state at the time the check was presented for payment of goods or services. 
    Check means any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository. 
    Dishonored means: 
(1)	Any check, draft or order drawn or written on any account, or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, without sufficient funds for the payment of same when presentment is made to the drawee. 
(2)	Any check, draft or order drawn or written on any account which has been closed with or by the bank or other depository upon which it is drawn. 
    Expenses of dishonored check response means the direct and reasonable cost incurred by the city or to a private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, when making a dishonored check response, including the cost of providing police, city attorney and/or administrative services in response to any dishonored check. These costs further include all of the salaries and wages of the city personnel and/or contractors responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of the personnel and contractors engaged in the investigation, supervision and report preparation, and all costs connected with the administration and provision of any prosecution of the person responsible for the dishonored check. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 2, 11-24-94)
Sec. 13-213. - Liability for the expense of dishonored check response. 
(a)	Person responsible. Any person is liable for the expense of a dishonored check response, if such person proximately causes any incident resulting in a dishonored check response. 
(b)	Presumptions shall mean: 
(1)	For the purpose of this article, a person is presumed to be the proximate cause of an incident if such person makes, draws, utters or delivers any dishonored check or causes directly or indirectly a check to become dishonored. 
(2)	For the purpose of this article a person is presumed to have acted with intent to defraud if such person shall not have paid the drawer thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, including the fees assessed hereunder, within five (5) business days after receiving notice by first class mail to the last known address of record that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(c)	Charges against person. The expenses of a dishonored check response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expense under this article. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(d)	Cost recovery schedule. The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of costs included within the expense of a dishonored check response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the police department. 
(e)	Billing. The city manager, or his or her designee, may submit a bill for the dishonored check response by first class mail to the last known address of record or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this article. The bill(s) shall require full payment within thirty (30) consecutive days from the date of service. Service by mail shall be effective upon depositing such bill in a United States Postal Service receptacle. In no event shall billing be permitted after one year from the last expense incurred. 
(f)	Failure to pay; procedure to recover cost. Any failure by the person described in this article as liable for the expense of a dishonored check response, to pay the bill within thirty (30) consecutive days of service shall be considered in default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by the law. 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 3, 11-24-94)
Sec. 13-214. - Dishonored checks offense. 
    No person shall make, draw, utter or deliver any dishonored check of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or cause directly or indirectly such a check to become dishonored. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, § 1, 4-6-98; Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 6-21-99)
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to provide and maintain parks, § 3.1(b)(5)(b).
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; nuisances, Ch. 12; vegetation, Ch. 23; zoning, App. A.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Use of gasoline powered motors prohibited. 
    The use of any inboard or outboard motor which uses as a fuel gasoline, oil or any other substance containing benzene, toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene, acenapthene, anthracene, fluorene, or pyrene on a municipally owned inland lake or an inland lake on which there is a public park is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 91-2, § 1, 5-15-91)
Secs. 14-2-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 14-26. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a commission of the city to be known as the parks and recreation commission to accomplish the public purpose and whose powers, duties and responsibilities shall be set forth. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-1), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-27. - Purpose. 
(a)	The parks and recreation commission shall advise and make recommendations to the city council on the city park system's management, operation and use. Such responsibilities shall include: 
(1)	Preparation, recommendation to the city council for adoption, and continual evaluation of a master plan for development of the city park system; 
(2)	Recommending to the city council annually a budget covering the acquisition, development, maintenance and operation of the city park system; 
(3)	Recommending to the city council capital improvement projects for the city park system;
(4)	Recommending to the city council policies, rules and regulations related to the use, operation and maintenance of the city park system; and 
(5)	Preparing an annual report to the city council on the management, operation and use of the city park system. 
(b)	When undertaking its responsibilities, the commission shall recognize that coordinated recreation efforts are needed to provide recreation programs and facilities for all citizens. The commission shall cooperate with community service organizations in providing recreation programs. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-2), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-28. - Composition. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall consist of five (5) voting members, all of whom shall be registered electors of the city. One (1) of the five (5) members shall be a person currently serving on the city council. All voting members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city council. In addition, there shall be one (1) ex officio nonvoting member appointed by the local branch of the YMCA. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-3), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-29. - Term of office. 
    The terms of office of the parks and recreation commission voting members shall be three (3) years, except that for the first members appointed, two (2) members shall be appointed for a three (3) year term, two (2) members shall be appointed for a two (2) year term, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a one (1) year term, and the city councilmember shall serve only so long as he is on the city council. Except for the initial appointment of commission members where a member's term shall commence upon appointment, all terms of office shall commence on January first. If a commission member's term has expired, and a successor has not been appointed, the commission member shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-4), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-30. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the parks and recreation commission shall be filled in the same manner as initial appointments for the remainder of the unexpired term of the appointment vacated. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-5), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-31. - Removal from office. 
    A commission member may be removed from the parks and recreation commission by the city council at any time for cause upon the city council receiving a recommendation for removal by the parks and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-6), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-32. - Compensation. 
    Members of the parks and recreation commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-7), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-33. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the parks and recreation commission, except as otherwise permitted by law, shall be open to the public and held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), as amended, and as may be amended. Meetings of the commission may be called by the commission chairperson or any two (2) of its members. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-8), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-34. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members of the parks and recreation commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-9), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-35. - Chairperson. 
    The members of the parks and recreation commission shall annually in January of each year elect one (1) of its members as chairperson. The chairperson shall be responsible for conducting all meetings of the commission. Another member of the commission, selected by commission members present, may serve as temporary chairperson for a meeting at which the chairperson is absent. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-10), 2-16-88)
Sec. 14-36. - Execution of contracts and commitment of funds. 
    The parks and recreation commission may advise and make recommendations to the city council regarding the entering into of contracts or the expenditure of city funds in connection with the city park system, but may not itself enter into contracts or commit city funds. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1(27-11), 2-16-88)
Secs. 14-37-14-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS 

Sec. 14-50. - Use of parks, recreation areas, etc. 
    No city parks, beaches, playgrounds or recreation areas or other city-owned property shall be entered, used or occupied contrary to posted signs prohibiting such entry, use or occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-51. - Camping. 
    No city parks, beaches, playgrounds or recreation areas or other city-owned property shall be used for camping or overnight sleeping except in those areas identified by the city for camping or overnight sleeping and upon the issuance by the city of a camping permit. The city council may from time to time by resolution establish fees to be charged for camping or overnight sleeping. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-52. - Hours closed to the public. 
    All city parks, beaches, playgrounds and recreation areas shall be closed to the public from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily, and it shall be unlawful, except as hereinafter provided, for any person to enter or use such facilities during such time. This section shall not apply to (i) any activity or event conducted or specifically authorized by the city or (ii) the entrance and use of such facilities by overnight campers registered at such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-53. - Damage to and removal of property. 
    No person shall damage, destroy or remove from city parks, beaches, playgrounds and recreation areas or other city-owned property trees, shrubs, wildflowers, grasses or other vegetation without first obtaining written permission from the city manager or his designee. This section shall not apply to the removal of mushrooms, berries and edible fruits or nuts. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-54. - Use of motor vehicles. 
    No person shall park, drive or ride any motor vehicle in any city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property (i) except upon a highway, road, trail road, street, alley or parking area designated for use by motor vehicles or motorized devices (i.e., off-road vehicles, snowmobiles, etc.), or (ii) at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour unless a greater or lesser speed is posted, (iii) in an unsafe manner, or (iv) in disobeyance of posted traffic or parking signs. In addition to the driver, the registered owner(s) of a motor vehicle or motorized device shall be responsible for complying with this section. All motor vehicles or other motorized devices shall be properly licensed in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-55. - Transportation and possession of alcoholic beverages and intoxicating liquors. 
    No person shall within any city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property transport or possess in an motor vehicle or motorized device beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors which are open or uncapped. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-56. - Breach of peace. 
    No person shall, within a city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property: 
(1)	Engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel;
(2)	Disturb the public peace and quiet be loud, boisterous, violent, abusive, turbulent or vulgar conduct; 
(3)	Incite, cause or attempt to incite or cause a riot;
(4)	Loiter, sit or lie upon walks or other passage ways so as to obstruct the free passage of others; 
(5)	Remove without authorization of the owner or damage the property of another; or
(6)	Utter profane, obscene or injurious language directed at or in the presence of another person, which language causes, is intended to cause, or would tend to cause an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-57. - Peddling, soliciting, conducting commercial operations, etc. 
    No person shall, within a city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property: 
(1)	Peddle or solicit business of any nature;
(2)	Distribute handbills or other advertising materials;
(3)	Post signs, placards or flyers; or
(4)	Conduct any commercial operation
without the prior written approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-58. - Trades, exhibitions or demonstrations. 
    No person shall sponsor or participate in any trade, exhibition or demonstration in any city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property without the prior written approval of the city manager or his designee. The city council may time to time by resolution establish fees to be charged for such uses. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-59. - Use of loudspeakers, public address systems, etc. 
    No person shall, within a city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property, use a loudspeaker, public address system or other sound-amplifying equipment without prior written approval of the city manager or his designee. Approval will not be granted if such equipment is capable of interfering with the use and enjoyment of such public areas by others. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-60. - Excessive noise. 
    No person shall, within a city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property, operate any motor, motorboat, motor vehicle, motorized device, radio, television, phonograph, tape recorder or other device in a manner so as to create excessive noise that disturbs or annoys others. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-61. - Fires. 
    No person shall, in any city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property (i) light any fire or burn any material, except in a designated fire pit or picnic grill or stove, (ii) set fire to a refuse basket or trash container, or (iii) place or burn garbage or refuse in a fire pit, picnic grill or stove. No person shall light any fire or place any picnic grill or stove in any area designated for swimming, sunbathing or wading. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-62. - Littering. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or leave litter, garbage, refuse or waste material in any city park, beach,playground or recreation area or other city-owned property except in public water receptacles and in such a manner that it will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements. Where public waste receptacles are not provided, all such litter, garbage, refuse and waste material shall be carried away from the area by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. No person shall dispose of litter, garbage, refuse or waste material originating outside a city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property in public waste receptacles located in such areas. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-63. - Storing of private property. 
    No person shall store or leave any boat, fish shanty or other item of personal property in a city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-64. - Glass on beach and other areas. 
    No person shall possess, carry or deposit any container bottle or other object which is made of glass on any public beach or designated swimming, sunbathing or wading area. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-65. - Animals in public areas. 
    No person who owns or has control of any dog (except leader dogs for the blind), cat or other animal shall: 
(1)	Allow or permit such animal on any public beach or designated swimming or wading area;
(2)	Walk any such animal or allow it to roam in any city park, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property unless such animal is restrained by a leash or tether not longer than six (6) feet; 
(3)	Allow any such animal to create a nuisance or disturbance in any city park, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property; or 
(4)	Allow any such animal to defecate in any city park, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property without removing said waste and disposing of it in a proper waste receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-66. - Firearms prohibited. 
    No person shall bring upon or use a firearm, pellet gun, BB gun, bow and arrow, crossbow or slingshot in any city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-67. - Hunting prohibited. 
    No person shall hunt, trap, kill, wound, injure, capture or intentionally disturb any bird, animal or other wildlife in any city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Sec. 14-68. - Disobeying order to leave public area. 
    No person shall willfully disobey the command of any law enforcement officer of the city or park supervisor or his designee to leave a city park, beach, playground or recreation area or other city-owned property when so ordered to do so by any of the aforementioned authorized persons. 
(Ord. No. 91-8, § 1, 12-2-91)
Secs. 14-69-14-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPONSORSHIP SIGNS IN CITY PARK SYSTEM 

Sec. 14-80. - Definition. 
    A sponsorship sign shall, for the purpose of this article, mean a placard or board upon which is displayed the name and/or logo of the sponsor of an event or activity held, or league or team playing, at an athletic field within the city park system. A sponsorship sign may also display the name and/or logo of the event or activity or the name or logo of the team or league being sponsored by the sponsor. A sponsorship sign shall not (i) include an advertisement of a product or service, (ii) contain a political message, or (iii) advocate a person for political office or the approval or disproval of a public question or referendum. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 10-1-07)
Sec. 14-81. - Permitted sponsorship signs. 
    Sponsorship signs may, at the city's sole discretion, be located on athletic fields or other facilities in the city park system. Such signs may only be placed on such athletic fields or other facilities by organizations who have a license agreement with the city as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 10-1-07)
Sec. 14-82. - License agreement. 
    Each organization desiring to place sponsorship signs in the city's park system shall first obtain from the city manager or his/her designee and sign a license agreement. The license agreement shall be in a form prescribed by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 10-1-07)
Sec. 14-83. - Approval and placement of sponsorship signs. 
(a)	Each licensed organization shall consult with the city manager or his/her designee regarding any sponsor for which it wishes to place a sponsorship sign in or on a city park system athletic field or facility. The city has the right, at its sole discretion acting through the city manager or his/her designee, to reject any proposed sponsor or sponsorship sign it determines to be inappropriate in or on a city park system athletic field or facility. 
(b)	Sponsorship signs must be pre-approved by the city manager or his/her designee on an annual or seasonal basis depending on the nature of the licensed organization. Sponsorship signs may be limited both by city park system athletic field or facility and number at any particular park system athletic field or facility. 
(c)	The location of sponsorship signs in or on a city park system athletic field or facility shall be determined of the city manager or his/her designation. Sponsorship signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of display area, shall not be permanently affixed to a city park system athletic field or facility and shall be oriented away from the public streets to the greatest extent possible. Sponsorship signs must be aesthetically appropriate and always be in good condition and repair. The back of the sign shall be white in color. 
(d)	The placement and removal of sponsorship signs may only be done or directed by the related licensed organization. An approved sponsorship sign shall not be placed in or on city park system athletic field or facility earlier than one (1) week prior to the related activity, event or sports season and shall be removed not later than one (1) week after such activity, event or sports season. 
(e)	The city makes no guarantee, express or implied, that sponsorship sign approval will be automatic or continuous. It shall be the responsibility of the licensed organization to confirm that space is available at a city park system athletic field or facility and to obtain the approval of the city manager or his/her designee in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 10-1-07)
Sec. 14-84. - Removal of sponsorship signs. 
    The city may, without notice to the licensed organization or the sponsor, remove any sponsorship sign which (i) has not been approved, (ii) remains more than one (1) week after the approved time for placement, (iii) is inappropriate, (iv) is in disrepair or in poor condition, or (v) poses a hazard or danger to users of the city park system. In the event the city removes a sponsorship sign, the licensed organization shall pay the city for the cost of such removal plus an additional twenty-five (25) percent of such removal costs. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 10-1-07)
Chapter 15 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a).
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Governmental entity means any state or local unit of government or any authority, board, commission, council or similar organization which is a part of such unit of government or formed by one or more such units of government. 
    Nonprofit organization means a nonprofit corporation, ecclesiastical corporation, fraternal association or other entity which is recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service and the state as a nonprofit entity and whose earnings are exempt from federal and state income taxes. 
    Peddler means any person, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, tickets, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering the same for retail sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, and anyone who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
    Transient merchant means any person engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise, in any place in the city and who, for the purpose of conducting such business, occupies or uses any lot, building, room or structure of any kind, including "itinerant merchants," "itinerant vendors" and persons engaged in selling goods, wares or merchandise at retail in the city and who are not on the property tax rolls of the city; and any person who commences a business of selling goods, wares and merchandise at retail in the city after the first day of January in any year and who is not assessed in connection with such business on the property tax roll of the city for that year and who conducts such business for a period of less than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Ord. of 9-21-87, § 1; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 2-16-99)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-2. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
    No peddler or transient merchant, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, make any cryout, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loudspeaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Ord. of 9-21-87, § 1)
Sec. 15-3. - Use of streets. 
    No peddler or transient merchant shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. 
(Ord. of 9-21-87, § 1)
Secs. 15-4-15-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate trades and occupations, § 3.1(b)(2)(a).

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 15-21-15-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 15-46. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler as defined in this chapter within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license therefor as provided herein. 
(Code 1971, § 12-15)
Sec. 15-47. - Filing, contents of application; application fee. 
(a)	Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the city manager a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to be furnished by the city: 
(1)	If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same together with license number or other means of identification; 
(2)	A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(b)	At the time of filing the application, a fee to be determined by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city to cover the cost of investigation. 
(Code 1971, § 12-16)
Sec. 15-48. - Investigation of applicants. 
    Upon receipt of such application, the chief of police shall cause an investigation of the applicant's business character and propensity to serve the public in a fair, honest, and open manner to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(Code 1971, § 12-17)
Sec. 15-49. - Disapproval of application. 
    If as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall recommend denial to the city manager and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city manager, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(Code 1971, § 12-18)
Sec. 15-50. - Approval of application; issuance of license. 
    If as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and upon the recommendation of the police chief and payment of applicable fees, the license shall be issued. 
(Code 1971, § 12-19)
Sec. 15-51. - Fees. 
    Fees to be charged under this article shall be as prescribed by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1971, § 12-20)
Sec. 15-52. - Expiration of license. 
    All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the thirty-first of December in the year when issued. Other than annual licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
(Code 1971, § 12-23)
Sec. 15-53. - Exhibition of license upon demand. 
    Peddlers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1971, § 12-24)
Sec. 15-54. - Refusal to issue; suspension, revocation. 
(a)	Licenses requested under this article may be refused by city manager and licenses issued may be revoked by city manager at any time, for any of the following causes: 
(1)	Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
(2)	Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the operation of a business;
(3)	Any violation of this chapter or any other provisions of the Code;
(4)	Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(5)	The failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of the Code. 
(b)	Written notice of suspension or revocation stating the cause or causes therefor shall be delivered to the licensee personally or mailed to his address as stated in his application for license. 
(c)	Any person whose license is revoked or suspended or any person whose request for a license is refused shall have the right to an informal hearing before the city manager provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days following the delivery or mailing of notice of revocation or suspension or within ten (10) days following such refusal. The informal hearing shall be held within twenty-one (21) days of the filing of the request therefore. 
(d)	A person aggrieved by the action of the city manager may appeal to the city council by filing a written request with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the delivery or mailing of the city manager's action. The city council shall consider the appeal at the next regular meeting of the city council. The city council may reverse any refusal to issue a license or any revocation or suspension of a license, and the city council may grant or reinstate any license. No person shall operate any business during any time when his license has been revoked or suspended. 
(e)	All decisions of the city council shall be final.
(Ord. of 9-21-87, § 2)
Secs. 15-55-15-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-71. - Scope. 
    Any person, organization, church or any representatives thereof, travelling either by foot or vehicle from door-to-door or place-to-place offering goods or services in exchange for a contribution or donation or any person, organization or church or a representative thereof who travels either by foot or vehicle from door-to-door, or place-to-place requesting cash or any negotiable instrument which may be exchanged for cash shall be considered a solicitor and must comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-16-79, § 12.5-1)
Sec. 15-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contributions and donations means and includes cash, checks, money orders, or any other negotiable instrument or item that may be exchanged for cash. 
    Contributor means any person making a contribution or donation to a solicitor. 
    Minor means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Solicitation campaign means any effort by a solicitor to collect, secure or otherwise obtain funds whether in exchange for goods and services or not, within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-16-79, § 12.5-1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 15-73-15-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 15-91. - Letter required. 
    Any person, organization, church or any representative desiring to solicit within the city must submit a letter not less than twenty (20) days prior to the commencement of any solicitation campaign. Such letter shall state the purpose of the solicitation campaign and shall provide the name, address and phone number of a responsible representative to be contacted in case of an emergency. Such designated person shall be a nonsolicitor. The letter shall further state the names and permanent addresses of all individuals who shall be solicitors. 
(Ord. of 7-16-79, § 12.5-2)
Sec. 15-92. - Public notice. 
    Not more than fifteen (15) days and not less than seven (7) days before a solicitation campaign begins a notice of intent to solicit shall be filed with the city manager. Such notice to include the following information: 
(1)	Heading: Notice of Intent to Solicit;
(2)	Dates and hours of solicitation campaign;
(3)	Name and permanent address of sponsoring person, organization or church;
(4)	Statement of purpose for which the solicitation is being conducted;
(5)	Names and permanent addresses of all solicitors.
(Ord. of 7-16-79, § 12.5-3)
Sec. 15-93. - Requirements. 
(a)	Each contributor shall receive a receipt stating the exact amount of the contribution; such receipt to be signed by the solicitor. 
(b)	Each group of five (5) minors who are designated as solicitors shall be accompanied and supervised by an adult (any person eighteen (18) years or older). 
(c)	Solicitations may not begin before 9:30 a.m. and must end not later than one (1) hour before dusk or 7:00 p.m., whichever comes first. 
(Ord. of 7-16-79, § 12.5-4)
Sec. 15-94. - Enforcement. 
    Any person, organizations, or churches conducting a solicitation campaign in violation of any provisions of this article shall be required to terminate such solicitation campaign immediately. 
(Ord. of 7-16-79, § 12.6-5)
Secs. 15-95-15-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed former Art. IV, §§ 15-111, 15-112, and 15-131-15-138, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 9-21-87, § 2.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-111. - Unlawful to conduct business. 
    Except as provided in section 15-112, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a transient merchant in the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-112. - Transient merchants at community events. 
    Subject to compliance with division 2 of this article, a person may engage in business as a transient merchant in connection with a community event such as a parade, festival, fair, farmers' market, athletic event or celebration sponsored by a governmental entity or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Secs. 15-113-15-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 15-131. - Permit required. 
    Any person conducting business as a transient merchant in connection with a community event pursuant to section 15-112 shall first obtain a permit from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-132. - State and county license prerequisite to issuance of permit. 
    No permit, required by this division 2 of this article, shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state or the county until such person has submitted to the city manager evidence that such license or permit has been obtained and is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-133. - Requirements for permit. 
    A person required to obtain a permit pursuant to this division 2 of this article shall provide the city manager the following: 
(1)	Name, business and residence addresses, and business and residence telephone numbers;
(2)	Written evidence that the governmental entity or nonprofit organization has approved the persons participating in the community event it's sponsoring; 
(3)	A general description of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale; 
(4)	The length of time the person is proposing to conduct business;
(5)	The location where the person proposes to conduct business; and
(6)	A copy of the persons state sales tax license.
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-134. - Term of permit. 
    The term of a permit issued by the city manager shall expire at the end of the community event in connection with which the permit was issued or such shorter period as may be requested by the governmental entity or nonprofit organization sponsoring the event. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-135. - Fees. 
    A permit fee may be charged to cover the cost of issuance of permits and the enforcement of the provisions of this article as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-136. - Refusal to issue and revocation of permit. 
    The city manager may refuse to issue, or revoke, a permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Fraud, misrepresentation or making of a false statement in connection with the issuance of the permit or the operation of the transient merchant business; 
(2)	Failure or inability to meet the requirements of this article;
(3)	Conducting transient merchant business in an unlawful manner; or
(4)	Failure to comply with the provisions of the Code.
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-137. - Display of permit. 
    A person issued a permit pursuant to this division 2 of this article shall display it at the location where the transient merchant business is being conducted at all times during which such business is being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Sec. 15-138. - Nontransferable. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this division 2 of this article shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § 2, 2-16-99)
Chapter 16 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City planning, § 7.9(a); zoning, § 7.10.
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; nuisances, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivisions, Ch. 20; zoning, App. A.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to create planning commission, § 7.9(a).

Sec. 16-26. - Created; duties and functions generally. 
    There is created a planning commission for the city to be known as the city planning commission. Such commission is created in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.) as amended, and shall have all the duties and powers, and perform all the functions provided by the act, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(Code 1971, § 19-11)
Sec. 16-27. - Composition; appointment, compensation, terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)	The city planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, one (1) of whom shall be a councilmember selected by resolution of the city council to serve as a member ex officio and the other six (6) members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council by majority vote. Appointed members shall be qualified electors of the city who represent, insofar as possible, different professions or occupations. Members of the commission may be compensated for their service in such amount as may be established by the council from time to time and in accordance with Act 285. Appointed members shall hold no other city office, except one (1) appointed member may be a member of the zoning board of appeals. The ex officio member serving on the planning commission shall have full voting rights. 
(b)	The term of the ex official member shall be determined by the city council and shall be stated in the resolution selecting such ex officio member, provided, the term shall not exceed the member's term of office as a member of the city council. The term of each appointed member shall be three (3) years or until his or her successor takes office; except that for the members appointed after the effective date of this section, two (2) members shall be appointed to serve through June 30, 2008, two (2) members shall be appointed to serve through June 30, 2009, and two (2) members shall be appointed to serve through June 30, 2010. 
(c)	Vacancies on the planning commission occurring otherwise than through the expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the case of the ex officio member by the city council and in the case of the appointed members by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 19-12; Ord. of 12-5-79; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 3-5-07)
Charter reference- Vacancies in boards and commissions, § 4.6. 
Sec. 16-28. - Removal of members from office. 
    Appointed members of the planning commission may, after a public hearing, be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, provided, however, such removal is subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 19-13; Ord. No. 07-02, § 2, 3-5-07)
Charter reference- Removal from boards and commissions, § 4.7. 
Sec. 16-29. - Commission chairman and secretary. 
    The city planning commission shall, from the appointed members, annually select a chairman who may be reelected and shall fill such other offices as it may determine. The city clerk shall act as secretary and clerk of the city planning commission and shall keep a record of all its proceedings. 
(Code 1971, § 19-14)
Sec. 16-30. - Meetings; adoption of rules; records; quorum established. 
(a)	The commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month and may adopt rules for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a full and complete record of its resolutions, surveys, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(b)	Special meetings may be called by the chairman or any two (2) members of the commission on his or their own initiative or upon the request of a person wishing to bring a matter before the commission. Written notice of the meeting shall be personally served on each member or left at his regular place of residence at least eighteen (18) hours prior to the meeting. 
    A person requesting a special meeting shall make his request in writing and shall state the reason for requesting a special meeting. If the meeting is being requested for the purpose of reviewing a site plan, the appropriate number of copies of the completed site plan must be included with the written request. The request shall also be accompanied by the special meeting fee established from time to time by city council resolution to cover the cost of preparing for, noticing and holding the meeting. Each party requesting a special meeting shall pay the established fee. 
    The commission may decline any request to hold a special meeting. 
(c)	A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Code 1971, § 19-15; Ord. No. 91-6, § 1, 9-16-91)
Sec. 16-31. - Reports and recommendations. 
(a)	The city planning commission shall make reports and recommendations to the city council and the city council shall vote to accept or reject such recommendations. 
(b)	The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the council amendments of the zoning ordinance or map or additions thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 19-18)
Sec. 16-32. - Plats. 
(a)	Approval. The planning commission shall review and approve, modify or disapprove a plat within sixty (60) days after the submission thereof to it; otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the commission. 
(b)	Hearing; notice. Any plat submitted to the commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent; and no plat shall be acted on by the commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to the address by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office and their addresses appear in the tax records of the municipality or county. 
(c)	Effect of plat approval. Every plat, approved by the commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the municipal plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat by the planning commission shall not be deemed final but shall be a requisite to final approval by the city council, nor shall it be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. 
(d)	Requirements and restrictions. The commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning ordinance of the municipality. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the zoning ordinance or map of the municipality. 
(Code 1971, § 19-19)
Sec. 16-33. - Master plan. 
(a)	Preparation and adoption by planning commission. The city planning commission shall prepare and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside of but not more than three (3) miles beyond its boundaries which, in the judgment of the commission, bear relation to the planning of such municipality, the making of surveys as a basis for such plan, the approval of public improvements, the carrying out of educational and publicity programs, the approval of plats and a street system, the adoption of regulations governing subdivision of land, and such other rights, powers, duties and responsibilities as are provided under the provisions of Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended. The commission may adopt the plan as whole by a single resolution or may by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the municipality or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. 
(b)	Hearing; notice. Before the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension, or addition, the commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing, by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality and by registered United States mail to each public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the geographical sections or divisions of the municipality affected. 
(c)	Required votes to adopt; certification. The adoption of the plan or of any such part or amendment, extension or addition shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six (6) members of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken of the commission. An attested copy of the plan or part shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman or secretary thereof shall be certified to the council and to the county register of deeds. 
(d)	Effect of plan upon subsequent approval of subdivision plats. Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted that sort of a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision jurisdiction or part thereof, and shall have filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds of the county in which such territory or part is located, then no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been approved by such planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the commission. Before exercising the powers referred to in this subsection, the planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the commission to the recorders of the counties in which the municipality and territory are located. 
(Code 1971, § 19-20)
Charter reference- Authority to provide a plan of streets and alleys, § 3.1(b)(3)(b). 
Chapter 17 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; nuisances, Ch. 12; offenses, Ch. 13; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21.

Sec. 17-1. - Oath of police officer. 
    Any police officer appointed by the council shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take the oath of office prescribed by the constitution of the state for the prompt and faithful performance of the duties of his office and shall file such oath with the city clerk. 
(Code 1971, § 21-2)
Sec. 17-2. - Special police officer. 
    It shall be the duty of special police officers to exercise police power under the direction of the chief of police and they shall have such, and only such powers and privileges as are granted under the ordinances and Charter of the city and the general laws of the state. 
(Code 1971, § 21-3)
Chapter 18 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, § 10.1 et seq.
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivisions, Ch. 20.

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost means and includes the cost of surveys, plans, right-of-way, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, and construction, and all other costs incident to the making of any improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Improvement means any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one (1) or more lots or parcels of land to be benefited thereby, in proportion to the benefit to be derived therefrom. 
(Code 1971, § 15-12)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-2. - Resolution determining that improvement cost be defrayed. 
    The council shall have power to determine by resolution that the whole or any part of the cost or expense of any improvement shall be defrayed by special assessments upon the property benefited, in proportion to the benefit derived or to be derived, in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1971, § 15-13)
Sec. 18-3. - Initiation. 
    The council in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor or may receive such a petition voluntarily presented; but, in either event, such petition shall be advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional. 
(Code 1971, § 15-14)
Sec. 18-4. - Duties of city manager. 
    Before determining to make any improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the city manager shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications therefor and an estimate of the cost thereof, and to file the same with the clerk, together with his recommendation as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, and the lands which should be included in the special assessment district. 
(Code 1971, § 15-15)
Sec. 18-5. - Hearing; notice. 
    After such filing, a public hearing shall be held before the council, which hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice of the time and place thereof has been published and sent by the clerk by first-class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. At the time and place specified in such notice for the public hearing, the council shall hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 15-16)
Sec. 18-6. - Determination to proceed. 
    After the public hearing, the council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution, the council shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement; determine the estimated cost thereof; determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property benefited and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city; determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid; determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments; designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments may be paid; and direct the city manager to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination. 
(Code 1971, § 15-17)
Sec. 18-7. - Special assessment roll-Preparation; certification; filing. 
(a)	A special assessment roll shall be prepared including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the council and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at large, if any. 
(b)	When the city manager has completed such assessment roll, he shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, his certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by him pursuant to a resolution of the council and that in making the assessments therein he has, as near as may be, according to his best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in such resolution and to the city Charter and the provisions of this article. Thereupon he shall file the special assessment roll with the clerk who shall present the same to the council. 
(Code 1971, § 15-18)
Sec. 18-8. - Same-Notice and hearing. 
(a)	Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the council shall order it filed in the office of the clerk for public examination; shall fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll; which meeting shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice thereof has been published and sent by the clerk by first-class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. Such notice shall specify the time and also the place of such meeting. 
(b)	Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file his objections thereto in writing with the clerk prior to the close of such hearing, which written objections shall specify in what respect he deems himself aggrieved. 
(Code 1971, § 15-19)
Sec. 18-9. - Same-Confirmation. 
    The council shall meet and review the special assessment roll and shall consider any written objections thereto. The council may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the council's minutes. After such hearing and review, the council may confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the city manager for revision or may elect not to confirm it. No original special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed except by the affirmative vote of four (4) of the members of the council, if prior to such confirmation written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property which will be required to bear more than fifty (50) percent of the amount of such special assessment. The clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll. Such roll shall, upon confirmation, be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1971, § 15-20)
Sec. 18-10. - Payment. 
(a)	The assessment roll shall be transmitted by the clerk to the treasurer for collection immediately after its confirmation. The treasurer shall mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners, as indicated by the records of the assessor, of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(b)	The whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid during the period of sixty (60) days from the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll without interest or penalty. Not later than fifteen (15) days after the end of said sixty (60) day period, the treasurer shall transmit such roll to the assessor with all payments upon assessments noted thereon. The assessor shall then divide any remaining balance of each assessment into such number of equal installments, as shall have been fixed by the council. 
(c)	The treasurer is responsible for the collection of taxes.
(d)	After the expiration of the sixty (60) day period provided for in paragraph (b), any installment which has not been spread upon the tax rolls may be discharged by paying the face amount thereof plus interest thereon to date of payment. 
(Code 1971, § 15-21)
Sec. 18-11. - Certification of cost. 
    Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof, the city manager shall certify to the council the total cost of such improvement, together with the amount of the original roll for such improvement. 
(Code 1971, § 15-22)
Sec. 18-12. - Lien upon property assessed. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall from the date of confirmation of such roll constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the city charter for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments as the council may determine at the time of confirmation and if in annual installments, the council shall determine the date the first installment is due. 
(Code 1971, § 15-23)
Sec. 18-13. - Additional remedies. 
    In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action, it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities, the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Code 1971, § 15-24)
Sec. 18-14. - Deficiency. 
    Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the council shall make additional assessments against the city and the several lots and parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original assessments, to supply the deficiency; but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement, provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twelve (12) percent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Code 1971, § 15-25)
Sec. 18-15. - Excess. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five (5) percent or less of the assessment, excluding any investment income, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five (5) percent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessment. 
(Code 1971, § 15-26)
Sec. 18-16. - Illegal assessment; reassessment procedure. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment; and whenever the assessment, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the same has been paid, and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. 
(Code 1971, § 15-27)
Chapter 19 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish and reasonably control streets, etc., § 3.1(b)(3).
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 12; offenses, Ch. 13; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 16; special assessments, Ch. 18; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21; zoning, App. A.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driveway approach means that portion of a driveway which lies within the public right-of-way and extends from the street side edge of the sidewalk to the street pavement or edge of a graded roadway. 
    Retaining wall means a wall built on that side of the sidewalk that abuts private property for the purpose of confining earth. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of the street right-of-way designated for pedestrian travel and includes driveway approach and retaining wall. 
    Trail means a travel way established either through construction or use which is passable by at least one (1) of the following: foot traffic, stock, watercraft, bicycles, in-line skates, wheelchairs, cross country skis or snow shoes. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 7-1-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-2. - Standard specifications. 
    The city shall establish a set of standard specifications. These specifications, as may be amended from time to time as circumstances require, shall govern all sidewalk construction, reconstruction and repair in the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, § 2, 7-1-13) 
Sec. 19-3. - Displacing, opening up pavement. 
(a)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to displace, remove or open up any portion of any street in the city without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager. 
(b)	Fee. The fee for a permit shall be as prescribed by the city council from time to time. 
(c)	Inspection of work. Any person displacing, removing or opening up any portion of any paved street as herein provided shall do all the work and replace the street and pavement under the supervision and direction of an inspector selected by the city. 
(d)	Violations; penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a stop work order and/or revocation of his or her permit. 
(Code 1971, § 22-6; Ord. No. 13-02, § 3, 7-1-13) 
Secs. 19-4-19-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALKS, RETAINING WALLS AND DRIVEWAY APPROACHES 

Sec. 19-21. - Declaration of necessity. 
    It is hereby declared necessary for the protection of the health and safety of the general public that the city provide by ordinance for the construction, repair and maintenance of sidewalks, retaining walls and driveway approaches in the city. The failure to keep sidewalks, driveway approaches and retaining walls in good repair or to construct such structures when required by this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88)
Sec. 19-22. - Responsibility and liability. 
    All sidewalks, driveway approaches and retaining walls within the city shall be maintained in good repair, free from any buckling, unevenness, cracking, etc., which would pose a health or safety hazard to pedestrians, by the owner of land adjacent to or abutting the same. The owner shall be liable to and fully indemnify the city for any damages recovered against the city by any person for neglect to keep these areas in good repair, and reasonably safe, fit and convenient for public travel of pedestrians. The owner shall be liable to any injured person for violation of this chapter, and any injured person may recover the damages suffered by them directly from the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88)
Sec. 19-23. - Existing construction not in good repair. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to order any person who owns property adjacent to or abutting upon any sidewalk, retaining wall or driveway approach that is not in good repair to build, rebuild or repair such structure. The city manager shall send a notice of violation of this article in accordance with the provisions of section 19-25. Such notice shall specify the location of such structure, the work required and that work must be completed within sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice, provided, however, the city manager may extend the period in which the work must be completed if conditions, as determined by the city manager, prevent completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88; Ord. No. 13-02, § 4, 7-1-13) 
Sec. 19-24. - Necessary construction. 
    In any street where concrete sidewalks, retaining walls and surfaced driveway approaches do not exist, and in the judgment of the city manager, such sidewalks, retaining walls and driveway approaches are necessary for the health and safety of the general public, the city council may by resolution order the abutting and adjacent property owners to install such structures as required within such time period as provided in the resolution. The city manager shall send notice of such order in accordance with the provisions of section 19-25. Such notice shall specify the location of such structure, the work required and the time within which the work must be completed. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88)
Sec. 19-25. - Notice of violation. 
(a)	Notice of required sidewalk, retaining wall, and driveway approach repairs or construction shall be served upon the adjacent or abutting property owner as follows: 
(1)	By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his residence, office, or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)	By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address; or 
(3)	If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the property for five (5) days. 
(b)	The responsibility for giving notice of violation is limited to providing for such notice to the property owner of record as shown on the most recent tax rolls of the city at the time of the giving of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88)
Sec. 19-26. - New construction. 
    The owner of any property within the city upon which a new residential, commercial or industrial building is to be constructed shall, in conjunction with such construction, construct sidewalks and any necessary retaining walls and driveway approaches in the public right-of-way adjacent or abutting such property as shall be required by the city manager at the time a building permit is issued for such construction. All such required structures shall be completed prior to the issuance by the city of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88)
Sec. 19-27. - Permit. 
(a)	Before starting any work required by this division in the public right-of-way, the property owner or his or her representative shall obtain a permit. The fee for this permit shall be set by resolution of the city council from time to time. When applying for the permit, the property owner or his or her representative shall submit a plan or sketch showing: 
(1)	The proposed location of the sidewalk and any related retaining walls and driveway approaches; and 
(2)	That the existing ground surfaces adjacent to and within the limits of the public right-of-way will be graded or excavated to conform to the established sidewalk grade upon completion of construction. 
(b)	Upon approval of the plan or sketch, the city manager shall promptly issue the permit.
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88; Ord. No. 13-02, § 5, 7-1-13) 
Sec. 19-28. - Assessment and lien upon property. 
    If a property owner shall fail to: 
(1)	Repair an abutting or adjacent sidewalk, retaining wall or driveway approach pursuant to section 19-23; 
(2)	Construct necessary sidewalks, retaining walls or driveway approaches pursuant to section 19-24; or 
(3)	Construct sidewalks, retaining walls and driveway approaches pursuant to section 19-26 within the time limits prescribed in such sections, the city may, without further notice, cause the same to be done and specially assess such expense against such property pursuant to section 10-10 of the city Charter. Such special assessment shall be a lien upon the property and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as for general ad valorem property taxes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1, 3-7-88)
Secs. 19-29-19-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SNOW REMOVAL 

Sec. 19-46. - Sidewalks and areas to be cleared. 
(a)	No occupant of any premises or owner of premises or property shall fail to keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises or property clear of ice and/or snow, to facilitate pedestrian use. Where there are no sidewalks, no such occupant or owner shall fail to clear a path free from snow and ice when such path will provide an extension of existing sidewalk on an adjacent property. Such path shall be the width of the existing adjacent sidewalk. 
(b)	Whenever any snow or ice has fallen or accumulated, it shall be cleared within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 86-1, § I, 10-20-86; Ord. No. 13-02, § 6, 7-1-13) 
Sec. 19-47. - Discarding snow and ice. 
(a)	No person shall cause snow to be piled or discarded upon another premises or property without permission. 
(b)	No person shall cause snow to be piled or discarded upon any public property, street right-of-way or sidewalk so as to obstruct its normal use. 
(Ord. No. 86-1, § II, 10-20-86)
Sec. 19-48. - Responsibility for repairs. 
    Any person who removes snow for hire within the city shall be responsible for the repair of any damages to public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 86-1, § III, 10-20-86)
Sec. 19-49. - Violations. 
(a)	If any occupant or property owner shall fail to clear an accumulation of ice or snow from the sidewalk adjoining his property within the time limit provided in this code, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on the sidewalk, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(b)	Any snow plow operator who fails to repair damages to any public or private property within the time period agreed, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(c)	Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense, plus the cost of removing snow and ice or repairing damages to public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 86-1, §§ IV, V, 10-20-86)
Sec. 19-50. - Waiver of provisions. 
(a)	During emergency situations or periods of excessive accumulations of snow and ice; the twenty-four (24) hour removal requirement may be waived by the city manager for a period of up to one hundred twenty (120) hours. 
(b)	The reasons for granting such waiver must be explained fully to the city council by the city manager at its first meeting after such waiver is granted. 
(Ord. No. 86-1, § VI, 10-20-86)
Secs. 19-51-19-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SNOW PLOWING 

Sec. 19-60. - Finding of necessity. 
    It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of persons and property in the city: 
(1)	To regulate the removal of snow and ice from private property, and
(2)	To require licensing of snow plow operators in the city.
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-61. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases, even if otherwise defined in this Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean any self-propelled vehicle of any size which carries or is capable of carrying its operator. 
    Public way shall mean any street, alley, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot, park or any other place which is open to or frequented by the public or to which the public has access. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-62. - Removal from private property onto public way prohibited. 
    No person shall remove snow or ice from private property and deposit or leave it on any public street or sidewalk or other public way. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-63. - Removal onto property of another prohibited. 
    No person shall remove snow or ice from private property and deposit or leave it upon the private property of another person without the permission of the other person. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-64. - Removal so as to block public way or access to property of another prohibited. 
    No person shall deposit or leave snow or ice in a place or manner which blocks or interferes with the use of a public way or which blocks or interferes with access to or the use of property of another person. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-65. - License required. 
(a)	No person, i.e., snow plow operator, shall engage in the business of plowing, removing or depositing snow or ice within the city and no motor vehicle shall be used for such purposes unless properly licensed by the city. 
(b)	Such license shall be issued by the city for such period as the city may specify.
(c)	It shall be an express condition of each license that the snow plow operator shall comply with all provisions of this article. 
(d)	An application for a license shall be filed by a snow plow operator with the city clerk in the form prescribed by the city manager. 
(e)	A separate license shall be required by each motor vehicle to be used in the plowing, removal or deposit of snow or ice. 
(f)	As a part of its application, a snow plow operator shall furnish the city clerk evidence of ownership or a leasehold interest in each motor vehicle it seeks to license. 
(g)	As a part of its application, a snow plow operator shall furnish the city clerk evidence of workmen's compensation, contractor's public liability and contractor's motor vehicle bodily injury and property damage insurance in such coverage amounts as shall be established from time to time by the city manager. All insurance coverage shall provide that the city clerk shall receive thirty (30) days' advance notice of cancellation or non-renewal. 
(h)	A snow plow operator shall display conspicuously on each motor vehicle required to be licensed such tag or sticker as is furnished by the city for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-66. - License term and fee. 
    The period of a license and the license fee shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-67. - No transfer of license. 
    No snow plow operator shall transfer or attempt to transfer its license without approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-68. - Revocation of license. 
    The city, after notice and the opportunity for a hearing before the city manager, may revoke the license of a snow plow operator who fails to comply with the requirements of this article or applicable state or federal laws, rules and regulations. The license of such snow plow operator shall not thereafter be granted or renewed until such time as the snow plow operator has remedied all violations and has demonstrated compliance with the requirements of this article and applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-69. - Inspection. 
    The city shall have the right to inspect all motor vehicles and related equipment for which a license must be obtained both prior to the issuance of the license or at any time during the period the license is in effect to determine compliance with this article and applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-70. - Compliance with laws, rules and regulations. 
    Snow plow operators shall comply with the requirements of this article and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto as well as all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-71. - Lights required. 
    In addition to any equipment required by applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, each motor vehicle for which a license is issued shall be equipped with lights of the type and mounted in the manner prescribed by Act 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended, MCL § 257.682c and § 257.698a, as may be amended from time to time. Such lights shall be turned on and be operating at all times such motor vehicle is being used for plowing, removing or depositing snow or ice. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10; Ord. No. 13-02, § 7, 7-1-13) 
Sec. 19-72. - Operating over public sidewalk. 
    A licensed snow plow operator may operate a motor vehicle over any public sidewalk for purposes of plowing, removing and depositing snow or ice or reaching a segment of the public sidewalk for which a private person has requested the plowing and removal of snow or ice. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-73. - Damage to property. 
    Any person licensed pursuant to this article shall be responsible for repairing any damage to a public way as the result of plowing, removal and depositing of snow and ice. If such person shall fail to make repairs sufficient to place the property in the same condition as it existed prior to the damage, the city may repair the damage and the costs thereof shall be a debt to the city from such person and shall be collected in the same manner as any other debt of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Sec. 19-74. - Enforcement of article; adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The enforcement of this article shall be the duty of the city manager, who is hereby authorized to adopt reasonable rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city council to carry out the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 9-7-10)
Secs. 19-75-19-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALK INSPECTION AND COMPLIANCE UPON SALE OR TRANSFER OF ABUTTING PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, adopted May 2, 2011, enacted provisions intended for use as article III, section 19-60. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as article IV, section 19-86.

Sec. 19-86. - Inspection of sidewalks, driveway approaches and retaining walls at time of sale or transfer of abutting or adjacent property and issuance of certificate of compliance. 
(a)	Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Property means any real property that is within the corporate limits of the city and abutting sidewalks, driveway approaches or retaining walls. 
    Sale or transfer means the conveyance of any interest in real property except by lease, mortgage, gift, divorce, devise, bequest, establishment of a family trust, government conveyance or lien foreclosure. The sale or transfer shall be deemed to occur upon the transfer of title or the execution of a land contract or other conveying instrument. 
(b)	Violation. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to sell or transfer property unless a valid compliance certificate is tendered to the purchaser or transferee at the time of the sale or transfer. 
(c)	Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	A sale or transfer which has occurred prior to the effective date of this section;
(2)	A sale or transfer where the seller or transferor and the purchaser or transferee have signed a purchase agreement prior to the effective date of this section; or 
(3)	Property where no repairs are required and, in such case, any application and inspection fees will be refunded. 
(d)	Issuance of compliance certificate and inspection fees. 
(1)	The city manager or his/her designee shall issue a compliance certificate after:
a.	An inspection has been made and all fees have been paid;
b.	It is determined by the city that all applicable construction specifications and any established city sidewalk rules and regulations have been met; and 
c.	The city has determined that the sidewalks, driveway approaches and retaining walls, as applicable, are reasonably safe and convenient for public travel. 
(2)	A compliance certificate may be issued:
a.	Immediately after inspection if no repairs are required;
b.	When the required repairs have been made and all applicable fees paid; or
c.	Upon payment to the city treasurer of an amount of money equal to the estimated cost of the repairs and inspection fees as determined by the city manager or his/her designee as provided in subsection (6) below. 
(3)	An application for a compliance certificate shall be available from, and shall be filed with, the city clerk. The city manager or his/her designee shall establish sidewalk rules and regulations and establish reasonable fees for the recovery of the direct and indirect costs of the city for inspections made pursuant to this section. The city manager shall provide the city council with any such fees. 
(4)	The property owner will be provided with either a notice to repair or a compliance certificate within thirty (30) days after an application is filed. 
(5)	It is the current property owner's responsibility to see that the applicable sidewalks, driveway approaches and retaining walls are in such condition that a proper inspection can be made. If an inspection is requested and cannot be made because of an accumulation of snow and ice at the noticed scheduled time of the inspection, the inspection shall be rescheduled and the property owner shall pay a second inspection fee. 
(6)	At the property owner's option, the property owner can deposit with the city treasurer an amount sufficient to cover the estimated costs of the repairs as determined by the city manager or his/her designee and applicable fees. A compliance certificate will then be issued within two (2) business days, after which the city will proceed to have the required repairs made. After the repairs have been made, inspected and approved, the property owner will be refunded within thirty (30) days any deposited unused monies not required to make the repairs and cover the applicable fees. 
(e)	Validity of compliance certificate; responsibility of city for defects. A compliance certificate shall be valid for the earlier of one (1) year from the date of its issuance or the date the sale or transfer of the related property is finalized. A new compliance certificate must be obtained for each subsequent sale or transfer of the property. A compliance certificate is not a warranty by the city that the applicable sidewalks, driveway approaches and retaining walls are free of any defects. 
(f)	Circumstances when a property sale is not finalized. When a property owner has requested an inspection, a notice of repair is issued as a result of the inspection and the sale or transfer of the property does not occur within six (6) months from the date of the inspection, the property owner shall make the repairs identified in the notice of repair within the time limit indicated in such notice. If the repairs are not made within such time limit, the city may cause the repairs to be made and the cost of such repairs shall be a lien on the abutting property and, if not reimbursed to the city by the property owner when due, shall be collected by the city in the same manner as the collection of delinquent ad valorem real property taxes. 
(g)	Emergency repairs. If an inspection reveals that the condition of the applicable sidewalks, driveway approaches and retaining walls constitutes, in the opinion of the city, an imminent danger to public health and safety, the city may order the repairs be immediately undertaken or may, where appropriate, cause the repairs to be made and the cost of such repairs shall be a lien on the abutting property, and, if not reimbursed to the city by the property owner when due, shall be collected by the city in the same manner as the collection of delinquent ad valorem real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 5-2-11)
Chapter 20 - SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, adopted May 6, 1996, amended Ch. 20, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 20 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table.

ARTICLE I. - TITLE, SCOPE AND AUTHORITY 

Sec. 20-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "subdivision control ordinance" for the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-2. - Authority. 
    The provisions of this article are adopted pursuant to the statutory authority of the Subdivision Control Act, Act 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended, and may be amended from time to time ("Act 288"). 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-3. - Scope and purpose. 
(a)	The approvals and requirements of this chapter shall be satisfied prior to the construction or installation of any subdivision within the city. The approvals and requirements of this chapter shall also be satisfied prior to the replatting of any subdivision. 
(b)	The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations dealing with the subdivision or platting of land within the city and to further promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by providing for the orderly development of land within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-4. - General administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered by the city council, commission, and city manager in accordance with this chapter and Act 288. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Secs. 20-5-20-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 20-11. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of Act 288, are hereby included and made a part of this chapter. Additional definitions are noted in the following section. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-12. - Additional definitions. 
(a)	Applicant means the proprietor as defined by Act 288. 
(b)	As-built plans means revised construction plans drawn in accordance with all approved field changes. 
(c)	City attorney means the legal counsel for the city. 
(d)	City engineer means the professional consulting engineer for the city. 
(e)	Clerk means the city clerk of the City of Lowell. 
(f)	Commission means the planning commission of the city. 
(g)	Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm drainage systems, culverts, bridges, utilities and other additions to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability. 
(h)	Natural features and amenities mean, but are not limited to, lakes, ponds, watercourses, floodplains, woodland and topography of the land. 
(i)	Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city as amended from time to time and included as Appendix A to the Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Secs. 20-13-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 20-21. - Application. 
(a)	An application for a plat approval shall be submitted to the clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the commission. 
(b)	The application shall include the following materials. Applications which do not include all of the materials listed below shall be considered incomplete and shall not be accepted. 
(1)	A completed application on a form supplied by the city.
(2)	An application fee which may be set by the council by resolution from time to time.
(3)	Ten (10) copies of a preliminary plat drawn at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet that complies with Act 288 and shows, at a minimum, the following: 
a.	A scaled location map showing the location of the proposed plat within the city relative to streets, section lines, watercourses and other subdivisions within one (1) mile of the proposed plat. 
b.	The zoning district and names of adjoining subdivisions, including future phases of the proposed subdivision, or the owners and addresses of abutting parcels of land, if not within a subdivision. 
c.	The names, rights-of-way and pavement widths of adjoining and proposed streets, including the location of all driveways on adjoining streets within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed plat. 
d.	The location, type and dimensions of any easements, streets, alleys or other public ways crossing the lot or lots being subdivided. 
e.	The locations and nature of any natural features and amenities.
f.	The location, size and dimensions of proposed lots.
g.	The location, dimension and use of any land set aside for public or private use.
h.	The location and dimensions of proposed drainage and utility easements.
i.	The location and size of all existing drainage ways and underground or above ground utilities. 
j.	The site topography at two (2) foot intervals.
k.	The date of preparation and the names of the plat, applicant, and the firm or individual preparing the plat. 
l.	The scale, north arrow, permanent parcel number(s) and legal description(s).
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-22. - Review process. 
(a)	Commission review; tentative preliminary plat. 
(1)	The commission shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing for the purpose of receiving public comments on the proposed plat. Notification of the public hearing shall be the same as that required for special approval uses in the zoning ordinance. The public hearing shall be held no later than sixty (60) days after receipt by the clerk of the application. 
(2)	Following the public hearing the commission shall recommend to the council approval, denial, or approval with the conditions. The commission shall state its reasons for such recommendation. The minutes containing the record of the public hearing and the commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the council and to the applicant prior to the council's consideration of the plat. 
(b)	Council review; tentative preliminary plat. 
(1)	The council shall not consider the preliminary plat until receiving the recommendation of the commission. 
(2)	The council shall consider the preliminary plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the recommendation of the commission. 
(3)	The council shall grant tentative approval, tentative approval with conditions, or denial of the preliminary plat within ninety (90) days of filing with the clerk, stating its reasons in writing for such tentative approval, tentative approval with conditions, or denial. Such reasons shall be based upon the standards set forth in section 20-23 hereof and shall be provided to the applicant. 
(c)	Tentative preliminary plat approval. 
(1)	Tentative preliminary plat approval shall constitute approval of the lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout of the proposed plat for a period of one (l) year. 
(2)	Tentative preliminary plat approval may be extended by the council if such extension is applied for in writing prior to the expiration of the tentative preliminary plat approval period and is supported by reasonable evidence justifying the extension as determined by the council. 
(3)	Following tentative preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall submit copies of such preliminary plat for the approval of the authorities as required by Act 288. 
(d)	Council review; final preliminary plat review. 
(1)	An application for final preliminary plat review shall be submitted to the clerk at least twenty (20) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the council at which it will be considered. 
(2)	The application shall include the following materials. Applications which do not include all of the materials listed below shall be considered incomplete and shall not be accepted. 
a.	The requirements of section 20-21(b) hereof. 
b.	Proof of approval of the preliminary plat from each of the authorities having jurisdiction as required by Act 288. Such approval shall include copies of all permits as may be required and issued by these authorities. 
(3)	The council shall consider the final preliminary plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least twenty (20) days after the filing of the application. 
(4)	The council shall grant approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the final preliminary plat, stating in writing its reasons for such approval, approval with conditions, or denial. Such reasons shall be based upon the standards set forth in section 20-23 hereof and shall be provided to the applicant. 
(e)	Final preliminary plat approval. 
(1)	Final preliminary plat approval shall confer upon the applicant for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which final preliminary plat approval was granted will not be changed. 
(2)	A final preliminary plat approval may be extended by the council if such extension is applied for in writing prior to the expiration of the tentative preliminary plat approval period and is supported by reasonable evidence justifying the extension as determined by the council. 
(f)	Final plat application, review and approval. 
(1)	An application for a final plat approval shall be submitted to the clerk at least twenty (20) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the council at which it will be considered. 
(2)	The application shall include the following materials. Applications which do not include all of the materials listed below shall be considered incomplete and shall not be accepted. 
a.	One (1) mylar copy and three (3) paper copies of the final plat.
b.	Two (2) paper copies of as-built plans for all completed improvements.
c.	An abstract of the title certified to date of the application, or, at the option of the applicant, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain whether or not the proper parties have signed the final plat. 
d.	Certification of a qualified individual indicating that construction of improvements has been satisfactorily completed, including evidence of completion of required inspections. 
e.	Cost estimates for any improvements that have not been completed.
(3)	The council shall consider the final plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least twenty (20) days after the filing of the application. 
(4)	The council shall grant final plat approval provided that the standards of section 20-23 hereof are met. 
(5)	In lieu of completion of all or a portion of all improvements and with the specific consent of the council, final plat approval may be granted, provided that as a condition of such approval, the applicant shall deposit with the city a true copy of an agreement showing that the applicant has deposited with the city or a bank or other agent acceptable to the city, cash, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, bond or other form of surety in an amount sufficient to guaranty the city the satisfactory construction, installation, completion and dedication of required improvements. 
a.	The amount of such deposit shall represent one hundred (100) percent of the estimated construction costs of completion of the required improvements, as determined by the city engineer. The applicant shall be responsible for providing a cost estimate to the city engineer for review. 
b.	Such deposit shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution, as set forth herein. 
c.	The city shall not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce the deposit, guaranty or surety until: 
1.	The applicant has certified in a manner approved by the city attorney that the improvements have been completed and are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances; 
2.	The city engineer has certified that the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed as required herein; and 
3.	The applicant shall have provided certification indicating that construction of required improvements has been satisfactorily completed. This certification shall include evidence of completion of inspections required by Act 288. 
d.	The deposit, guaranty or surety shall be reduced and refunded upon actual completion of required improvements and then only to the ratio that the completed improvement bears to the total improvements for the plat. In no event shall the deposit, guaranty or surety be reduced below ten (10) percent of estimated costs of the improvements before final acceptance of all improvements by the council. 
(6)	Until the council grants final plat approval, the city building official shall not issue building permits for construction of buildings or structures in the plat. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-23. - Review standards. 
(a)	Tentative preliminary plat approval. The commission shall recommend, and council shall grant tentative preliminary plat approval upon making the following findings: 
(1)	The proposed lots comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(2)	The design of the streets within the plat provide adequate and safe circulation and that sufficient consideration has been given to providing access to adjacent streets and parcels within the same or adjacent compatible zoning district(s). 
(3)	The streets are designed and lots oriented to:
a.	Ensure safety of access to any street;
b.	Provide the most efficient and safe traffic flow;
c.	Take best advantage of existing topography; and
d.	Preserve existing natural features and amenities.
(4)	The plat conforms to the requirements hereof and any other applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations and policies. 
(5)	The council has received the recommendation of the commission.
(b)	Final preliminary plat approval. The council shall grant tentative preliminary plat approval upon making the following findings: 
(1)	The plat substantially conforms with the tentative preliminary plat approval including any conditions placed on such approval. 
(2)	All required reviews have been completed and appropriate documentation of such approvals is provided. 
(3)	The plat conforms with the requirements hereof any other applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations and policies. 
(c)	Final plat approval. The council shall grant final plat approval upon making the following findings: 
(1)	The final plat substantially conforms to the preliminary plat approval including any conditions placed on such approval. 
(2)	All required reviews have been completed and appropriate documentation of such approvals is provided. 
(3)	The plat conforms to the requirements hereof and any other applicable federal, state or local laws or ordinances. 
(4)	Construction of all improvements as required herein has been completed or cash, guaranty or surety has been submitted in accordance with section 20-22(f)(5) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-24. - Required improvements; engineering and design. 
(a)	Streets and access. 
(1)	All streets within the plat and improvements to streets adjoining the plat shall be constructed to the standards required by the city, county road commission, or Michigan Department of Transportation, as applicable. Streets under the jurisdiction of the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.	Rights-of-way:
Local residential streets - sixty-six (66) feet 
Local collector streets - eighty (80) feet 
Major streets - one hundred (100) feet 
Cul-de-sac radius - fifty (50) feet 
b.	Minimum pavement width: thirty-six (36) feet from face of curb to face of curb. Cul-de-sac pavement radii shall be a minimum of forty-five (45) feet. 
c.	Pavement construction shall comply with the requirements of the county road commission for the appropriate street classification. 
d.	Intersections shall be constructed at as close to ninety (90) degree angles as possible, but in no case shall be less than thirty (30) degrees. 
e.	Centerline radii minimums:
Major streets - five hundred (500) feet 
Local streets - one hundred (100) feet 
f.	Street grades shall be not less than one-half of one (0.5) percent or greater than six (6) percent. 
g.	Standard six (6) inch curbs shall be required for all streets and shall be not less than twenty four (24) inches in width. 
(2)	Access to lots within the plat shall only be provided by streets proposed as part of the plat. The council may grant individual lots direct access to existing public streets provided that at least one (1) of the following conditions are met: 
a.	The proposed plat contains fewer than five (5) lots;
b.	The proposed plat has less than four hundred (400) feet of frontage on the existing public street; or 
c.	No practical alternative exists for access due to physical features located on the site. 
(3)	Offsetting streets at an intersection are prohibited unless the centerlines thereof are offset a minimum of one hundred and twenty five (125) feet. 
(4)	Block lengths, dead-end streets or culs-de-sac shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length from the nearest public street right-of-way line from which access is gained as measured along the centerline of the subdivision street to the furthest point of the street, measured to the furthest curb, without access being provided to another public street. 
a.	The maximum length of a proposed block, dead-end street or cul-de-sac may be exceeded if the council, after recommendation of the commission, finds that at least one (1) of the following conditions exist: 
1.	Topography or other significant natural features preclude access to any other public street or adjoining property on which a public street may be constructed. Such significant natural features shall be clearly identified and marked on the plat. 
2.	Not allowing a longer block, dead end street or cul-de-sac would result in inefficient use of land. Documentation demonstrating that no other development is feasible shall be submitted by the applicant and reviewed by the council prior to making this finding. 
3.	Other methods of access are available such that emergency vehicles are assured a safe and unimpeded route of travel to the properties served by the block, dead end street or cul-de-sac. Such access shall be reviewed by the city fire chief and a recommendation forwarded to the commission. 
b.	The council, upon a finding that at least one (1) of the above conditions exists, shall establish the maximum length of the proposed block, dead-end street or cul-de-sac. 
(b)	Utilities. 
(1)	Public sanitary sewer and water shall be extended at the applicant's expense to serve the proposed plat where an appropriate connection is available within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the boundary of such plat. 
(2)	Where such connections are not available the applicant may either pay for the extension of such utilities or provide suitable private utility systems, subject to the approval of the county health department and the city. 
(3)	Public sanitary sewer and water and all other utilities shall be installed underground at the applicant's expense. All such utilities shall be placed within private easements provided to such utility agencies, or within dedicated public rights-of-way, as permitted by the entities governing such rights-of-way. 
(4)	All utilities shall conform to the construction standards of the city or other appropriate agency and applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and policies. 
(c)	Sidewalks. 
(1)	Sidewalks shall be required unless the city council determines that sidewalks are impractical due to physical limitations of the property. 
(2)	Sidewalks and pedestrian crosswalks shall be constructed according to the standards of the city. 
(d)	Storm drainage. 
(1)	All storm drainage systems shall be designed, constructed and maintained to the standards required by the county drain commissioner, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, the city and applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and policies. 
(2)	The applicant shall comply with the provisions of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, Act 347 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended and as may be amended from time to time, and provide a general description of the manner in which it intends to meet the requirements of Act 347. 
(e)	Existing natural features and amenities. 
(1)	To the extent possible, existing natural features and amenities shall be preserved within the plat. 
(2)	Where such natural features and amenities are required to be removed or altered as part of the plat design, the applicant shall certify to the council: 
a.	That the properties of the land which is part of the plat are such that no practical alternative design is possible that would preserve such features and amenities. 
b.	That the removal or alteration of such features and amenities will not have significant adverse effect on adjacent properties with respect to drainage, views or other environmental conditions. 
c.	That the removal or alteration of such features and amenities complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and policies. 
d.	That financial considerations alone have not been used to justify the removal or alteration of such features and amenities. 
(3)	The council may require the installation of street trees or other landscaping. Street trees shall be planted at an average distance of forty (40) feet on-center and shall be of a variety acceptable to the city. 
(f)	Street lighting. Street lighting shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the city or other appropriate agency or utility. 
(g)	Lots. 
(1)	Every lot shall have frontage on a public, dedicated street and each lot shall meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance as to lot width and area. 
(2)	Every lot shall contain sufficient buildable area to permit construction of a principal building without requiring a variance from the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)	Where, after receiving an opinion from the zoning enforcement officer, city engineer, and building official there is a question regarding sufficient buildable area due to factors such as soil formations, flood conditions, high water table, or similar conditions, the commission shall withhold approval until a sufficient buildable area is provided. This may be accomplished through the combining lots or other such design which will provide sufficient buildable area. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Sec. 20-25. - Administration, conflict and enforceability. 
(a)	This chapter shall be administered by the commission, city council and city manager. The requirements and standards imposed herein shall be considered to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city; and in interpreting and applying them, primary consideration shall be given to this factor. 
(b)	The council may establish by resolution fees, inspection requirements, specification standards and administrative procedures as provided by law and such shall be deemed to be requirements hereof. 
(c)	To the extent there is a conflict between the procedures hereof and Act 288, the provisions of Act 288 shall control. 
(d)	Should any provision or part of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other provision or part which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § 1, 5-6-96)
Chapter 20.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 26. For purposes of alphabetization, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch. 20.5.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20.5-1-20.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 20.5-31. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Act 48 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2002 ("Act 48"), and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under Act 48 by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-32. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with Act 48 or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-33. - Defined terms. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Act 48 means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Act 48 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2002, MCL 484.3101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of Act 48. 
    City means the City of Lowell. 
    City council means the city council of the city or its designee. This definition does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission of the State of Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in Act 48. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to Act 48 and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Act 179 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1991, as amended, MCL 484.2102, et seq. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of Act 48 and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)	A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service.
(2)	Except as otherwise provided by Act 48, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)	A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20.5-34. - Permit required. 
(a)	Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in Act 48, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)	Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of Act 48. A telecommunications provider shall file the application with the city clerk. The application shall be complete and include all information required by Act 48, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of Act 48. 
(c)	Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary or confidential information, which is exempt public disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act, Act 442 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended, MCL 15.231 et seq. ("Act 442"), pursuant to Section 6(5) of Act 48, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)	Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by Act 48, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)	Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of Act 48. 
(f)	Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of Act 48, authorizations or permits, if any, previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Act 179 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1991, as amended, MCL 484.2251 et seq. ("Act 179") and authorizations or permits, if any, issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of Act 179 but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this section. 
(g)	Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of Act 48, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of Act 48, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of Act 179, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this section. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of Act 48, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection (g) is not required to pay the five hundred-dollar application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection (g) shall be given up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of Act 48. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-35. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)	Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of Act 48, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 4(b) of this ordinance for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of Act 48, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)	Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of Act 48. 
(c)	Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of Act 48, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)	Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of Act 48, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-36. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining any applicable construction or engineering permit as required by this code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-37. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of Act 48, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under Act 48 or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-38. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of Act 48, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and the city. The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of Act 48. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-39. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of Act 48, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-40. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of Act 48. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-41. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of Act 48, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of Act 48, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under Act 48, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of Act 48, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of Act 48. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of Act 48. To the extent any fees are charged to telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under Act 48, or which are otherwise inconsistent with Act 48, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-42. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of Act 48, if Section 8 of Act 48 is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 20.5-11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-43. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(4) of Act 48, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-44. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of Act 48, if required by Act 48, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-45. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of Act 48, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of Act 48, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-46. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this ordinance shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-47. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of Act 48, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Act 48, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Exempting certain route maps from Act 442, as provided in section 20.5-4(c) of this chapter; 
(2)	Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 20.5-4(f) of this chapter; 
(3)	Allowing existing providers, if any, additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the five hundred-dollar application fee, in accordance with section 20.5-4(g) of this chapter; 
(4)	Approving or denying an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 20.5-5(a) of this chapter; 
(5)	Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 20.5-5(a) of this chapter; 
(6)	Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 20.5-5(a) of this chapter; 
(7)	Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 20.5-5(b) of this chapter; 
(8)	Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 20.5-5(c) of this chapter; 
(8)	Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 20.5-5(d) of this chapter; 
(9)	Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 20.5-6 of this chapter; 
(10)	Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with section 20.5-11 of this chapter; 
(11)	Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 20-.5-14 of this chapter; and 
(12)	Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 20.5-15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Sec. 20.5-48. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of Act 48, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 02-7, § 1, 11-18-02)
Chapter 21 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; vehicles for hire, Ch. 24.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Impaired drivers responsible for certain costs. 
(1)	The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances. In addition, the city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police, fire fighting and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances. 
(2)	When used in this section the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(a)	Emergency response shall mean: 
1.	The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, fire fighting, emergency medical and rescue services by the city, or by a private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, to an incident resulting in an accident involving a motor vehicle where one (1) or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance; or 
2.	An incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when a driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance. 
(b)	Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city or to a private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, when making an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of providing police, fire fighting and rescue services at the scene of the incident. These costs further include all of the salaries and wages of the city personnel responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of the city personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, all costs connected with the administration and provision of all chemical tests of his blood, breath or urine and all costs related to any prosecution or incarceration of the person causing the incident. 
(3)	Person responsible. Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response, if while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance, such person's operation of a motor vehicle proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency response. 
(4)	Presumptions. For the purpose of this section, a person is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, when his/her physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he/she no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be assumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if a chemical analysis of his/her blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his/her blood was in excess of (i) seven one hundredths of one percent (0.07%) or (ii) such lesser percent as shall be established from time to time by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended (the "Motor Vehicle Code"), as that amount for which there is a presumption that a person's ability to operate a motor vehicle is visibly impaired. In addition, it shall be assumed that a person under the age of twenty-one (21) was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if the person has any bodily alcohol content as defined in the Motor Vehicle Code. 
(5)	Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(6)	Cost recovery schedule. The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of an emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the police department. 
(7)	Billing. The chief of police, or his designee, may, within ten (10) days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this section. The bill(s) shall require full payment in thirty (30) days from the date of service. 
(8)	Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any failure by the person described in this section as liable for the expense of an emergency response, to pay the bill within thirty (30) days of service shall be considered in default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-2, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 98-5, § 1, 4-20-98)
Secs. 21-2-21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2008, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, § 21-26, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 86, § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 1981.

Sec. 21-26. - Adoption by reference of Uniform Traffic Code. 
(a)	In accordance with the Uniform Traffic Code, Act 62 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956, as amended (MCL 257.951 et seq.), the city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Act 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969, as amended (MCL 24.201, et seq.), currently effective and all future amendments and revisions of the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in the state. 
(b)	All references to "governmental unit" within such code shall mean the city.
(c)	Copies of the code, and all future amendments and revisions thereto, shall be retained at city hall and be made available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 12-1-08)
Sec. 21-27. - Adoption by reference of Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(a)	The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended (MCL 257.1, et seq.), currently effective and all future amendments and revisions thereto when they are promulgated and effective in the state. 
(b)	All reference to "local authorities" within such code shall mean the city.
(c)	Copies of such code shall be retained at the office of the city clerk and be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 12-1-08)
Secs. 21-28-21-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate speed, stopping and parking of vehicles, § 3.1(b)(3)(g).

Sec. 21-46. - Maximum speed within city limits. 
    The maximum speed limit for vehicles traveling in the city limits shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour except where the speed limit is posted by signs placed by competent authority to the contrary, and, when required by law, with the consent of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-13)
Charter reference- Authority to regulate speed of vehicles, § 3.1(3)(g). 
Sec. 21-47. - Passing of traction engines over paved streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to run, propel or cause to be run or propelled any traction engine upon, over or across any portion of any pavement in the city unless the pavement is planked so the wheels of the traction engine shall not touch any pavement. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-20)
Secs. 21-48-21-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate stopping and parking of vehicles, § 3.1(b)(3)(g).

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-66. - Parking so as to obstruct streets. 
    No vehicle or device moved by human power shall be permitted to stand or remain in or upon any street, lane, public ground, side or crosswalk in the city, so as to obstruct the same; nor shall any person, at any time, fasten any animal in any manner that obstructs the free use of any sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-30)
Sec. 21-67. - Parking prohibited on city streets between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; exception. 
    No vehicle shall be parked except as provided herein on any street within the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish a parking permit system which system shall set forth a procedure by which a person may apply for a permit to park on local city streets between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. when absolutely necessary and shall establish the fees for same. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-31)
Sec. 21-68. - Hours parking restrictions applicable. 
    Parking restrictions shall apply from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily, except Sundays and holidays, in lots and on streets. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-32)
Sec. 21-69. - Parking prohibited. 
    Parking shall be prohibited on certain streets within the city when approved signs are erected giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-35)
Secs. 21-70-21-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 21-86. - Established. 
    Pursuant to Section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan, as added by Act No. 154 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968, and amended by Act No. 511 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 and Act No. 67 of 1979 of the Public Acts of Michigan Act No. of 1979 (MCL 600.8395), a parking violations bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the city is hereby established. The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-41)
Sec. 21-87. - Location and administration; adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The city manager shall, subject to the approval of the city council, establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-42)
Sec. 21-88. - Disposition of violations. 
    Parking violations shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-43)
Sec. 21-89. - Settlement of violations. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him by law. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-44)
Sec. 21-90. - Traffic tickets or notices of violation; issuance, contents. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the parking violations bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such a person fails to respond within the time limited. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-45)
Sec. 21-91. - Penalties. 
    Penalties shall be as prescribed by the city council by resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. of 3-10-77, § 17-46)
Secs. 21-92-21-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS THAT IMPAIR USE OF STREETS, PUBLIC WAYS 

Sec. 21-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonprofit organization means a nonprofit corporation, ecclesiastical corporation, fraternal association, or other entity which is recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service and the state as a nonprofit entity and any earnings of which are tax-exempt. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-112. - Permit required. 
    No person shall organize or lead, cause to be organized or lead, sponsor, engage in, permit, allow or participate in a parade, carnival, athletic event, festival, fair, celebration or other activity, event or use which blocks, closes or hinders or impairs the vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow in or along a street, road, or other public way within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager. 
(1)	Such permits shall be issued in accordance with guidelines adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(2)	If the activity, event or use will continue for more than four (4) hours, or if the vehicular or pedestrian traffic will be hindered or impaired or the public way closed or blocked for more than four (4) hours, a permit shall be issued only upon the approval of the city council. 
(3)	If a fee, rate or other charge is made or donations are accepted to participate in or view the activity, event or use or if the activity, event or use is for the purpose of or results in the raising of funds, a permit shall be issued only upon the approval of the city council. 
(4)	A permit shall be granted only to the person or persons who organizes, sponsors or leads the activity, event or use and only to nonprofit organizations or individuals. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 26-2)
Sec. 21-113. - Permit application. 
    The application for a special event permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be on a form provided by and filed with the city manager by the proposed permittee (the "applicant") and shall require the following information: 
(1)	The name and address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2)	If an applicant is other than an individual, the name, address and telephone number of all directors, officers, partners and persons having an equity interest of ten (10) percent or more in the applicant. 
(3)	Designation of the public ways to be used or affected by the activity, event or use.
(4)	Description of the activity, event or use.
(5)	List or description of anticipated participants in the activity, event or use.
(6)	The starting and ending times and dates of the activity, event or use and the set-up and clean-up times and dates for the activity, event or use. 
(7)	The anticipated number of persons participating in and attending the activity, event or use. 
(8)	Proposed parking, security, crowd control, traffic direction, refuse disposal, utility, restroom, private property protection and restoration, noise control, staging areas, and other areas, plans, personnel and equipment which is or may reasonably be necessary. 
(9)	The type, nature and amount of any rate, fee, charge or donation to be paid by anyone participating in or attending the activity, event or use. 
(10)	The type, nature, source, price and purveyors of any food, beverages, souvenirs or other goods to be sold or distributed at the activity, event or use. 
(11)	The use of any amounts paid for participation in, attending or purchasing goods at the activity, event or use. 
(12)	Unless waived by the city manager, a copy of the articles of incorporation, bylaws, partnership agreement, charter or other organizing, charter or creating documents of the applicant. 
(13)	Copies of insurance policies naming the city and any property owners abutting the affected public way as named or additional insureds in amounts of coverage to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council and covering such person from premises liability and from any and all liability arising as a result of the activity, event or use, as a result of participation in or attendance at the activity, event or use entering upon the property of a person required to be insured hereunder. 
(14)	A certification, acceptable to the city attorneys, that the applicant will indemnify the persons referred to in subsection (13) above for, hold them harmless from and defend them against any and all claims, lawsuits or other liability arising from or as a result of the activity, event or use. 
(15)	A certification that the statements in the application are true, accurate and complete.
(16)	The signature of an authorized person on behalf of the applicant.
(17)	The location of any privately owned premises to be used in conjunction with the activity, event or use and the duration, extent and purpose of such use. 
(18)	Any other information deemed necessary by the city council, city manager or city attorneys.
(19)	A statement of the benefit of the activity, event or use to the citizens and taxpayers of the city or county or to a nonprofit organization and of the reasons for the activity, event or use. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 26-3)
Sec. 21-114. - Issuance of permit. 
    A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued by the city manager only if the following criteria are met: 
(1)	Verified adequate provisions have been made by the applicant or others for the protection of public and private health, safety and welfare and property, including, without limitation, provisions for those concerns referred to in subsection 21-113(8). 
(2)	The location, time and date of the activity, event or use will not unreasonably affect the use or enjoyment of private or public property and will not cause unreasonable traffic hazards or delays. 
(3)	The activity, event or use, its duration, its repetition or its location won't adversely impact upon the value of private property in its vicinity. 
(4)	Most affected property owners do not object to the activity, event or use.
(5)	The application requirements are fully met.
(6)	The applicant meets and has not in the past failed to meet all of the requirements of this chapter, of the city Charter, of the city Code, and of other applicable laws, rules, regulations and orders. 
(7)	No activity, event or use shall constitute a public nuisance.
(8)	No permit shall be issued to any for profit organization or to enable any individual to make a profit. 
(9)	Unless waived by resolution of the city council, any permittee shall pay to the city any costs incurred by the city as a result of the activity, event or use permitted hereunder, including without limitation, such costs as added police patrols, added sanitation crews, etc. 
(10)	The activity, event or use does not exceed ten (10) days in duration in any calendar year. 
(11)	The application and all past applications of the applicant are true, accurate and complete. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 26-4)
Sec. 21-115. - Permit contents. 
    Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall indicate the location of the affected public ways, the location of any private property used in conjunction with the permitted activity, event or use, the times, dates and duration of the permit and of any set-up, clean-up, activity, event, use and permitted location, any restrictions including without limitation those regarding traffic, parking, security, noise, etc., any requirements of the permit, number of participants included in the permit and any other information deemed appropriate by the city council, city manager or city attorneys, including without limitation any ordinance provision affected by the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 26-5)
Sec. 21-116. - Effect of permit. 
    Notwithstanding any other ordinance provision to the contrary, any activity, event or use specifically permitted pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be conducted without being deemed a violation of any other ordinance provision while the permit is in effect; provided, however, any permit shall not affect any other ordinance unless it is specified in the permit. Provided, further, that during the term of the permit, a permittee shall comply with all requests of the city manager made to protect the public health, safety, welfare or convenience or to protect public or private property. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 26-6)
Sec. 21-117. - Monitoring. 
    It is the intent of the city that permits issued pursuant to this chapter not be used for the profit or benefit of any person other than a nonprofit organization, that activities or uses conducted pursuant to permits issued pursuant to this chapter benefit the city, the county, the general public or a nonprofit organization pursuant to the stated purposes for which the organization was formed and that any funds collected by a permittee or others as a result of the activity, event or use be in fact used for the purposes stated in the permit application. Therefore, any person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall, within seven (7) days of a request from the city manager, permit the city, including its accountants and attorneys, to examine, inspect and copy any financial, accounting and other records of the person. Any such person shall keep and maintain accurate records of any funds received by it, including the source and use of the funds, of its expenses and of any profits and their distribution. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 26-7)
Sec. 21-118. - Nuisance. 
    Any violation of or failure to comply with this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and may be abated by any and all available means, including, without limitation, the issuance of equitable relief by any court with jurisdiction. Any person so violating or failing to comply with this chapter shall pay any costs and expenses, including actual reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87, § 26-10)
Chapter 22 - ELECTRIC UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 22-1. - Billing and enforcement. 
(a)	Lien. Electric service rates and charges, including any late payment penalties, interest and charges, shall constitute a lien on all premises served which lien shall become effective immediately upon the provision of electric service to the premises. Whenever such rates and charges are delinquent and remain unpaid, the rates and charges shall be entered on the next ad valorem real property tax roll for the property served and collected in the same manner as ad valorem real property taxes. The city treasurer shall on or before March 1 of each year, turn such delinquent and unpaid charges over to the county treasurer in the same fashion as delinquent and unpaid ad valorem real property taxes. Provided, however, such charges shall not be a lien on the property served if the owner of that property has leased the property, the owner is not, according to the lease provisions, responsible for such electric service rates and charges, the city is so notified in a writing signed by both the owner and the lessee, and proof of such lease is provided to the city as required by applicable law. Where the owner is not responsible for such charges, the lessee shall, before the commencement of electric service to the premises, cause to be deposited with the city treasurer an amount equal to an estimated three (3) months' electric service rates and charges and shall cause such deposit to continue at that level throughout the lease term. The city shall apply the funds in that deposit against any and all delinquent charges of the lessee. 
(b)	Discontinuance. Subject to applicable state law, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of electricity to any premises for the nonpayment of electric service rates and charges when due. 
(c)	Other remedies. The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative together with all other remedies under state or common law and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-22-11)
Sec. 22-2. - Right to hearing. 
    The superintendent of light and power may send to a user who has not paid electric service rates and charges, when due, a notice that at the user's request a hearing will be scheduled with the superintendent of light and power. If the city is considering discontinuing the user's electric service, such notice shall be sent giving the user an opportunity to request a hearing with the superintendent of light and power to show cause why such service should not be discontinued. Such hearing shall be informal and the decision of the superintendent of light and power shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-22-11)
Chapter 23 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate location of trees and shrubs, § 3.1(b)(3)(j); to provide for planting, care, protection and removal of trees and shrubs, §§ 3.1(b)(3)(m), (b)(3)(o).
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 12; offenses, Ch. 13.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 23-1-23-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 23-26. - Injuring or destroying trees. 
    It shall be unlawful to cut, destroy or otherwise injure any shade or ornamental tree or shrub growing within the limits of any public street, highway or place within the city, without the consent of the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 22-16)
Sec. 23-27. - Trimming of trees by city. 
    It shall be lawful for the city manager to cause to be properly and necessarily trimmed all trees standing in or that may overhang any highways, streets or avenues, or which in any manner obstruct the public lighting of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 22-17)
Sec. 23-28. - City manager consent required for planting trees. 
    Whenever any person desires to plant any shade or ornamental trees in any of the public highways, streets and avenues of the city, he shall make application to the city manager in writing, specifying the number and kind he desires to plant and the highway, street and avenue where he desires to plant the same. Whereupon the city manager shall determine by an order providing whether such person may plant any trees upon such highway, street or avenue without injury or detriment to the public interest. 
(Code 1971, § 22-18)
Secs. 23-29-23-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOXIOUS SHRUBS, WEEDS AND GRASS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2008, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, § 23-46, pertained to grass and noxious weeds, and derived from Code 1971, § 11-10.

Sec. 23-46. - Property conditions declared a public nuisance. 
    The following conditions are declared to be a public nuisance: 
(1)	Trees, shrubs, bushes, weeds or other plant growth obstructing a public sidewalk or pedestrian walkway, a road or street right-of-way or other public way; 
(2)	Weeds, grasses or other plant growth that endanger public property or the health or safety of the public, or interfere with, obstruct or render dangerous any public way including noxious weeds, as defined in Section 2 of Act 359 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941, as amended, including ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac, poison oak and Canada thistle; 
(3)	Weeds, grasses and undergrowth higher than twelve (12) inches; and
(4)	Dead trees deemed hazardous to the public or to an adjacent property.
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 23-47. - Nuisances prohibited. 
(a)	For all residentially zoned properties and all other properties on which residential uses are located regardless to the zone district, a property owner, tenant or other responsible party shall maintain such property, occupied or vacant, improved or unimproved, free of the nuisances described in section 23-46 in the following areas: 
(1)	On areas of developed lots, parcels and units where a traditional lawn has been established;
(2)	The front twenty-five (25) feet measured from the improved right-of-way of residentially zoned lots or parcels, whether or not vacant, or lots or parcels with residential uses in which more than eighty-five (85) percent of the lot or parcel has been developed (for corner lots and parcels, the front twenty-five (25) feet shall be measured from both improved public right-of-ways); and 
(3)	All cleared and graded areas of lots and parcels where lawns or other landscaped improvements are intended to be planted, but have not yet been established. 
(b)	For all business and industrial zoned property and all other properties on which there are commercial, office, business and industrial uses regardless of the zone district, a property owner, tenant or other responsible party shall maintain all landscaped areas of the property free of the nuisances described in section 23-46. 
(c)	This article is not intended to prohibit or discourage the practice of developing natural groundcover areas, prairie yards, or gardens and lawns using accepted xerophytic plantings and techniques. It is intended to abate and eliminate situations where property is in a state of actual neglect and shows no distinct plan or pattern of upkeep or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 23-48. - Responsibility for maintenance of adjacent properties. 
    For every property that is to be maintained pursuant to subsections 23-47(a) and (b), shall also include the same maintenance by a property owner, tenant or other responsible party of such property in the area between that property's front property line and an improved public road or street, and in the case of private roads and streets, between the improved private road or street and the front property line. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 23-49. - Notice of violation. 
(a)	In the event that a property owner fails to comply or cause compliance with this article, the city shall notify the property owner of the violation and direct that the nuisance be abated. Such notice shall be in writing, addressed to the property owner as shown on the latest ad valorem property tax assessment roll, and shall inform the property owner: 
(1)	Of the nature of the violation;
(2)	Of the time in which the violation must be abated, which shall not be less than five (5) days; 
(3)	That the city may act to abate any violation that is not abated within the time prescribed;
(4)	That if the city abates the nuisance, the cost of such abatement plus an administrative fee as prescribed in section 23-51 shall be assessed as a lien against the property until paid; and 
(5)	That failure of the property owner to abate or cause the abatement of the nuisance may result in civil enforcement or criminal prosecution and/or abatement of the nuisance by the city. 
(b)	The failure to receive such notice shall not be a defense against the city's right to collect the costs of nuisance abatement including administrative fees or the initiation of civil enforcement or criminal prosecution of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 23-50. - Abatement. 
    Upon failure, neglect or refusal of a property owner to comply or cause compliance with the provisions of this article, the city or its authorized contractor or designee is authorized to enter upon the property of the property owner to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 23-51. - Administrative fee. 
    An administrative fee reflecting the city's cost of enforcing this article and as established by resolution of the city council shall be added to the actual costs charged to a property owner for abating a nuisance under this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 23-52. - Charges a lien on property. 
    Unpaid charges and administrative fees related to the failure to abate a nuisance to a property shall be a lien on such property and, if delinquent, may be collected in the same manner as the collection of delinquent ad valorem property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 12-15-08)
Secs. 23-53-23-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY ARBOR BOARD 

Sec. 23-66. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a board of the city to be known as the city arbor board to accomplish the public purposes and who shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-67. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The city arbor board shall study, investigate, counsel, and develop, annually update and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in public parks, along public streets and roads, within public right-of-ways and within other public areas. Such plan as annually updated shall be for the immediately succeeding fiscal year of the city and shall be presented to the city council in April of each year. Upon review, acceptance and approval by the city council it shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan of the city. In addition, the city arbor board shall, at the request of the city council, consider, investigate, make findings, report and make recommendations to the city council on any matter or question within the scope of its work as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-68. - Composition. 
    The city arbor board shall consist of five (5) voting members, all of whom shall be registered electors of the city. One (1) voting member shall be a currently serving city councilperson and one (1) voting member shall be a current member of the city board of light and power. All members shall be approved by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the members then serving on the city council, provided, however, the councilperson to be appointed shall not vote on the confirmation of his or her appointment. In addition, there shall be one (1) ex-officio nonvoting member who shall be a certified tree arborist who need not be a registered elector of the city, who shall be identified by the city manager and who shall agree to serve in such capacity. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-22-08)
Sec. 23-69. - Term of office. 
    The term of office for city arbor board voting members, other than the member also serving on the city council and the member also serving on the city board of light and power, shall be for three (3) years, provided, that for the first members appointed, one (1) member shall be appointed for a three-year term, one (1) member shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a one-year term. Except for the initial appointment of such board members where a member's term shall commence upon appointment, all terms of such members shall commence on July 1. If such board member's term has expired, and a successor has not been appointed, such board member shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed. The terms of the board member appointed as a currently serving city councilperson and the board member appointed as a current member of the city board of light and power shall begin on the date of appointment and end on date such member is no longer a city councilperson or member of the city board of light and power. Such board members shall not continue to serve after their term has ended even if a successor has not been appointed. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-22-08)
Sec. 23-70. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the city arbor board shall be filled in the same manner as regular appointments for the remainder of the unexpired term of the appointment vacated. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-71. - Removal from office. 
    A board member may be removed from the city arbor board by the city council at any time for cause as determined solely by the city council upon receiving a recommendation for removal by the city arbor board. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-72. - Compensation. 
    Members of the city arbor board shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-73. - Rules of procedure. 
    The city arbor board may adopt such rules of procedure for carrying out its powers, duties and responsibilities that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-74. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the city arbor board shall, except as otherwise permitted by law, be open to the public and held in compliance with the Michigan Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Meetings of the city arbor board may be called by the board chairperson or by any two (2) of its board members. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-75. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the voting board members then serving on the city arbor board shall constitute a quorum for the conducting of the business of the board. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-76. - Chairperson. 
    The members of the city arbor board shall annually elect one (1) of its members as chairperson. The chairperson shall be responsible for conducting all meetings of the board. Another member of the board, selected by board members present at the meeting, may serve as temporary chairperson for a meeting at which the chairperson is absent. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Sec. 23-77. - Execution of contracts and commitment of funds. 
    The city arbor board may advise and make recommendations to the city council regarding the entering into contracts or the expenditure of city funds in connection with its duties and responsibilities, but may not itself enter into contracts or commit city funds. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 5-21-07)
Secs. 23-78-23-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREES 

Sec. 23-91. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other woody plants within the city. It is the further intent of this article to cause the replacement of each approved tree species that is removed from public street right-of-ways, city parks and other city-owned property. Such replacements shall be of an approved species as designated by the city arbor board and at locations as shall be determined by the city manager or his/her designee; thereby ensuring the variety and longevity of the city tree inventory. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-92. - Permits for tree planting, care and removal. 
    The city manager or his/her designee shall have control of the planting, removal and care of trees, shrubs and other woody plants in the public street right-of-ways, city parks and other city-owned property subject to the provisions of this article. The owner of land abutting a public street right-of-way may, upon obtaining a written permit from the city manager or his/her designee, prune, plant, remove, spray and otherwise maintain trees, shrubs and other woody plants in that part of the street right-of-way abutting such owners land not used for pedestrian or vehicular travel. No person shall otherwise prune, plant, remove, spray or otherwise maintain trees, shrubs and other woody plants in any public street right-of-way, city park or other city-owned property. Each permit shall specify the extent and conditions of authorization. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-93. - Tree removal and replacement. 
    If the city manger or his/her designee shall determine that an existing tree, shrub or other woody plant located in the public street right-of-way, a city park or other city-owned property has died or is diseased, disfigured or partially destroyed, he/she shall authorize its removal. All trees, shrubs and other woody plants that are removed from public street right-of-ways, city parks and other city-owned property shall be replaced on a one-to-one basis at a location to be determined by the city manager or his/her designee. At the time of the authorization and removal of a tree, shrub or other woody plant a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be paid by the party responsible for removal and deposited in a designated city tree fund for its replacement unless otherwise provided by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-94. - Planting and spacing of trees. 
    The planting of trees, shrubs and other woody plants in public street right-of-ways, city parks and other city-owned property shall be authorized by the city manager or his/her designee in accordance with prescribed planting practices and their location and spacing shall be determined by the city manager or his/her designee. The planting and spacing of city provided trees on private property shall be mutually approved by the property owner and the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-95. - Covering soil surface near trees; sidewalks. 
    No person shall place within the public street right-of-ways any material which will impede or redirect the full and free passage of water, air or fertilizer or other plant food to the roots of any tree, shrub or other woody plant except for a sidewalk of authorized width and location. Where there are sidewalks within the public street right-of-way, every effort shall be made to place materials that will inhibit the growth of root structures under the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-96. - Clear vision clearance. 
    No trees, shrubs, woody plants, other plantings, fencing or other obstruction shall be located or maintained on a corner lot which will obstruct the view of the driver or operator of a vehicle within the public street right-of-way. Such unobstructed view area shall mean a triangular area formed by the private property lines along each public street right-of-way and a line connecting them at a point twenty-five (25) feet from the private property lines extended. Trees, shrubs, woody plants and other plantings may be located in such unobstructed view area provided they will not achieve a height at maturity greater than thirty (30) inches. In addition, no trees, shrubs, woody plants or other plantings shall be located or maintained in any front, side or rear yard of a lot which, in the opinion of the city manager or his/her designee will obstruct the view from vehicles entering or leaving the lot from driveways or adjacent private roadways. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-97. - Tree removal for utility operation or public safety. 
    If a public or private utility company (which shall include the city department of light and power) or the city manager or his/her designee determines that a tree, shrub or other woody plant located in a public street right-of-way, city park or other city-owned property is a detriment to utility operations or a public safety concern it may be trimmed or removed to provide the necessary and appropriate clearance or to otherwise eliminate the operational or public safety concern. Any tree, shrub or other woody plant removed shall be replaced at a location determined by the city manager or his/her designee. At the time of removal, a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be paid by the party responsible for the removal and deposited in a designated city tree fund to pay for the replacement unless otherwise provided by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-98. - Maintenance of trees on private property. 
    The owner of a tree located on private property which overhangs onto a public street right-of-way shall periodically be responsible for trimming its branches (a) so the tree does not obstruct the light from any street lamp or the clear view of any public street intersection, and (b) so there is a clear space of thirteen (13) feet above the surface of the public street right-of-way. The owner of a dead, diseased, infested or dangerous tree or a tree with broken or decayed limbs on private property which constitutes a danger to public safety shall promptly remove such tree or limbs. The city has the right to trim any tree, shrub or other woody plant that obstructs the light of any street lamp in the public street right-of-way or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign. Such trimming shall be confined to the area immediately above the public street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-99. - Tree trimming standards. 
    All trees, shrubs and other woody plants that are subject to this article shall be trimmed and pruned in accordance with the then current standards established by the American National Standard Institute for tree care operations (ANSI A-300) or, with respect to any activities of the city board of light and power related to this article, the Lowell Light and Power Operating Policy 5-14 for Power Line Clearance as it may be revised from time to time. In no case shall a tree be "topped" or improperly pruned. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-100. - Persons engaged in trimming, pruning and removal. 
    All persons, firms and companies providing trimming, pruning and removal services of trees, shrubs and woody plants within the public street right-of-ways or in city parks or other city-owned property shall be, if required, currently licensed by the appropriate state authority, if any, and shall have in effect a general liability policy of insurance which names the city as an additional or co-insured. A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance shall be filed with the city clerk before beginning work within the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-101. - Species of trees. 
    It is the policy of the city that it will not plant more than fifty (50) percent of the trees in one (1) area of the city with one (1) single species of trees during a calendar year. It is recommended that the species of trees planted throughout the city be staggered to prevent the loss of inventory from disease or infestation. A list of approved tree species compiled by the city arbor board shall be kept by the city clerk and shall be available to the general public upon request. Only species indicated on such list shall be planted in the public street right-of-ways, city parks or other city-owned property or with funds made available from the designated city tree fund. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Sec. 23-102. - Road commission jurisdiction. 
    For those public street right-of-ways in the city which the Kent County road commission has jurisdiction or maintenance responsibility, the tree policy of the road commission, rather than the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08)
Chapter 24 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to license and regulate vehicles for hire, § 3.1(b)(2)(e).
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means and includes any street, alley, avenue, court, lane, or public place or highway in the city. 
    Taxicab means and includes any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons for hire, excepting ambulances, hearses, cars owned and operated by funeral directors, and vehicles under jurisdiction of the state public service commission. 
(Code 1971, § 24-11)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 24-27. - Operation by unauthorized persons. 
    No taxicab shall be operated as such, by any person other than the franchise holder, or a driver licensed as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1971, § 24-12)
Secs. 24-28-24-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRIVERS' PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to license and regulate the number of vehicles carrying persons or property for hire, § 3.1(b)(2)(e).

Sec. 24-46. - Application; filing, contents; fee. 
(a)	Any person desiring to drive a taxicab shall first file an application with the city manager stating the following: 
(1)	Name, age and residence of the applicant;
(2)	Previous taxi or driving experience;
(3)	State chauffeur's license number.
(b)	The application shall be accompanied by the yearly fee as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1971, § 24-33)
Sec. 24-47. - Presentation of application; granting of permit. 
    Upon presentation of an application for a driver's permit the city manager shall grant a one-year permit. 
(Code 1971, § 24-34)
Sec. 24-48. - Revocation. 
    A taxicab driver's permit may be revoked at any time in the discretion of the city manager upon violation of any ordinance of the city or law of the state. 
(Code 1971, § 24-36)
Chapter 25 - WATER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Administration of water and sewer disposal systems. 
    The water and sewer disposal systems of the city shall be administered as regular departments of the city under the management, supervision and control of the city manager as set forth under section 15.2 of the city Charter. The city manager may employ or designate such person in such capacity as he deems advisable to carry out the efficient management and operation of the systems. 
Secs. 25-2-25-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 25-16. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to establish the authority necessary to enable the city to efficiently manage and operate its water system and to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and requirements. 
Sec. 25-17. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this Article and any rules, regulations, standards or requirements promulgated pursuant hereto shall be as follows: 
    City manager means the city manager of the city and/or the director of public works or any other authorized deputy, agent, representative or designee of the city manager. 
    Commercial user means a user whose premises are used to offer services and/or products such as retail and wholesale stores, gasoline stations, restaurants, schools, churches, hotels, motels, nursing homes, theaters and governmental buildings. 
    Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances though which a backflow could occur. 
    Industrial user means a user who operates a manufacturing or process facility which is engaged in producing a product. 
    Intermediate transmission lines means those pipes which not only transport water to one (1) or more local service areas but also provide local service. 
    Local distribution lines means those pipes which serve only the abutting property within only one (1) local service area. 
    MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or any successor thereof. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    Premises means a lot, parcel or plot of land including the buildings for structures thereon or any part thereof. 
    Primary transmission lines means those pipes whose only function is to transport water to and through one (1) or more local service areas, and to which water connection pipes are not attached. 
    Residential user means a user whose premises are or buildings are used primarily as a permanent domicile for one (1) or more persons (transit lodging such as motels, hotels and motor inns are not included) and which discharges only domestic waste. 
    Secondary water supply means a water supply system maintained in addition to a public water supply, including but not limited to, water systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of Act 98 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1913, as amended, or water from a public water supply which has been exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other than an approved storage facility. 
    Submerged inlet means a water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminants and which is unprotected against backflow. 
    Water connection pipe means that pipe connecting the watermain with the premises served. This includes the connection to the watermain or the corporation cock, the shut-off valve, and the valves on the inlet and outlet sides of the meter. 
    Water main means the primary and intermediate transmission and local distribution lines of the system. 
    Water system or system means the Grand Rapids water system consisting of all plants, works, instrumentalities, lines and properties now or hereafter existing, used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply, its treatment, distribution and all other necessary functions. 
    User means either a residential, commercial or industrial user of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 10-5-09)
Sec. 25-18. - Rules and regulations. 
    Rules and regulations to effectuate the provisions of this article may be promulgated pursuant to this article. Such rules and regulations, once promulgated, shall be deemed to be as complete and binding a part of this article as if they were set forth specifically herein and any violation of such rules and regulations so promulgated shall be deemed a violation of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be prepared by the city manager and approved by resolution of the city council. The promulgation of such rules and regulations shall be complete when they are placed on file in the city clerk's office and notice of their adoption has been published in a newspaper of general circulation of the city. 
Sec. 25-19. - Use of the water system. 
    Any person conforming to this article and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article shall be permitted to receive water service provided there exists adequate intermediate transmission or local distribution lines of the system to which he can connect. 
Sec. 25-20. - Service connection. 
    Application for water connection shall be made to the system on forms prescribed and furnished by the city manager. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of this system and upon the payment of the required charges and fees. 
Sec. 25-21. - Meters. 
    Each premises using water shall be separately metered and, if there are more than one (1) residential, commercial or industrial unit located in a single premises, each unit shall be separately metered unless the owner of the premises is responsible for the payment of water and sewer user charges for all units. All meters shall be the property of the system. All water supplied to metered premises must pass through the meter. The city manager shall have the right to determine the size of the meter required for any service. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a water meter to any watermain of the system, unless such meter shall be installed by the city or under its supervision. No person except an authorized city employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, or alter or interfere in any way with, any water meter. 
(Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 3-15-93)
Sec. 25-22. - Inspection. 
    The city manager or his designee bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person who applies for and/or receives water from the system under this article shall be deemed to have consented to inspections pursuant to this section, including entrance upon that person's property at reasonable times to make inspections. 
Sec. 25-23. - Hydrant use. 
    No person, except an authorized employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant except in case of emergency, without first securing permission from the city manager and paying such charges as may be prescribed in the rules and regulations of the system. 
Sec. 25-24. - Restricting water use. 
    The city manager may regulate, limit or prohibit the use of water for any purpose. Such regulations shall restrict less essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to assure an adequate supply for essential needs and for fire fighting. 
Sec. 25-25. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with or alter, any structure, property, appurtenance, equipment or any other item which is part of the water system. 
Sec. 25-26. - Repairs by city. 
    In case of any violation of this article, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article, the city shall have the right to make the needed repair or take any other necessary corrective action and bill any user for any costs incurred thereby. In addition to any other remedies available, the costs, if unpaid ninety (90) days after the user has been billed therefor, shall become a lien on the premises served and entered upon the next tax roll. 
Sec. 25-27. - False information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification on any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or requested pursuant to this article or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall be deemed to have violated this article. 
Sec. 25-28. - Civil liability. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant hereto or liable to the city for any costs it incurs as a result of such violation including, without limitation, the costs incurred by the city for any corrective actions or measures and any fines or penalties incurred by the city and shall be liable to the city for any legal costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the city by reason of such violation including, without limitation, the costs incurred by the city to collect from such person any amounts due under this article, this section, or the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. 
Sec. 25-29. - Penalties. 
    Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article, a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article for each offense as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
Sec. 25-30. - Legal action. 
    The city attorney may commence and/or maintain any action at law or equity to enforce any provision of this article, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article. Such actions may include, without limitation, the seeking of preliminary, temporary or permanent injunctive relief and/or the seeking of damages. 
Sec. 25-31. - Cross-connection control. 
    The city adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the MDEQ as set forth in Sections 325.11401 through 325.11407 of the 1979 Michigan Administrative Code, as may be amended or replaced from time to time and pursuant thereto the city shall eliminate and prevent all cross connections pursuant to a cross-connection control plan which the city has established and which has been approved by the MDEQ. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 10-5-09)
Sec. 25-32. - Cross connections prohibited. 
(a)	A cross connection shall not be made between the water system and a secondary water supply. 
(b)	A cross connection shall not be made by submerged inlet.
(c)	A cross connection shall not be made between the water system and piping which may contain sanitary waste or a contaminant. 
(d)	A cross connection shall not be made between the water system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a contaminant. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 10-5-09)
Sec. 25-33. - Inspections. 
    The city manager is hereby reserved the right to cause inspections to be made of all properties in the city served by the water system where cross connections are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as provided in the city's cross-connection control plan and as approved by the MDEQ. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 10-5-09)
Sec. 25-34. - Right of entry. 
    Representatives of the city authorized by the city manager shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the water system for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. Upon request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish such representatives all pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems of such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a cross connection. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 10-5-09)
Sec. 25-35. - Discontinuance of water service. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to discontinue or cause the discontinuance of water service after reasonable notice to any property that has a cross connection in violation of this article and to take such other measures he/she deems necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination to the water system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 10-5-09)
Sec. 25-36. - Testing backflow prevention assemblies. 
    Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation to determine that they are working properly. Subsequent testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be on an annual basis as required by the city in accordance with MDEQ requirements. Only a person approved and certified by the state shall be qualified to perform such testing and said person shall certify the results of such testing. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 10-5-09)
Sec. 25-37. - Protection of water supply. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the water system shall be protected from possible contamination as specified in this article and by the state and city plumbing codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable water system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as water unsafe for drinking. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 10-5-09)
Secs. 25-38-25-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 25-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 92-3, § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 1992, repealed § 25-46, which pertained to the purpose for establishing regulations to regulate sewers and sewage disposal. 
Sec. 25-47. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article and any rules, regulations, standards or requirements promulgated pursuant hereto shall be as follows: 
    Available city sanitary sewer means a sanitary sewer line of the system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses and joins or abuts upon the property and passing not more than two hundred (200) feet from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
    BOD or biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade expressed in terms of weight (parts per million) and/or by concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sanitary sewer of other place of disposal. 
    COD or chemical oxygen demand means a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater determined as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test and expressed in terms of concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Cesspool means an underground pit into which raw household sewage or other untreated liquid waste is discharged and from which the liquid seeps into surrounding soil or is otherwise removed. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount remaining at the end of a specified contact period expressed in terms of concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    City manager means the city manager of the city and/or the director of public works or any other authorized deputy, agent, representative or designee of the city manager. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Combined wastestream means the wastestream of an industrial user where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewater (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment. 
    Commercial user means an establishment listed in the Office of Management and Budget's "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" (SICM) (1972 Edition) involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the city manager discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary convenience and which is not a residential user or an industrial user. 
    Compatible substance or compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the system's wastewater treatment plant and for which treatment the treatment plant was designed. 
    Domestic user means a user whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a permanent domicile for one (1) or more persons (transit lodging such as motels, hotels and motor inns are not included) and which discharges only domestic waste. 
    Domestic waste means the water carried wastes from sanitary conveniences such as toilets, sinks, garbage disposals, dishwashers and clothes washing machines located in a domicile. Domestic waste has a strength not exceeding three hundred (300) parts per million of BOD, three hundred (300) parts per million of suspended solids and ten (10) parts per million of phosphorus at the point of discharge. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the growing, handling, storage and sale of produce or other edible products. 
    Grease trap means a tank of a size and material and so designed as to be capable of removing grease and oily wastes from the sewage. 
    Incompatible substance or incompatible pollutant means any substance which is not a compatible substance. 
    Industrial user means a user who discharges any industrial waste. 
    Industrial waste means liquid or liquid carried wastes from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or from any such structure used or designed to be used for any such purpose, as distinct from domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Integrated facilities means industrial facilities which combine process waste prior to treatment. 
    Interfere with sewage treatment means to inhibit or disrupt sewage treatment plant processes or operations so as to cause or contribute to a violation of the city's NPDES permit, to reduce the sewage treatment plant efficiency or to increase the cost of wastewater treatment. The term also includes directly or indirectly inhibiting, disrupting, hindering or restricting the use or disposal of sewage sludge. 
    MDNR means the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any federal regulation containing water pollutant discharge limits which is promulgated by the USEPA and which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    NPDES permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of P.L. 92-500 of 1972 as amended by P.L. 95-217 of 1977, 33 U.S.C.A. § 1342 and all applicable regulations. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    New source means any source, emanating from a building, the construction of which is commenced after the adoption of this chapter. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities, administration and other effort required to operate and maintain the sewage works and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any of various chemicals, substances, and refuse materials such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes which impair the purity or natural qualities of surface waters, ground waters, and/or soil. 
    Premises means a lot, parcel or plot of land including the buildings or structures thereon or any part thereof. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment facilities means devices or structures for use in treating industrial waste prior to entry into public sewers. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement for treating of a waste prior to discharge to the sewers. 
    Pretreatment standards means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, Alternative Discharge Limits, or other federal, state, or local standards, whichever are applicable, including those in or promulgated pursuant to subsection 307(a) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a). 
    Private sewage system means any sanitary sewage works or part thereof not connected to a public sewer and shall include but not be limited to septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits. 
    Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Seepage pit means a cistern or underground enclosure constructed of concrete blocks, bricks, or similar material loosely laid with open joints so as to allow the septic tank overflow or effluent to be absorbed directly into the surrounding soil. 
    Septic tank means a receptacle receiving sewage and having an inlet and outlet designed to permit the separation of solids in suspension from such wastes and to permit such retained solids to undergo decomposition therein. 
    Sewage or wastewater means a combination of liquid, liquid-carried, water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage disposal system and system means the combined Lowell Sanitary and Storm Sewage Disposal Systems. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of compatible or incompatible substances in concentrations or quantities which interfere with sewage treatment or damage the system. 
    Standard industrial classification or SIC means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    State means the state of Michigan. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Structure in which sanitary sewage originates or structure means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate water-carried sanitary sewage, are used or are available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. 
    Surcharge means an extra charge to cover the cost of treating and sludge disposal of extra strength sewage or slugs. 
    Suspended solids or SS means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to public health, treatment, or environment including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the USEPA. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include any noncompliance caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive or other maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    USEPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of sewage into the sewage works. 
    Watercourse means a channel, natural or artificial, in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently, but does not include the sewage disposal system or any part or component thereof. 
Sec. 25-48. - Abbreviations. 
    The meaning of abbreviations used in this article and rules promulgated pursuant hereto shall be as follows: 
(1)	gpd shall mean gallons per day.
(2)	l shall mean liter.
(3)	MG shall mean million gallons.
(4)	mg shall mean milligrams.
(5)	mgl shall mean milligrams per liter.
(6)	ppm shall mean parts per million.
(7)	u shall mean microgram.
(8)	u/l shall mean micrograms per liter.
Sec. 25-49. - Pollution and waste deposits prohibited. 
    No person shall deposit, place or discharge, cause to be deposited, placed or discharged or permit to be deposited, placed or discharged onto any property or into any natural outlet or watercourse within or under the jurisdiction of the city any domestic waste, industrial waste, sanitary sewage or other pollutant, unless the same has been treated to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and requirements, and no person shall dispose of, place or deposit, cause to be disposed of, placed or deposited or permit to be disposed of, placed or deposited in an unsanitary manner upon, in or with any premises within or under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable material. 
Sec. 25-50. - Sewer connection required. 
    All structures in which sanitary sewage originates which is located on premises with an available city sanitary sewer shall, at the expense of the owner thereof and in accordance with the provisions of this article, be connected to the city sanitary sewer within one hundred eighty (180) days after the city sanitary sewer becomes available or, if it is presently unoccupied and unused, prior to any occupancy or use. Provided, however, no new connection to the sanitary sewer will be required or permitted unless there is sufficient available capacity in all downstream sewage collection lines, force mains and lift stations and in the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treating BOD and suspended solids. 
Sec. 25-51. - Use of private sewage system. 
    Where a city sanitary sewer is not available to a structure, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage system which complies with all applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations including any requirements of state, county or city health officers. 
Sec. 25-52. - Repair, maintenance and replacement of private sewage system. 
    The owner of a private sewage system shall, at his own expense, repair, maintain and/or replace the private sewage system or parts and components thereof to assure that is operates correctly, does not cause any odors, is not a public or private nuisance and does not violate any provision of this article or the rules promulgated pursuant hereto. If the city manager determines the use of the private sewage system or the failure to repair, maintain or replace the private sewage system or any part or component thereof causes a health hazard, results in a violation of any provision of this article, creates an obnoxious odor or creates a nuisance, the owner of the premises shall take immediate efforts to repair or replace the private sewage system or any parts or components thereof to correct the problem. If it is not possible to correct the problem by repairing or replacing the private sewage system or parts or components thereof, the owner of the premises shall either connect to the city sanitary sewer at his own expense or cease the use and occupancy of the premises. 
Sec. 25-53. - Prohibited private sewage system. 
    No private sewage system may be operated, repaired, maintained, enlarged, extended or constructed if any structure to which it is connected is located on a premises with an available city sanitary sewer. 
Sec. 25-54. - Unused private sewage system. 
    Where a premises is connected to a sanitary sewer and there exists on the premises a septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other similar private sewage facility, any sewage in the septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other similar private sewage facility shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner and the septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other private sewage facility shall be filled with sand or gravel. 
Sec. 25-55. - Permit required for private sewage system construction; application; fee. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city manager. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city manager. A permit and inspection fee in an amount to be established from time to time by the city council shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
Sec. 25-56. - When permit effective; inspection of work. 
    A permit for a private sewage system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city manager. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city manager when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the city manager. 
Sec. 25-57. - Type, capacity, location of private sewage systems. 
    The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and requirements and with all recommendations of the state department of public health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
Sec. 25-58. - Bond required of plumbers. 
    All plumbers or others designated to perform sewer work shall be required to file a surety bond with the city clerk in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and running to the city to protect it against any liability in connection with the work done, and which surety bond or bonds shall be kept in force and effect from year to year. 
Sec. 25-59. - Sewer connection permit required. 
    No person shall uncover and make any connections with, or openings into, use, alter or disturb any city sewer or appurtenance thereof, without obtaining a written permit from the city manager. Any sewer connections or work done within the city's right-of-way shall require a street opening permit from the city manager. 
Sec. 25-60. - Sanitary sewer connection permit, classification, application and fee. 
(a)	Classification. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)	Residential and commercial services, and
(2)	Establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on the form furnished by the city. 
(b)	Application. In addition to such other information as may be required by the city manager or under rules promulgated pursuant to this article, such application for excavating shall plainly state the location thereof, the purpose for which it is to be done, the date when said work is to be performed and also kind and nature of the sewer, whether four (4) inches cast iron or six (6) inches sewer pipe (vitrified). The application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent by the city manager. 
(c)	Fees. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate permit, connection and inspection fees which shall be in amounts specified in this Code or as set forth from time to time by the city council. 
Sec. 25-61. - Costs of connection; indemnification of city. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
Sec. 25-62. - Separate building sewers required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each structure. However, where any existing structure is so located on an interior lot so that no individual building sewer is available nor can one be constructed to the structure through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, more than one (1) structure may be served with the same building sewer subject to approval by the city manager. In areas where laterals have not been constructed to the property and complete street improvements have been made or where unusual lot splits have occurred leaving only one (1) lateral for two (2) properties, joint use of this lateral may be approved by the city manager with the connection being made to the city sewer. Where joint use of a lateral is permitted, it shall be conditional upon the city's right to, at any time, monitor the effluent of the joint users of the lateral prior to its entry into the joint lateral, whether or not such monitoring must occur on private or public property or in or outside the users' facilities. 
Sec. 25-63. - Use of old building sewers in new building. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and testing by the city manager, to meet all requirements of this article. 
Sec. 25-64. - Existing building sewers. 
    Existing building sewers shall meet all requirements of this article. Whenever any examination determines that an existing building sewer does not meet the requirements of this article and the city manager determines that the connection is creating a health hazard, odor, or public nuisance, the sewer shall be reconstructed at the owner's expense. 
Sec. 25-65. - Connections of building sewer into public sanitary sewer. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer shall be made at the Y branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no Y branch is available, the contractor will install a cast iron saddle. This cast iron device will be furnished by the city and must be installed according to instructions furnished by the city manager. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. 
Sec. 25-66. - Connections on trunk line highways or county roads. 
    Where it may be necessary to connect into a sewer on a trunk line highway or on a county road, the applicant will secure the necessary permits from the state department of transportation and the county road commission. Such permits shall be presented to the city manager when the application for local permit is made. The applicant to pay all fees thereof. 
Sec. 25-67. - Prohibited lateral sewer connections. 
    In no case shall a lateral sanitary sewer be connected to the outlet end of a septic tank and cesspool, but said sewer shall be laid as direct as possible between the trunk line sanitary sewer and the building to be connected. No lateral sanitary sewer from any building shall be connected directly to any catch basin, manhole or any line leading from any catch basin to the main sanitary sewer. 
Sec. 25-68. - Taps. 
    All taps made in any trunk line sanitary sewer within the city shall be made under the supervision of the city manager. Lateral sanitary sewers must be laid at least to the property line by the plumber or person designated to perform the work. 
Sec. 25-69. - Inspection and supervision of connections. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the city sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city manager. 
Sec. 25-70. - Pipe specifications. 
    The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe, ASTM specifications (A74-42) or equal; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM specifications (C13-44T) or equal; or other suitable material approved by the city manager. Joints shall be tight and waterproof, and part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10) feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed or cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the city manager where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewers shall be of cast-iron soil pipe except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the city manager. 
Sec. 25-71. - Joints. 
(a)	Joints are to be gastight and watertight. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(b)	Cast-iron pipe joints. Cast-iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, federal specification (QQ-L-156), not less than one (1) inch deep. Lead shall be run in one (1) pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and approved. 
(c)	Joints in vitrified clay pipe. All joints in vitrified clay pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot poured jointing material or cement mortar as specified below. 
(d)	Hot poured joints. Material for hot poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the waste carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved material. 
(e)	Cement joints. Cement joints shall be made by packing a closely twisted jute or oakum gasket, or suitable size to fill partly the annular space between the pipes. The remaining space shall be filled and firmly compacted with mortar composed of one (1) part portland cement and three (3) parts mortar sand. The material shall be mixed dry; only sufficient water shall be added to make the mixture workable. Mortar which has begun to set shall not be used or retempered. Lime putty or hydrated lime may be substituted to the extent of not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the volume of the portland cement that may be added. 
(f)	Jointing materials not specified. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the city manager. 
Sec. 25-72. - Building sewer size and slope. 
    The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city manager, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches soil and six (6) inches vitrified pipe. The slope of such pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
Sec. 25-73. - Building sewer location, elevation, grade and alignment. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to nor within three (3) feet of any bearing wall. The depth shall be sufficient to be protected against frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in straight alignment shall be made only with property curved pipe or long radius fittings. Changes in direction using bends of forty-five (45) degrees or over shall have a cleanout. 
Sec. 25-74. - Floor drains. 
    Floor drains which are connected to the building sewer shall be required for all basements or cellars if the elevation of the public sanitary sewer will service the building. 
Sec. 25-75. - Building drains; artificial lift required. 
    In all structures in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
Sec. 25-76. - Replacement of asphalt pavement. 
    In case it is necessary to cut into asphalt pavement, all asphalt pavement shall be replaced by the city or its authorized agent and shall be paid for by the applicant at a rate to be set from time to time by the city council on each and every opening. An estimate of the number of square yards of asphalt pavement to be removed shall be specified in the application and the same shall be paid for by the applicant at the time application is made. Any additional amount of paving over and above the estimated amount shall be promptly paid for by the applicant, and in case the amount of pavement removed is not as much as specified in the estimate, the city shall promptly make refund to the applicant therefor. 
Sec. 25-77. - Excavations. 
(a)	Specifications generally. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city manager. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification (C12-19) except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(b)	Guarding; restoration of streets, sidewalks, etc. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(c)	Filling. All excavation or trenches shall be filled in a thorough and workmanlike manner, either by flooding or hand tamping. Additional filling shall be placed if necessary in excavations or trenches that have settled, and all surplus earth or any refuse shall be removed from the street by the applicant obtaining the permit. 
Sec. 25-78. - Storm water, runoff, cooling water. 
(a)	The present separated sanitary sewer, and the sanitary portion of the sewage disposal system shall be used for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage only. Downspouts, footing drains, weep tile, or any conduit that carries storm water or groundwater, alone or in combination with sanitary sewage, shall not be connected to the system, directly or indirectly. 
(b)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted air-conditioning water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer unless specifically permitted by the city manager. This water shall be discharged into storm sewers, dry wells or natural outlet as approved by the director, the county drain commissioner, state water resources commission or other such governmental agency having jurisdiction to make such determination. 
Secs. 25-79-25-132. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 92-3, § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 1992, repealed §§ 25-79-25-115, which pertained to regulatory provisions for sewers and sewage disposal. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER USER CHARGES 

Sec. 25-133. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms in this article shall be as follows: 
    City means the city of Lowell, Kent County, Michigan. 
    City council means the city council of the city. 
    City manager means the city manager of the city or his duly authorized designee. 
    Commercial user means a user engaged in the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business, or otherwise rendering a service. 
    Governmental user means a federal, state or local government user which has executive, legislative, judicial, administrative or regulatory activities. 
    Industrial user means a manufacturing or process facility engaged in a productive or profit making venture. 
    Institutional user means a user involved in a social, charitable, religious, educational or other special purpose activity. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    Readiness-to-serve charge means a charge levied on the users of the water system for the availability of water to each user and generally based on the size of the user's water meter (except for mobile home parks and apartment buildings), and generally intended to cover the capital cost of the system. 
    Residential user means a user whose premises or building is used primarily as a permanent domicile for one or more persons (transit lodging such as motels, hotels and motor inns are not included). 
    Water service charge means the sum of the commodity charge and the readiness-to-serve charge. 
    Water system or system means the city water system consisting of all plants, works, instrumentalities, lines and properties now or hereafter existing, used or useful in connection with the obtaining of water supply, its treatment, distribution and all other necessary functions. 
    User means either a residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental user of the water system. 
    Commodity charge means a charge levied on the users of the water system based on the actual volume of water used and generally intended to cover the operation and maintenance cost of the system. 
    User class means the classification (residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental) into which each user is categorized. 
Sec. 25-134. - Additional definitions. 
    Definitions of terms not defined in the preceding section shall be the same as those in sections 25-17 and 25-47 of this Code, if they are so defined in that section. 
Sec. 25-135. - Water service charges. 
(a)	Water service charges including any late payment penalties, interest and charges shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The water service charges shall be based upon the water usage of the user. The commodity charge and the readiness-to-serve charge for water service shall be specified separately. In addition, the city council shall from time to time establish charges for unmetered fire protection service. No free service shall be furnished by the system to the city or to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. The city shall pay for water service supplied to it or any of its departments or agencies at the rates established pursuant to this section from time to time. 
(b)	If there is evidence of a malfunctioning meter, the city manager shall have the authority to estimate the quantity of water on which the billing is made until such time as the malfunctioning meter is repaired or replaced. The estimate of usage shall be based on previous months of similar usage. 
(c)	Rates and charges established hereunder shall be reviewed annually by the city council and adjusted as needed to provide needed revenue to cover the system's costs and expenses. 
(d)	All users shall be notified at least annually of the amount of the commodity charge and of the amount of the readiness-to-serve charges per user class. 
Sec. 25-136. - Billing and enforcement. 
(a)	Lien. Water service charges, including any late payment penalties, interest and charges, shall constitute a lien on all premises served which lien shall become effective immediately upon the provision of water system service to the premises. Whenever such charges are delinquent and remain unpaid, the charges shall be entered on the next ad valorem property tax roll for the property served and collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes. The city treasurer shall, on or before March 1 of each year, turn such delinquent and unpaid charges over to the county treasurer in the same fashion as delinquent and unpaid ad valorem property taxes. Provided, however, such charges shall not be a lien on the property served if the owner of that property has leased the property, the owner, is not, according to a lease provision, liable for such water service charges, the city is so notified in a writing signed by both the owner and lessee and proof of such lease is provided the city as required by applicable law. Where the owner is not responsible for such charges, the lessee shall, before the commencement of water service to the premises, cause to be deposited with the city treasurer an amount equal to an estimated three (3) months water service charges and shall cause such deposit to continue at that level throughout the lease term. The city shall apply the funds in that deposit against any and all delinquent charges of the lessee. 
(b)	Discontinuance. The city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment of water service charges and rates when due. If water rates and charges for service furnished to any premises are not paid within twenty (20) days after the due date thereof, water service to such premises will be shut off and discontinued and will not be restored until all such charges and penalties have been paid and a deposit equal to that provided in subsection (a) has been paid. 
(c)	Other remedies. The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative of any and all other remedies under state law, common law and this Code. 
(d)	Billings. The city will bill users periodically as provided by resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 25-137. - Hearing. 
    The city manager may send to a user who has not paid sewer service charges within twenty (20) days of the date due, a notice that at the user's request a hearing will be scheduled with the city manager to show cause why the user's billing is incorrect. If the city is considering discontinuing the user's city water service, such a notice shall be sent giving the user an opportunity to request a hearing with the city manager to show cause why such service should not be discontinued. Such hearings shall be informal and the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
Sec. 25-138. - Audit. 
    The system shall be audited annually as part of the annual city audit. 
Secs. 25-139-25-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USER CHARGES AND SURCHARGES 

Sec. 25-153. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms in this article shall be as follows: 
    City means the city of Lowell, Kent County, Michigan. 
    City council means the city council of the city. 
    City manager means the city manager of the city or his duly authorized designee. 
    Commercial user means a user engaged in the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business, or otherwise rendering a service. 
    Debt service charge means a charge levied on the users of the sewer system for the user's proportionate share of the principal and interest payable on all indebtedness issued to fiance the acquisition of the sewer system and the treatment plant. 
    Governmental user means a federal, state or local government user which has executive, legislative, judicial, administrative or regulatory activities. 
    Interjurisdictional sanitary sewer use agreement means the agreement between the city and the township dated as of August 1, 1987, relating to the use of the sewer system and the treatment of sanitary sewage at the treatment plant as such agreement may be amended from time to time. 
    Industrial user means a manufacturing or process facility engaged in a productive or profit making venture that discharges a trade or process waste to the system and all users who discharge industrial waste into the system. 
    Institutional user means a user involved in a social, charitable, religious, educational or other special purpose activity. 
    Operation, maintenance and repair (or OM&R) cost shall mean the cost to operate and maintain the system and treatment plant plus replacement costs. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    Replacement costs means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance during the service life of the system and treatment works for which they were designed and constructed. 
    Residential user means a user whose premises or building is used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons and whose wastes originate from normal living activities of its inhabitants. 
    Sewer service charge means the sum of the user charge and the debt service charge. 
    Sewer system or system means all sanitary sewer lines, lift stations, pumping facilities, sanitary sewer collection facilities and their appurtenances which the city has or shall have possession of and operating responsibility for (whether owned by the city or not), either now in existence in the city or hereafter acquired or constructed in the city, together with all works, plants instrumentalities and properties used or useful in connection therewith in collecting sanitary sewage and transmitting and conveying such collected sanitary sewage to the treatment plant, and all extension, enlargements and improvements thereto in the city. 
    Surcharge means an extra charge to cover the cost of treating and sludge disposal of extra strength sewage or slugs. 
    Township means the Township of Lowell, Kent County, Michigan. 
    Township board means the township board of the township. 
    Treatment plant or treatment works shall mean the city's wastewater treatment plant and all equipment and appurtenances, either now in existence or hereafter acquired or constructed by the city and all extensions, enlargements and improvements thereto in the city. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of sewage into the treatment works. 
    User charge means a charge levied on the users of the sewer system for the user's proportionate share of the cost of the operation and maintenance (including replacement costs) of the sewer system and treatment plant. 
    User charge system means the system of charges levied on users of the system. 
    User class means the classification (residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental) into which each user is categorized. 
Sec. 25-154. - Additional definitions. 
    Definitions of terms not defined in the preceding section shall be the same as those in sections 25-17 and 25-47 of this Code, if they are so defined in that section. 
Sec. 25-155. - Abbreviations. 
    The meaning of abbreviations used in this Article and rules promulgated pursuant hereto shall be as follows: 
(1)	gpd shall mean gallons per day.
(2)	l shall mean liter.
(3)	MG shall mean million gallons.
(4)	mg shall mean milligrams.
(5)	mgl shall mean milligrams per liter.
(6)	ppm shall mean parts per million.
(7)	u shall mean microgram.
(8)	u/l shall mean micrograms per liter.
(9)	g3 shall mean gallons. 
(10)	g shall mean one thousand (1000) gallons.
Sec. 25-156. - Sewer service charges. 
(a)	Sewer service charges including any late payment penalties, interest and charges shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The sewer service charges shall be based upon the water usage by the user, upon the actual sewer discharge flow or upon residential equivalencies. The user charge and the debt service charge for sewer service shall be specified separately. No free service shall be furnished by the system to the city or to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. The city shall pay for sewer service supplied to it or any of its departments or agencies at the rates established pursuant to this section from time to time. User charges for the township shall be based on the actual costs of transmitting and treating the wastewater of the township as determined by the interjurisdictional sanitary sewer use agreement. Debt service charges for the township shall be based on the township's proportional share of the capital costs of the sewer system as determined by the interjurisdictional sanitary sewer use agreement. 
(b)	If a user is connected to the sewer system but not to the city's water system, the city may, at the user's expense install a water meter with a remote reader on the user's well or other water supply. The user charge will then be based on the readings from that meter in the same manner and at the same rates applicable to user who are also connected to the city's water system. All users which are not residential users shall, at their expense, have meters installed and their rates so based. Residential users who are not connected to the city's water system and who do not have a water meter on the user's well or other water supply, shall be billed based upon a table of residential equivalencies to be adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(c)	Industrial users may as established from time to time by resolution of the city council be required to install, at their own expense, a sewage meter and sewage sampling equipment of a type and at a location acceptable to the city, for the purpose of determining their user charges. 
(d)	If there is evidence of a malfunctioning meter, the city manager shall have the authority to estimate the quantity of water on which the billing is made until such time as the malfunctioning meter is repaired or replaced. The estimate of usage shall be based on previous months of similar usage. 
(e)	Rates and charges established hereunder shall be reviewed annually by the city council and adjusted as needed to provide needed revenue to cover the system's costs and expenses. 
(f)	All users shall be notified at least annually of the amount of the user charge and of the amount of the debt service charges per user class. 
Sec. 25-157. - Surcharges. 
    Surcharges shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be billed and collected with sewer service charges. 
Sec. 25-158. - Billing and enforcement. 
(a)	Lien. Sewer service charges, including any late payment penalties, interest and charges, shall constitute a lien on all premises served which lien shall become effective immediately upon the provision of sewer system service to the premises. Whenever such charges are delinquent and remain unpaid, the charges shall be entered on the next ad valorem property tax roll for the property served and collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes. The city treasurer shall, on or before March 1 of each year, turn such delinquent and unpaid charges over to the county treasurer in the same fashion as delinquent and unpaid ad valorem property taxes. Provided, however, such charges shall not be a lien on the property served if the owner of that property has leased the property, the owner, is not, according to a lease provision, liable for such sewer service charges, the city is so notified in a writing signed by both the owner and lessee and proof of such lease is provided the city as required by applicable law. Where the owner is not responsible for such charges, the lessee shall, before the commencement of sewer service to the premises, cause to be deposited with the city treasurer an amount equal to an estimated three (3) months sewer service charges and shall cause such deposit to continue at that level throughout the lease term. The city shall apply the funds in that deposit against any and all delinquent charges of the lessee. 
(b)	Discontinuance. The city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment of sewer service charges and rates when due. If sewer rates and charges for service furnished to any premises are not paid within twenty (20) days after the due date thereof, water service to such premises will be shut off and discontinued and will not be restored until all such charges and penalties have been paid and a deposit equal to that provided in subsection (a) has been paid. 
(c)	Other remedies. The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative of any and all other remedies under state law, common law and this Code. 
(d)	Billings. The city will bill users periodically as provided by resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 25-159. - Hearing. 
    The city manager may send to a user who has not paid sewer service charges within twenty (20) days of the date due, a notice that at the user's request a hearing will be scheduled with the city manager to show cause why the user's billing is incorrect. If the city is considering discontinuing the user's city water service, such a notice shall be sent giving the user an opportunity to request a hearing with the city manager to show cause why such service should not be discontinued. Such hearings shall be informal and the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
Sec. 25-160. - Audit. 
    The system shall be audited annually as part of the annual city audit. 
Secs. 25-161-15-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEWER DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 25-200. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Establish uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors to the city's wastewater collection and treatment system and to enable the city to comply with applicable state and federal statutes and regulations including specifically the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR, Part 403, as from time to time modified and revised; 
(2)	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's sanitary sewer wastewater collection and treatment system which will: 
a.	Interfere with the operation of or cause damage to the sanitary sewer system;
b.	Cause violation of the city's NPDES permit;
c.	Contaminate the sludge;
d.	Pass through the sanitary sewer system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere; 
e.	Pose a health threat to city employees; or
f.	Be otherwise incompatible with the sanitary sewer system.
(3)	Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the sanitary sewer system and to provide waste minimization; 
(4)	Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the sanitary sewer system; and
(5)	Establish an administrative procedure for review of city decisions under this article.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-201. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD-biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR-Code of Federal Regulations 
COD-chemical oxygen demand 
DNR-Michigan Department of Natural Resources 
EPA-United States Environmental Protection Agency 
l-liter 
mg-milligrams 
mg/l-milligrams per liter 
NPDES-National pollutant discharge elimination system 
SIC-standard industrial classification 
TSS-total suspended solids 
USC-United States Code 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-202. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the following definitions apply to the terms used in this article: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1987, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq. 
    Authorized representative means: 
(1)	In the case of a corporation, a president or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function; 
(2)	In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor; and
(3)	An authorized representative of the individuals designated above if (a) such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the sanitary sewer system originates; (b) the authorization is in writing and (c) the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Bulkhead means any method or device that prevents a discharge to the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard means a regulation promulgated by the EPA under 33 USC 1311 and 1317, which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    City means the City of Lowell, Kent County, Michigan. 
    Concentration means the amount of a substance in weight, molds, or equivalents contained in unit volume. 
    Domestic waste means human waste and other waste related to personal or residential sanitation. 
    Domestic wastewater means wastewater that contains only domestic waste. 
    Existing source means any building, structure, facility or installation that is discharging or that may discharge pollutants to the sanitary sewer system and that is not a new source. 
    Flow proportioned composite sample means a combination of individual samples of equal volume taken at equal intervals of flow without consideration of the time between individual samples. 
    Grab sample means a sample taken on a one-time basis without consideration for flow or time. 
    Industrial user or user means any person who introduces pollutants into the sanitary sewer system from any non-domestic source regulated under the Act, state law or local ordinance. 
    Interference means any discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)	Inhibits or disrupts the sanitary sewer system and any of its processes or operations, or its sludge use or disposable; and 
(2)	Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1342, et seq. 
    New source means any building, structure, facility or installation that is discharging or that may discharge pollutants to the sanitary sewer system and for which the construction commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards that would be applicable to the source and that (i) is constructed at a site at which no other source is located, or (ii) totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source, or (iii) has process or production equipment substantially independent from the equipment of an existing source at the same site. 
    Pass-through means a discharge which exits the sanitary sewer system into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste or any other contaminant. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction, elimination or alteration of the nature of pollutant properties before or instead of discharging the pollutants to the sanitary sewer system. 
    Pretreatment facility means a facility that reduces, eliminates or alters the nature of pollutant properties before or instead of discharging the pollutants to the sanitary sewer system. 
    Pretreatment standard or standard means any local, state or federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits. 
    Sanitary sewer system means the sanitary sewer system of the city as the same is now constituted, all property, real and personal, used and useful therefor, all apparatus and equipment used in connection therewith, and all acquisitions, replacements, enlargements, improvements, extensions, additions and betterments that may be made thereto at any time hereafter used in the collection, transportation, storage, pumping, treatment and final disposition of sewage. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user (i) subject to a categorical pretreatment standard; and (ii) unless the city makes a finding that a user has no reasonable potential to adversely affect the sanitary sewer system, any industrial user that (a) discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the sanitary sewer system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) or (b) discharges process wastewater that makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the sanitary sewer system; or (iii) is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the sanitary sewer system or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. Within thirty (30) days after the city determines that a user is a significant industrial user, the city shall notify the user of the city's determination and the particular regulations that apply as a result of this determination. 
    Significant noncompliance means: 
(1)	Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)	Technical review criteria ("TRC") violations in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)	Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longerterm average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, or pass-through or endangerment to the health of city employees or the general public; 
(4)	Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)	Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone; 
(6)	Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic compliance reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)	Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
(8)	Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
    Slug discharge means any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    State means the State of Michigan. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the city's sanitary sewer system, or his designee. 
    Time proportioned composite sample means a combination of individual samples of equal volume taken at equal intervals of time, without consideration of the volume or rate of flow. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants identified as toxic pursuant to federal or state statutes or regulations. 
    Upset means an incident for which the user may have a defense to an enforcement action according to section 25-346(b). 
    User means any person who discharges or may discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
    Wastewater means any water that contains pollutants. 
    Waters of the state means: 
(1)	Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of this state subject to its jurisdiction, including all ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches and public drainage systems within this state, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage; and 
(2)	The flood plain free-flowing waters determined by the DNR on the basis of 100-year flood frequency. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-203. - General prohibitions. 
(a)	In general. Users may not discharge to the sanitary sewer system except in compliance with this article. 
(b)	Interference. Users may not discharge any pollutant to the sanitary sewer system in a quantity or concentration that, alone or in conjunction with other discharges: 
(1)	Inhibits or disrupts the sanitary sewer system or its sludge processes and
(2)	a.	Is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit; or
b.	Increases the magnitude or duration of a violation; or
c.	Prevents the use or disposal of sewage sludge in compliance with any applicable local, state or federal statutes, ordinances, regulations, permits, or other requirements; or 
d.	Inhibits the marketing of treated sewage sludge.
(c)	Pass-through. Users may not discharge to the sanitary sewer system any pollutant in a quantity or concentration that, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, is a cause of a discharge from the sanitary sewer system to waters of the state that violates the city's NPDES permit or increases the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-204. - Prohibited discharges. 
    Users may not discharge the following substances to the sanitary sewer system: 
(1)	Pollutants that create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewage system, including but not limited to pollutants that result in wastewater with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees celsius; 
(2)	Wastewater having a corrosive property capable of causing damage to the structures, equipment or employees of the sanitary sewer system, including but not limited to wastewater with a pH less than the limit set forth in section 25-205(b); 
(3)	Solid or viscous substances that may obstruct the flow in a sewer or otherwise cause interference with the operation of the sanitary sewer system including, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension, or any material which can be disposed of as trash; 
(4)	Wastewater with a temperature that inhibits biological activity in the sanitary sewer system including, but not limited to, any wastewater that causes the effluent to the treatment plant to exceed forty (40) degrees celsius (one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit) or any wastewater or vapor having a temperature higher than sixty (60) degrees celsius (one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit) at the point of entrance to the sanitary sewer system; 
(5)	Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amount that cause interference or pass-through, including, but not limited to, amounts in excess of the limit set forth in section 25-205(a); 
(6)	Pollutants that result in the presence of gases within the sanitary sewer system that:
a.	Cause an odor nuisance; or
b.	Cause workplace conditions in violation of any applicable workplace health or safety standard. 
(7)	Hauled waste, except for hauled waste that:
a.	Consists only of domestic wastewater unless specifically authorized by the city pursuant to policies and procedures established by the city; and 
b.	Is discharged at a point designated by the city.
(8)	Waste not typically discharged to a sanitary sewer system unless specifically authorized by the city pursuant to policies and procedures established by the city; 
(9)	Any substance that may cause the sanitary sewer system's treatment residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, that causes interference with the reclamation process, or that inhibits the marketing of treated sewage sludge; 
(10)	Any wastewater that contains radioactive wastes, except when:
a.	The user is authorized to use radioactive material by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission or other governmental agency with authority to regulate the use of radioactive materials; and 
b.	The wastewater is discharged in compliance with the regulations of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission and any other applicable local or state regulations. 
(11)	Any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, non-contact cooling water, or other unpolluted water, except as approved by the city. 
(12)	Anti-freeze, motor oil, brake fluid, transmission fluid, hydraulic fluid, cleaning solvents, oil-based paint, and paint thinners. 
(13)	Any non-domestic wastewater before the city has approved a notice of intent submitted according to section 25-250; 
(14)	Any mass, concentration or volume of a substance in excess of the amount allowed in the user's wastewater discharge permit; and 
(15)	Any substance which may create a public nuisance, cause hazard to life or prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-205. - Pretreatment standards for specific pollutants-Local limits. 
(a)	Users may not discharge into the sanitary sewer system any wastewater containing concentrations of pollutants greater than the following limits: 
Limits for Organic Parameters 
ParameterDaily Maximum
Limit1(ug/l) Monthly Average
Limit1(ug/l) Arsenic4838Cadmium4234Chromium (total)180140Copper840620Cyanide (total)76Lead160130Nickel1170940Silver76Zinc28502280Mercuryn.d.n.d.BTEX2020CBOD-53002,5002 Phosphorus (total)10202 Suspended solids3002,5002 Grease, oil and fats100100 
1These limits are an absolute maximum when a pollutant is measured by grab sample. When a pollutant is measured by a flow proportioned or time proportioned composite sample, these standards apply to the composite sample. 
2Subject to surcharges pursuant to section 25-300(d). 
(b)	Users may not discharge wastewater with a pH of 5.5 s.u. or less, except as provided in subsection (c)(2) below or with a pH of 9.5 s.u. or more. 
(c)	(1)	If a pollutant is regulated by both a categorical pretreatment standard and this section, then the more stringent standard applies, except as provided in subsection (2) below. 
(2)	If a user is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard for pH and if pH is continuously monitored, then the user may discharge wastewater with a pH less than the categorical pretreatment standard but greater than 5.0 s.u. for a period up to fifteen (15) consecutive minutes. 
(d)	For purposes of determining compliance with the limits set forth in this section, users shall analyze samples according to section 25-276. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 95-1, § 1, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 98-6, § 1, 4-20-98)
Sec. 25-206. - Pretreatment requirements. 
(a)	Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with the most stringent of this article, categorical pretreatment standards, state standards and conditions of any wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article, and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations, and with any other pretreatment standards by applicable deadlines. 
(b)	Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city before construction of the facility for review and approval. The review and approval of plans and operating procedures does not relieve an industrial user from complying with the provisions of this article and permit conditions. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and approved by the city prior to the initiation of the changes. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-207. - Dilution prohibition. 
    Unless authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, users may not increase the use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-208. - Bypass prohibition. 
(a)	Bypass is prohibited.
(b)	Users shall report bypasses according to section 25-256. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-209. - New source compliance. 
    Before beginning to discharge, new sources shall install, have in operating condition and start-up all pollution control equipment needed to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, new sources shall meet all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-210. - Categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)	Existing sources shall comply with any applicable categorical pretreatment standard within three years from the date that the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance date is specified in the standard. 
(b)	Existing sources that become users after promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall comply with the categorical pretreatment standard for existing sources on the commencement of discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)	Limits in a categorical pretreatment standard apply to the effluent from the process regulated by the standard regardless of the site of the effluent discharge. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-211. - Calculating equivalent limits. 
(a)	When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the city may convert the limits to equivalent limits expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration. 
(b)	The city shall calculate equivalent mass-per day limits by multiplying the limits in the standard by the user's average rate of production. The average rate of production shall be based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual long-term daily production, such as the average daily production during a representative year. For new sources, projected production may be used. 
(c)	The city shall calculate equivalent concentration limits by dividing the mass limits derived according to subsection (b) above by the average daily flow rate of the user's regulated process wastewater. This average daily flow rate shall be based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual longterm average flow rate, such as the average daily flow rate during a representative year. 
(d)	If the city calculates equivalent limits according to this section, the city shall calculate both an equivalent daily maximum limit and an equivalent long-term average limit for the same averaging period as used in the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, such as a monthly, thirty-day, or four-day average or other daily average. The city shall use the same production and flow rates to calculate the equivalent maximum limit and the equivalent monthly, thirty-day, or four-day average limit or other daily average. 
(e)	A user subject to limits calculated according to this section shall be subject to those limits until the user has notified the city in writing of a change in production according to section 25-257. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-212. - Combined wastestreams. 
(a)	The following definitions apply to the terms used in this section:
(1)	Wastestream means wastewater from a particular process. 
(2)	Regulated stream means wastewater from a particular process that is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)	Combined wastestream means any combination of regulated streams and wastestreams not subject to a categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)	Combined treatment facility means the equipment and processes used to reduce the mass or concentration of pollutants in a combined wastestream before discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)	When a regulated stream is mixed before treatment with other wastewaters, the superintendent may calculate alternative limits for the combined wastestream using either of the following equations: 
NC;sub\sub; F;sub\sub; FT - FD CT =           N F;sub\sub; FT  
FT - FD MT = NM;sub\sub; F;sub\sub;i      NF;sub\sub;  
Where: 
Cj =  the categorical pretreatment standard concentration limit for a pollutant in regulated stream i 
CT =  the alternative concentration limit for the combined wastestream 
M;sub\sub; =  the categorical pretreatment standard mass limit for a pollutant in regulated stream i 
MT =  the alternative mass limit for a pollutant in the combined wastestream 
N =  the total number of regulated streams 
F;sub\sub; =  the average daily flow over at least thirty (30) days of stream i to the extent that it is regulated for the pollutant 
FT =  the average daily flow over at least thirty (30) days through the combined treatment facility 
FD =  the average daily flow over at least thirty (30) days from: 
(1)	a.	Boiler blowdown streams, non-contact cooling water, stormwater streams, and demineralizer backwash streams, except as provided in b. below; 
b.	The city may exclude a wastestream listed in a. above from FD if the user has requested the change in classification and provided engineering data, production data, monitoring results, or other information demonstrating that the wastestream contains a significant amount of a pollutant and the combination of the wastestream before treatment with regulated streams will result in a substantial reduction of that pollutant; 
(2)	Domestic wastewater when this wastewater is not regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard; or 
(3)	Wastestreams exempted from categorical pretreatment standards for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.	The pollutants of concern are not detectable in the effluent from the user;
b.	The pollutants of concern are presently only in trace amounts and are neither causing nor likely to cause toxic effects; 
c.	The pollutants of concern are present in quantities too small to be effectively reduced by technologies known to the city; or 
d.	The wastestream contains only pollutants that are compatible with the sanitary sewer system. 
(4)	When deriving alternative limits, the superintendent shall calculate both an alternative maximum limit and an alternative long-term average limit. 
(5)	The user shall comply with the alternative limits until the city modifies the limits.
(6)	A user shall immediately report to the city any significant changes in the values to calculate the alternative limits. The city shall make any necessary changes to the alternative limits within thirty (30) days after the user reports the changes. 
(7)	a.	When wastewaters are combined before treatment at a centralized waste treater, alternative discharge limits shall be derived according to (3)b. above, except as provided in (7)b. below. 
b.	The City may impose alternative discharge limits determined by the city's best professional judgment when: 
1.	The City determines that the calculation of alternative discharge limits according to this section is not practicable; and 
2.	The DNR has approved the alternative limits.
(8)	When necessary to ensure that neither dilution nor mixing is used instead of treatment to achieve compliance with the applicable limits, the city shall require segregated treatment of wastestreams or other measures. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-213. - Spill prevention and slug control plans. 
(a)	(1)	Users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the sanitary sewer system by developing spill prevention plans. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Spill prevention plans, including the facilities and the operating procedures, shall be approved by the city before acquisition or construction of the new facilities. 
(2)	Industrial users that store hazardous substances shall not contribute to the sanitary sewer system after the effective date of this article unless a spill prevention plan has been approved by the city. Approval of such plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage and transportation of hazardous substances. 
(b)	The city shall evaluate each significant industrial user at least once every two (2) years, and other industrial users as necessary, to determine whether such user needs a plan to control slug discharges. If the city decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)	A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2)	A description of stored chemicals;
(3)	Procedures for immediately notifying the city of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under section 25-205 with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days; 
(4)	If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-214. - Notification of violation or change of discharge. 
(a)	In the case of any discharge by an individual user in violation of this article or a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article, or in the case of any other discharge that could cause problems to the sanitary sewer system, the user shall immediately notify the city of the discharge by telephone. The notification shall include: 
(1)	The date, time, location and duration of the discharge;
(2)	The type of waste, including concentration and volume; and
(3)	Any corrective actions taken.
(b)	Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial user shall submit a written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures that will be taken by the user to prevent similar future discharges. 
(c)	Any notification required by this section shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability resulting from the discharge, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed under this article or other applicable state or federal law. 
(d)	All users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-215. - Employee notification. 
    Each user shall permanently post a notice in a prominent place advising all employees to call the city in the event of a dangerous discharge for which notification is required and shall advise all employees who may cause or be injured by such a discharge of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-216. - Records. 
(a)	Industrial users shall retain and make available, upon request of authorized representatives of the city, the DNR or the EPA, all records required to be collected by the user pursuant to this article or any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)	Such records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years after their collection. 
(c)	The retention period shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation related to compliance with this article or a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article, the operation of the sanitary sewer system pretreatment program or when requested by the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-217. - Confidential information. 
(a)	Information and data about an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections, shall be available to the public unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When such a confidentiality claim is asserted, the information shall be treated as confidential until a determination is made by the city. Effluent data shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(b)	When the person furnishing a report satisfies the city that such person has made the demonstration required by (a) above, the portions of a report, questionnaire, permit application, etc., which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection, except by the DNR or EPA for uses related to this article, the city's NPDES permit or pretreatment program. Confidential portions shall be available for use by the DNR or EPA in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the information. Effluent data will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Secs. 25-218-25-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 25-225. - Users that need permits. 
(a)	The following users may not discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer system without a wastewater discharge permit: 
(1)	Any significant industrial user;
(2)	Any user required by state pretreatment requirements to obtain a permit;
(3)	Any user providing pretreatment; and
(4)	Any other user directed by the city to apply for a permit.
(b)	Existing users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit by subsection (a) above must apply for a permit within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this article, and shall obtain the permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this article. 
(c)	New sources required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit by subsection (a) above must apply for and receive a permit prior to discharging pollutants into the sanitary sewer system. 
(d)	Any user not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for existing discharges must apply for and receive a permit prior to changing the user's discharge in such a manner that the resulting discharge would require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-226. - Permit application. 
    Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application on the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by a fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council. An authorized representative of the user shall sign and swear to the truth of the application. In support of the application, the user shall submit the following information: 
(1)	User's name, address, location (if different from the address) and the name of owners and operator of user; 
(2)	User's SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)	Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in section 25-205 of this article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. 
(4)	Time and duration of discharge;
(5)	Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation and a current water use schematic; 
(7)	Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)	The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement signed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)	The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any categorical pretreatment standards or which are described in section 25-205. Both daily maximum and average concentration shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. Samples should be taken immediately downstream of pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with wastewater regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards; 
(10)	If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.); 
b.	No increment referred to in (1) above shall exceed nine (9) months; and
c.	Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the Increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports; 
(11)	Each product and/or by-product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(12)	Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(13)	Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of the facilities and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; and 
(14)	Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After acceptance and evaluation of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-227. - Permit elements. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall include: 
(1)	The user's name and address;
(2)	A description of the processes and operations to which the permit applies;
(3)	Applicable federal, state and city pretreatment standards and requirements;
(4)	Sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements, including the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, sample collection techniques and analytical requirements; 
(5)	Duration of the permit;
(6)	Requirements to pay applicable fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the sanitary sewer system; 
(7)	Any limitations on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(8)	Requirements for the installation and maintenance of sampling and monitoring facilities;
(9)	Any applicable compliance schedule, provided that the permit may not contain compliance schedules that extend beyond any applicable federal deadline; 
(10)	Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge reports or certification statements; 
(11)	Requirements for retaining and preserving records relating to wastewater discharges and for allowing the city access to these records; 
(12)	Requirements for notification to the city of any new wastewater constituents or any change in long-term production rates or wastewater flow rates of twenty (20) percent or more; 
(13)	Requirements for notification of spills, potential problems to the sanitary sewer system, including slug loadings, upsets or violations; 
(14)	Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of pollution control equipment;
(15)	Requirements to develop and implement spill and slug control plans; a statement regarding the applicable civil and criminal penalties for violating pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(16)	A statement indicating that the permit is not transferable to any other person unless the new user applies to the city for a transfer of the permit before the user takes possession or control of the processes or operations to which the permit applies; a statement that the user consents to inspection and sampling by the city; and 
(17)	Requirements regarding the necessity of having a DNR certified wastewater pretreatment operator be responsible for operating the user's pretreatment facilities; 
(18)	Any other appropriate requirements.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-228. - Basis for effluent limitations. 
    Effluent limitations shall be based upon the more stringent of the following: 
(1)	Categorical pretreatment standards;
(2)	State pretreatment requirements; or
(3)	Local limitations.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-229. - Permit duration. 
    Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-230. - Permit modifications. 
(a)	Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement or such shorter time as specified within the standard or requirement, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards or requirements shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time prescribed by such standard. The user shall apply for a modified wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of a new pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(b)	A user must reapply for a wastewater discharge permit: (1) whenever the mass loading of pollutants contained in the permitted discharge exceeds the average daily quantity applied for by greater than ten (10) percent and/or (2) prior to any new introduction of pollutants or any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants introduced into the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)	A user may reapply for a wastewater discharge permit whenever the user believes that some of the permit requirements no longer apply. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-231. - Permit reissuance. 
    A permittee shall submit to the city an application for reissuance of a wastewater discharge permit at least sixty (60) days before the expiration date of the current permit. The application shall consist of a written request for reissuance of the permit, a statement indicating whether the user is in compliance with all of the conditions of the existing permit and this article, and a description of any circumstances that have changed since the current permit was issued or modified. An authorized representative of the user shall sign and swear to the truth of the application. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-232. - Permit transfer. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for processes or operations at a specific location. Wastewater discharge permits are not transferable to another person, process, operation or location without prior approval from the city. Before taking possession or control of the processes or operations to which a permit applies, the person taking possession or control shall apply to the city for transfer of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Secs. 25-231-25-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REPORTING 

Sec. 25-250. - Notice of intent. 
(a)	At least sixty (60) days before commencing or changing a discharge, the following persons shall submit a notice of intent with the city: 
(1)	A person proposing to discharge any nondomestic wastewater not previously reported to the city; 
(2)	A person taking possession or control of an existing facility that discharges or may discharge process wastewater into the sanitary sewer system; 
(3)	A person constructing a new facility that will discharge process wastewater into the sanitary sewer system; 
(4)	A person changing the physical size or operations at a facility to the extent that wastewater volume or content is substantially changed, including, but not limited to, to any change in wastewater volume of twenty (20) percent or more; and 
(5)	A person commencing or modifying a discharge of hazardous wastes that requires reporting under section 25-259. 
(b)	The notice of intent shall:
(1)	Be submitted in writing on a form provided by the city;
(2)	Include sufficient information to allow the city to evaluate the effect of the proposed discharge on the sanitary sewer system and operations and to assure compliance with this article; 
(3)	Contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user; and 
(4)	Be accompanied by a payment of any fees established by the city.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-251. - Baseline monitoring report. 
(a)	If a user discharges wastewater from a process that is regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard, then the user shall submit to the city a baseline monitoring report within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the categorical pretreatment standard. This report shall include all of the information required by subsection (c) below. 
(b)	New sources subject to categorical pretreatment standards and existing sources that become users after the promulgation of an applicable pretreatment standard shall submit to the city a baseline monitoring report at least ninety (90) days before the commencement of discharge. This report shall contain the information required by subsection (c) below. New sources shall also discuss the method of pretreatment that the source intends to use. New sources shall estimate the information required in subsection (c)(4) and (6). 
(c)	Baseline monitoring reports shall include the following information:
(1)	The name, address, and location of the user and the names of the owners and operators;
(2)	A list of environmental control permits held by or for the facility;
(3)	A description of production processes and products, the rate of production, the SIC and a schematic diagram of the facility that indicates where processes regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard discharge to the sanitary sewer system; 
(4)	The average and maximum flows to the sanitary sewer system from each process regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard and from any other stream in a combined wastestream; 
(5)	The applicable categorical pretreatment standards;
(6)	a.	Except as provided in subsection b. below, the results of sampling and analysis that identify the nature and concentration or mass of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average values shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. Sampling and analysis shall be done according to division 4; 
b.	Representative historical data may be used if approved by the city;
(7)	The time, date and place of sampling and the method of analysis;
(8)	A certification that the data is representative of normal work cycles and discharges to the sanitary sewer system; 
(9)	A discussion of whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis. If the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not being met, the report shall include a discussion of the changes to operations, maintenance procedures or equipment necessary to achieve compliance; 
(10)	If changes to operations, maintenance procedures or equipment are needed to achieve compliance, the report shall include the shortest possible implementation schedule. The completion date may not be after the compliance date for any applicable categorical pretreatment standard. The schedule shall specify the dates of commencement and completion of major events. The time between any two (2) major events shall be less than nine (9) months; and 
(11)	Any other information required by the city.
(d)	Baseline monitoring reports shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-252. - Progress reports. 
(a)	Within fourteen (14) days after any of the dates in a schedule required by section 25-251(c)(10), the user shall submit to the city a written progress report. At a minimum, this report shall state whether the required event was completed by the specified date. If the required event is not completed, the report shall give the reason for the delay, the efforts made to return to the schedule and the date when the required event will be completed. 
(b)	Progress reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-253. - Ninety-day reports. 
(a)	If a user is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, the user shall submit to the city a ninety-day report that includes the information required by section 25-251(c)(4) through (10). If a user is subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated according to 40 CFR 403.6(c), then the user shall include a reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term production rate. If a user's categorical pretreatment standards are expressed in production-base standards or another measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the sampling period. 
(b)	Users shall submit the ninety-day report within ninety (90) days after the compliance date for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. New sources shall submit the report within ninety (90) days after the commencement of discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)	Ninety-day reports shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-254. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)	Any user with a wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the city periodic compliance reports according to the schedule in the user's wastewater discharge permit, but in no event no less often than semi-annually. 
(b)	Periodic compliance reports shall include all of the information required by the user's wastewater discharge permit. At a minimum, these reports shall include: 
(1)	The name, mailing address and street address of the user;
(2)	The wastewater discharge permit number; and
(3)	Sample results for the regulated pollutants, sample date, sample location and sample type. 
(c)	If a user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the sampling and analysis procedures required by this article, then the user shall include the results of that monitoring in the periodic compliance report. 
(d)	For any wastewaters subject to categorical pretreatment standards that have been shipped off-site for disposal, periodic compliance reports shall include the category, manufacturing process, volume and destination. 
(e)	Users shall report sample results before the last day of the month after the month in which the samples were collected. 
(f)	Periodic compliance reports shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-255. - Report of violation and resampling. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall: 
(1)	Notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation;
(2)	Provide a written report with sample results to the city within five (5) days after becoming aware of the violation; and 
(3)	Repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-256. - Bypass reports. 
(a)	If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, then the user shall notify the city at least ten (10) days before the bypass, if possible, or otherwise immediately. 
(b)	If a user has a bypass that causes a violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement and the user did not anticipate the bypass, then the user shall: 
(1)	Orally notify the city of the bypass within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the bypass; and 
(2)	Provide a written notification within five (5) days after becoming aware of the bypass that describes: 
a.	The bypass and its cause;
b.	The duration of the bypass with exact dates and times or the anticipated time it is expected to continue if the user has not yet corrected the bypass; and 
c.	The steps taken or planned to prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
(c)	The reports required by this section shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-257. - Reports of changed production levels. 
(a)	If a user's wastewater discharge permit incorporates equivalent mass or concentration limits and if the user's long-term production rate will change by twenty (20) percent or more, then the user shall notify the city within two (2) days after determining that the production level will change. 
(b)	This notification shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-258. - Reporting of upsets, spills, other slugs and emergencies. 
(a)	Users shall immediately notify the city of an upset, spill or other slug.
(b)	The notice required shall include:
(1)	The location, date and time of the discharge;
(2)	The character and volume of the discharged material; and
(3)	Containment or other corrective action taken by the user.
(c)	Within five (5) days after the upset, spill or other slug, the user shall submit to the city a written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar occurrences in the future. 
(d)	The report required by section (c) shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(e)	Users shall immediately notify the city of any emergency that may affect the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-259. - Hazardous waste report. 
(a)	A user shall submit a hazardous waste report to the city, the DNR and the EPA if the user discharges to the sanitary sewer system: 
(1)	Any amount of substances that if otherwise disposed would be acutely hazardous substances according to 40 CFR 261.30(d) or 261.33(e); or 
(2)	Substances that:
a.	If otherwise disposed would be listed as characteristic hazardous waste according to 40 CFR 261; and 
b.	Are discharged in quantities of fifteen (15) kilograms or more per month.
(b)	(1)	Hazardous waste reports shall include:
a.	The name of the hazardous waste;
b.	The hazardous waste number;
c.	Whether the discharge is batch, continuous or another type; and a certification that the user has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the greatest degree economically practicable. 
(2)	If the user discharges to the sanitary sewer system more than 100 kilograms per month of substances that if otherwise disposed would be a hazardous waste, then the hazardous waste report shall include the following information to the extent that it is known to the user: 
a.	The hazardous constituents contained in the waste;
b.	The mass and concentration of the hazardous constituents in the wastestream discharged during each month; and 
c.	The mass of hazardous constituents the user expects to discharge during the next twelve (12) months. 
(c)	Users shall submit the hazardous waste report:
(1)	Before July 1, 1992, if the user is currently subject to this section;
(2)	Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the commencement of discharge of any listed or characteristic hazardous waste in quantities that make the user subject to this section; and 
(3)	Within ninety (90) days after new federal or state regulations define as a hazardous waste substances that the user discharges in quantities that make the user subject to this section. 
(d)	Only one (1) report is required for each hazardous waste discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Users shall report changes in the quantity or frequency of the discharge according to section 25-250. 
(e)	If other reports under this division have included the information that would be in the hazardous waste report, then a hazardous waste report is not required. 
(f)	Hazardous waste reports shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-260. - Reporting requirements for users other than those users subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)	Users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall report to the city according to the requirements of the city. 
(b)	Significant industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the city reports according to section 25-254. 
(c)	The reports required by this section shall be based upon sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and performed according to the techniques set forth in division 4 or other techniques approved by the city. 
(d)	Any reports required by this section shall contain the certification set forth in section 25-263 and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-261. - Review of proposed treatment facilities. 
    If a user is planning to install or modify treatment facilities or operations to comply with a categorical pretreatment standard, a pretreatment standard set forth in section 25-205, a wastewater discharge permit condition, or an order of the city, then the user shall provide the city with plans, specifications and operating procedures for the proposed facilities. The city may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans, specifications and operating procedures. A user may not begin discharging from the treatment facilities until the user has satisfied the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-262. - Other reports. 
    In addition to the reports required by sections 25-250 through 25-261, the city may require other reports whenever the city finds them necessary to fulfill the city's responsibilities under this article or any other city, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-263. - Certification requirement. 
    The reports required by sections 25-250 through 25-260 and section 25-262 shall contain the following certification: 
    I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-264. - Signatory requirements. 
    The reports required by section 25-250 through 25-260 shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-265. - Reporting address. 
    Users shall submit reports required by this article to the city at the following address: 
City of Lowell
Wastewater Treatment Plant
300 Bowes Road
Lowell, Michigan 49331
Attention: Superintendent 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-266. - Record keeping requirements. 
(a)	For each sample taken to satisfy the requirements of this article, users shall record the following information: 
(1)	The exact place, date and time of the sampling;
(2)	The type of sample;
(3)	The name of the person taking the sample, the person doing the analysis and the laboratory where the analysis was done; 
(4)	The dates the analyses were performed;
(5)	The analytical techniques and methods used; and
(6)	The results of all required analyses.
(b)	Users shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years all records relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of the user. If a record pertains to matters that are the subject of an order, litigation or other enforcement action, then the user shall retain and preserve the record until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitations for appeals have expired. Users shall make these records available upon request to the city for inspection and copying. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-267. - Public information. 
    All written information submitted to the city shall be available without restriction to any person upon request, unless: 
(1)	The user provides, at the time the user submits the information, a written notice to the city that the user claims that all or part of the information is exempt from disclosure according to section 25-215 hereof; and 
(2)	The user demonstrates to the city's satisfaction that the information is a trade secret according to section 25-215 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Secs. 25-268-25-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SAMPLE COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 

Sec. 25-275. - Sampling 
(a)	Reports required by this article shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report. This data shall be representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The monitoring frequency shall be sufficient to show compliance with all applicable standards and requirements. Users shall at a minimum take one composite representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with applicable standards and requirements. 
(b)	(1)	Users shall collect grab samples for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, users shall collect flow proportioned composite samples collected over twenty-four (24) hours or the duration of the discharge if the duration of the discharge is less than twenty-four (24) hours. However, the city may waive flow proportional composite sampling requirements if the user demonstrates to the city's satisfaction that flow proportioned sampling is not feasible. In such cases, users may use time proportioned composite samples, grab samples, or another type of sample that will provide a representative sample and has been approved by the city. 
(2)	For baseline monitoring reports, users shall take a minimum of four (4) grab samples for the pollutants for which grab samples are taken. 
(3)	The city may require continuous pH monitoring.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-276. - Sample analysis. 
(a)	Samples collected for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of this article shall be analyzed: 
(1)	According to 40 CFR 136; and
(2)	By a recognized professional.
(b)	For discharges to the sanitary sewer system from remedial actions related to leaking underground storage tanks or other sources of contaminated groundwater, the city may require the following analyses or any other appropriate analyses: 
(1)	Samples shall be analyzed for benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene using EPA method 624. 
(2)	For total petroleum hydrocarbons, samples shall be analyzed according to the California LUFT Field Manual, May, 1988. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-277. - Monitoring locations and facilities. 
(a)	When requested by the city, a user shall construct and maintain monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges to the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)	Users shall locate, construct and maintain monitoring facilities according to the requirements of the city. 
(c)	All buildings of significant industrial users constructed after July 1, 1992, shall include monitoring facilities at every outfall that may discharge non-domestic wastewater. 
(d)	Users shall submit to the city plans and specifications for construction or modification of monitoring facilities at least thirty (30) days before the proposed commencement of construction or modification. If a user constructs or modifies monitoring facilities before city approval or without an inspection during construction and the city determines that the monitoring facilities are unacceptable, then the user shall at its costs reconstruct or modify the monitoring facilities according to the requirements of the city. 
(e)	The user shall maintain monitoring facilities in a safe, operating condition at all times. 
(f)	The user shall allow the city access to all monitoring facilities according to the requirements of section 25-328. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-278. - Monitoring location for combined wastestreams. 
(a)	When a wastewater regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard is combined before treatment with other wastewaters, a user may monitor either the segregated wastestreams or the combined wastestream for purposes of determining compliance with the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(b)	If the user chooses to monitor the segregated wastestream, the user shall apply the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. 
(c)	If the user monitors the combined wastestream, the user shall apply an alternative limit calculated according to the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(d)	A user may change monitoring locations only after receiving approval from the city. The city shall ensure that any change in a user's monitoring location will not allow the user to substitute dilution for adequate treatment. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Secs. 25-279-25-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FEES 

Sec. 25-300. - Fees and charges. 
    The city may (shall in the case of surcharge fees) from time to time by resolution of the city council adopt fees and charges to include: 
(1)	Charges for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the sanitary sewer system pretreatment program; 
(2)	Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by the industrial user; 
(3)	Charges for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4)	Surcharge fees to cover the cost of removal of prohibited discharge, including surcharges for BOD, TSS and phosphorus discharges over the following permissible limits: 
PollutantSurcharge AboveBOD300.0 mg/lPhosphorus10.0 mg/lTSS300.0 mg/l 
(5)	Fees for permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications;
(6)	Fees for filing appeals; and
(7)	Other fees and charges as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contain in this article. 
    These fees and charges relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Secs. 25-301-25-324. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW 

Sec. 25-325. - City responsible for enforcement. 
(a)	The city shall undertake the enforcement actions necessary to promote the purposes set forth in section 25-200 hereof. The city has the primary responsibility for enforcing all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. However, users may also be subject to citizens suits under 33 USC 1365 or enforcement actions by the EPA. 
(b)	The city may take any enforcement action at any time as appropriate to the circumstances of the case. The city is not required to take enforcement actions in the order in which they are presented in this division. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-326. - Enforcement response plan. 
(a)	The city shall develop and implement an enforcement response plan. This plan shall contain procedures for investigating and eliminating noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements. At a minimum, the plan shall discuss: 
(1)	How the city will investigate instances of noncompliance;
(2)	The various types of enforcement responses used by the city, the violations for which the responses will be used, and the timing of these responses; and 
(3)	The persons responsible for each response.
(b)	The enforcement response plan provides only explanatory material and is merely informational in nature. The enforcement response plan does not create legal rights or obligations and does not limit the enforcement discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-327. - City surveillance of users. 
(a)	The city shall sample and analyze effluent from users and conduct other surveillance activities as often as necessary to identify occasional and continuing noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(b)	The city shall inspect the premises of and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once per year. 
(c)	Users shall pay fees to the city for the costs of sample collection, preparation and analysis as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-328. - Right of entry. 
(a)	After city, DNR or EPA representatives or agents have exhibited proper credentials, a user shall allow them to enter the premises of the user at any reasonable time for the purposes of inspection, sampling or examining records. 
(b)	For purposes of inspection and sampling, "reasonable time" includes any time the user is operating any process that results in wastewater or any time the user is discharging to the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)	Users shall allow the city to use on the user's devices for sampling, inspecting, measuring flows or otherwise monitoring compliance. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-329. - Inspection and sampling warrants. 
    If the city has a reasonable belief that a user has discharged or may discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer system in violation of this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit or any other applicable provision of local, state or federal law, then the city may apply to an appropriate circuit court for a search warrant or other appropriate judicial order or writ. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-330. - Determining compliance. 
(a)	Whenever a grab sample is used to determine compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, a user is in violation on the sampling day if any one grab sample exceeds the applicable pretreatment standard, regardless of the number of grab samples taken on the sampling day. 
(b)	For determining compliance with any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the city shall use the sample result that shows a pollutant present in the largest amount when: 
(1)	A sample collected by the city is split with a user or when the city and a user simultaneously collect samples; 
(2)	The samples are analyzed by the city and the user according to 40 CFR, Part 136; and
(3)	The analyses by the city and the user produce different results.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-331. - Notice of noncompliance. 
(a)	If the city has determined that a user has violated or is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, or any other applicable local, state or federal law, then the city may issue to the user a notice of noncompliance. 
(b)	A notice of noncompliance shall identify the violation and the consequences of further violation. 
(c)	As appropriate to the circumstances, the notice of noncompliance may:
(1)	Require description of the nature and cause of the violation;
(2)	Require a description of the remedy;
(3)	Require the submission of certain information before a certain date;
(4)	Provide notice that the city will be increasing its surveillance of the user; or
(5)	Contain other provisions that promote a return to compliance.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-332. - Notice of violation. 
(a)	If the city has determined that a user has violated or is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, or any other applicable local, state or federal law or has failed to respond to a notice of noncompliance, then the city may issue to the user a notice of violation. 
(b)	Any notice of violation issued by the city shall:
(1)	Be written;
(2)	Be either hand delivered or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested;
(3)	State the nature of the violation;
(4)	If the city has determined that the user meets the criteria set forth in section 25-334, indicate that the city intends to publish the user's name according to section 25-334; and 
(5)	Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the city's determination.
(c)	A notice of violation may require the user to:
(1)	Attend a meeting with the city;
(2)	Submit a remedial action plan and compliance schedule; and
(3)	Take other actions to identify the nature of the violation, the cause of the violation or a remedy for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-333. - Remedial action plans and compliance schedules. 
(a)	A user may submit to the city a remedial action plan in response to any noncompliance. The remedial action plan shall contain a compliance schedule. 
(b)	The city shall review the remedial action plan and compliance schedule to determine whether they are sufficient to achieve consistent compliance within a reasonable time. 
(c)	The city may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the remedial action plan and compliance schedule. 
(d)	The city may defer further progressive enforcement action if the user implements the remedial action plan according to the approved compliance schedule. If the user fails to implement an approved remedial plan according to the compliance schedule or if the implementation of an approved remedial action plan fails to achieve compliance, then the city shall take further appropriate enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-334. - Publication of the names of the users in significant noncompliance. 
(a)	As often as the city finds necessary, but at least once per year, the city shall publish the names of the users that were in significant noncompliance. 
(b)	The city shall publish the list required by subsection (a) above in the newspaper with the largest circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-335. - Orders. 
(a)	General orders. 
(1)	If the city has determined that a user has violated or is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, or any other applicable local, state or federal law, then the city may order a user to take certain actions before a certain time. 
(2)	An order shall:
a.	Be written;
b.	State the reasons for the order;
c.	Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the city's determination; and 
d.	Be hand delivered or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(b)	Show cause orders. 
(1)	If the city determines that a user has violated or is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, or any other applicable local, state or federal law, then the city may order a user to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(2)	An order shall:
a.	Be written;
b.	State the reason for the order and the proposed enforcement action;
c.	State the time, date and place of a meeting with the city;
d.	Describe the administrative procedures that are available to review the city's determination; and 
e.	Be hand delivered or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-336. - Permit and license suspension and revocation. 
(a)	The city may suspend or revoke a user's wastewater discharge permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	The failure to accurately report wastewater constituents or other characteristics of the discharge; 
(2)	The failure to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or other characteristics;
(3)	The failure to submit timely reports;
(4)	The failure to allow the city or its representatives reasonable access to the user's premises for inspection or monitoring; 
(5)	The discharging of any substance prohibited by this article;
(6)	The discharging of a substance in excess of the amount allowed in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(7)	The failure to pay the costs imposed upon the user by the city;
(8)	The refusal to grant right of entry pursuant to section 25-328; 
(9)	The failure to reapply for a wastewater discharge permit or request a required permit modification; or 
(10)	Any other violation of the wastewater discharge permit, this article, an order of the city, a judicial order, or any other applicable local, state or federal law. 
(b)	After a user has received notice that the city has suspended or revoked the user's wastewater discharge permit, the user shall immediately cease all discharges to the sanitary sewer system from the facility to which the permit applied. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-337. - Bulkheads. 
(a)	The city may issue a written order for the insertion of a bulkhead in a user's sewer connection if the city has determined that: 
(1)	The user has failed to adequately respond to a notice of noncompliance, a notice of violation of an order for discharging prohibited substances or pollutants, or 
(2)	The user has discharged or will imminently discharge a prohibited substance or pollutant in an amount likely to harm the environment, the sanitary sewer system or the public. 
(b)	Before the city may insert a bulkhead, the city shall deliver to the user a written notice describing the reason for the bulkhead order. The city shall make a reasonable attempt to deliver the notice to the person who appears to be in control of the user's facility. 
(c)	After delivery of the notice, the city may immediately insert the bulkhead.
(d)	(1)	Except as provided in subsection (2) below, no person may remove or tamper with a bulkhead. 
(2)	A user may remove a bulkhead after the user has received written permission from the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-338. - Administrative review of decisions. 
(a)	Introduction. The procedures set forth in this section shall be used to review decisions under division 2 and sections 25-332, 25-333, 25-334 and 25-335. 
(b)	Initial review. 
(1)	Any person aggrieved by a decision under division 2 or sections 25-332, 25-333, 25-334 and 25-335 may request that the city review its decision. 
(2)	a.	The city shall review a decision according to this subsection if the Superintendent receives a request for review within thirty (30) days after the person requesting review received notice of the decision, except as provided in subsection b. below. 
b.	If a user has received a notice of violation indicating that the city will publish the user's name according to section 25-334, then the city shall review a decision according to this subsection if the superintendent receives a request for review either three (3) or more days before a compliance meeting required by the notice of violation or before another date specified in the notice of violation. 
(3)	A request for review shall be in writing and shall contain facts and arguments supporting modification or reversal of the decision. 
(4)	Within fifteen (15) days after receiving the request for review, the superintendent shall review the decision or provide to the person requesting review notification of when the review will be complete. The superintendent may affirm, reverse or modify the initial decision. The superintendent shall provide to the person requesting review a written decision and the reasons for the decision. If the decision is adverse to the person requesting review, the decision shall indicate the procedures necessary for an administrative appeal and the date by which the user must initiate the administrative appeal. 
(c)	Administrative appeal. 
(1)	If a decision under subsection (b)(4) is adverse to the person requesting review, that person may appeal that decision by providing a notice of appeal to the superintendent within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision. 
(2)	The city shall provide for a hearing on an appeal requested under subsection (b)(4) within sixty (60) days after the city has received a notice of appeal. The city shall mail or otherwise deliver notice to the appellant of the hearing at least ten (10) days before the hearing. 
(3)	The city manager shall conduct the hearing of an appeal.
(4)	At a hearing under this section, attorneys may represent the parties and they may file briefs, present evidence, and call, examine and cross-examine witnesses. 
(5)	Witnesses shall be sworn by the city manager before providing testimony.
(6)	The city manager shall ensure that the record of the proceedings is complete. As directed by the city manager, the city shall provide a court reporter or other recording device. 
(7)	The parties shall jointly submit an exhibit and witness list to the city manager at least five (5) days before the hearing or as directed by the city manager. 
(8)	The city manager shall admit all testimony having reasonable probative value and shall exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious testimony. The city manager is not bound by common law or statutory rules of evidence. 
(9)	The user shall have the burden of proof and persuasion for showing that the city's decision was erroneous. 
(10)	Within twenty (20) days after the completion of the hearing, the city manager shall mail or otherwise deliver to all of the parties a written decision and the reasons for it. 
(d)	Exhaustion. A decision under article II or sections 25-332, 25-333, 25-334 and 25-335 is not final until a person has exhausted all of the procedures of this section. A decision under subsection (c)(10) above shall be a final determination for purposes of judicial review by any party. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-339. - Effectiveness of decision during review. 
    During the pendency in any forum of any challenge to a decision, a user affected by the decision shall comply with the decision. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-340. - Judicial proceedings. 
(a)	If the city has determined that a user has failed to comply with this article, the user's wastewater permit, any other applicable local, state or federal law, or a notice of violation or order issued by the city, then the city, through the city attorney, may commence judicial proceedings for appropriate relief in the appropriate court. 
(b)	The city may bring an action for a preliminary or permanent injunction or both, as may be appropriate, against any person who violates the provisions of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, order or any other applicable local, state or federal law. 
(c)	The city may also seek injunctive relief any time an emergency arises due to imminent danger to the public health or welfare or imminent danger to the environment to abate any pollution or other activity that is causing the danger. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-341. - Remedies, penalties and cost recovery. 
(a)	The city may obtain any remedy allowed by law for any violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(b)	The city may seek the imposition of civil penalties up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or other amount allowed by law for each violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement. The following rules apply to counting violations: 
(1)	A separate violation occurs for each pollutant that exceeds an applicable pretreatment standard; 
(2)	Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation and a violation will be deemed to have continued to occur each day beginning with the first day the violation occurred to the day the user is able to demonstrate through sampling results that the violation is not longer occurring; 
(3)	If a user is in noncompliance with any pretreatment standard that is a monthly average, thirty-day average, four-day average, or other daily average, then the user has one violation on each day of the averaging period; 
(4)	If for any period a user has violated both a maximum and an average pretreatment standard for a particular pollutant, then the total number of violations is the sum of the days on which the maximum standard was violated and the days in the averaging period; and 
(5)	One violation occurs on:
a.	Each day that a report is late; and
b.	Each day after an action required to be completed is not completed.
(c)	Making a false statement or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document, or making a monitoring device or method inaccurate may result in punishment under the criminal laws of the state or the United States, in addition to civil relief. 
(d)	If a user's discharge results in a deposit, an obstruction, damage, or an impairment in the sanitary sewer system, then the user shall be liable to the city for the costs of cleaning, repairing, or replacing the affected components. 
(e)	In any enforcement action, the city may recover from the user subject to the enforcement action the city's costs for sampling, analysis, other surveillance measures and time devoted to the action by the Superintendent, city manager, city attorney or other personnel. 
(f)	A user shall be liable to the city for a penalty or other liability imposed upon the city if: 
(1)	The user has violated any pretreatment standard or requirement;
(2)	The user's violation has caused the city to violate any requirement to which it is subject or increased the magnitude or duration of a violation; and 
(3)	An enforcement action against the city by the DNR, the EPA or any other person resulted in the penalty or other liability being imposed upon the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-342. - Administrative fines. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any user who has violated any provision of this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit or an order issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(b)	The rules set forth in subsection 25-341(b) shall apply in the counting of violations under this section. 
(c)	All administrative fines may be added to the user's next sewer service charges bill and shall be treated for purpose of payment and the imposition of late payment penalties, interest and charges the same as sewer service charges. 
(d)	Delinquent administrative fines shall be a lien on the user's premises and for collection purposes shall be treated pursuant to section 25-158 in the same manner as delinquent sewer service charges. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-343. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)	Violating this article, wastewater discharge permit or order.
(1)	A person who violates any provision of or fails to perform any duty imposed by this article or who violates any provision of or fails to perform any duty imposed by a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or other amount allowed by law per violation or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both. 
(2)	In addition to any criminal penalties imposed on a person convicted under this section, the person may be enjoined from continuing the violations. 
(3)	The rules set forth in subsection 25-341(b) shall apply in the counting of violations. 
(b)	False statements in required documents. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or other amount allowed by law or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both if the person: 
(1)	Knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained under this article or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article; or 
(2)	Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required to be maintained under this article or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-344. - Public nuisance. 
    Every violation of this article or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued pursuant to this article is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-345. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. 
(a)	Performance bonds. The city may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or any order or previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder unless such user first files with it a satisfactory performance bond, as determined by the city, to assure consistent compliance. 
(b)	Liability insurance. The city may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained liability insurance, bond, letter of credit or other financial assurance in an amount sufficient, as determined by the city, to restore or repair sanitary sewer system damage caused by its discharge. 
(c)	Suspension of water and/or sewer service. The city may suspend water and/or sewer service when such suspension is necessary in the opinion of the city to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with sewer treatment or causes the city to violate its NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-346. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)	Local limit compliance; unchanged discharge defense. If the city brings an action against a user alleging a violation of section 25-205, then the user may assert as an affirmative defense that: 
(1)	The user did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in combination with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference; and 
(2)	Either:
a.	A local limit designed to prevent pass-through or interference was developed and the user was in compliance with the local limit immediately before and during the pass-through or interference; or 
b.	A local limit was not applicable and immediately before and during the pass-through or interference the user's discharge did not substantially change in volume or constituents from the user's previous discharges when the city was in compliance with its npdes permit and all applicable requirements for sludge use or disposal. 
(b)	Upset defense. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with a categorical pretreatment standard if: 
(1)	The user demonstrates, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other evidence: 
a.	The cause of the noncompliance;
b.	That the noncompliance was unintentional and temporary;
c.	That the facility was being operated in a prudent manner in compliance with all applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
d.	That the noncompliance was caused by factors beyond the reasonable control of the user and not caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation; and 
(2)	The user reports the noncompliance according to section 25-257. 
(c)	Bypass defense. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with section 25-208 if the user demonstrates that: 
(1)	a.	The bypass did not cause a violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement; and 
b.	The bypass was essential for maintenance necessary to ensure efficient operation; or 
(2)	a.	The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, severe property damage, damage to treatment facilities that would cause them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, but not merely economic loss caused by delays in production; 
b.	The user had no alternative to the bypass, such as using auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waters, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime; 
c.	If the bypass occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or equipment maintenance, reasonable engineering judgment indicates that backup equipment was not justified; and 
d.	The user submitted the reports required by section 25-256. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Sec. 25-347. - Effect of approval of plans, specifications or operating procedures. 
    City approval of plans, specifications or operating procedures does not entitle a user to relief from enforcement actions if the treatment facilities do not achieve compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 11-16-92)
Secs. 25-348-25-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEWER BACKUP AND OVERFLOW CLAIM REPORTING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 25-400. - Notice and claim procedures applicable to overflow and backup of the sewer system. 
(a)	This article is adopted in accordance with Act 222 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2001, as amended from time to time ("Act 222"), to set forth the notice and claim procedures applicable to an overflow or backup of the city's sewage disposal system. 
(b)	Any word, term or phrase used in this article, if defined in Act 222, shall have the same meaning as provided in Act 222. 
(c)	In order to afford property owners, individuals and the city greater efficiency, certainty and consistency in the consideration and provision of relief for damages or physical injuries caused by a sewage disposal system event, the city and a claimant for economic damages shall follow the following procedures: 
(1)	A claimant shall not be entitled to compensation unless the claimant notifies the city of a claim of damage or physical injury, in writing, within forty-five (45) days after the date the damage or physical injury was discovered, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have been discovered, by the claimant. 
(2)	The written notice shall include the claimant's name, address and telephone number, the address of the affected property, the date of discovery of any property damage or physical injuries, and a brief description of the claim. If the notice includes a claim for damaged personal property, it shall include reasonable proof of ownership and the value of such property. Reasonable proof may include testimony or records documenting the ownership, purchase price or value of the property or photographic or similar evidence showing the value of the property. 
(3)	Written notice shall be given to the city clerk, who is designated as the person to receive such notices pursuant to Act 222. 
(d)	If a person who owns or occupies affected property notifies the city clerk orally or in writing of a sewage disposal system event before providing notice of a claim that complies with such subsection (c), the city clerk shall provide such person with the following information in writing: 
(1)	A sufficiently detailed explanation of the notice requirements of subsection (c) to allow a claimant to comply with the requirements. 
(2)	The name and address of the person to whom a claimant must send written notice.
(3)	The required content of the written notice.
(e)	If the city is notified of a claim under subsection (c) and it believes that a different or additional governmental agency may be responsible for the claimed property damages or physical injuries, the city shall notify the contacting agency of each additional or different governmental agency, in writing, within fifteen (15) business days after the date the city receives claimant's notice under subsection (c). 
(f)	If the city receives notice from a claimant under subsection (c) or otherwise as provided in Act 222, the city may inspect the damaged property or investigate the physical injury. A claimant or the owner or occupant of affected property shall not unreasonably refuse to allow the city or its authorized representatives to inspect damaged property or investigate a physical injury. 
(g)	In order for the city to be responsible for property damage or physical injury caused by an alleged sewage disposal system event, the following shall have existed at the time of the event: 
(1)	The city owned or operated, or directly or indirectly discharged into, the portion of the sewage disposal system that allegedly caused damage or physical injury. 
(2)	The sewage disposal system had a defect.
(3)	The city knew, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence, should have known, about the defect. 
(4)	The city, having legal authority to do so, failed to take reasonable steps in a reasonable amount of time to repair, correct or remedy the defect. 
(5)	The defect was fifty (50) percent or more of the cause of the sewage disposal system event and the property damage or physical injury. 
(h)	An overflow or backup shall not be a sewage disposal system event and the city shall not be responsible for a claim of property damage or physical injury if any of the following was fifty (50) percent or more of the cause of the overflow or the backup: 
(1)	An obstruction in the service lead that was not caused by the city.
(2)	A connection to the sewage disposal system on the affected property, including, but not limited to, a footing drain, sump system, surface drain, gutter, downspout or any other connection that discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, sub-surface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted air-conditioning water or unpolluted industrial process water to the sewage disposal system. 
(3)	An act of war, whether declared or undeclared, or an act of terrorism.
(i)	If the city, after receiving a notice of claim pursuant to subsection (c), and the claimant do not reach an agreement on the amount of compensation for the property damage or physical injury within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the notice, the claimant may institute a civil action as authorized by Act 222. 
(j)	To facilitate compliance with this article, the city shall make available to the public information regarding the notice and claim procedures set forth in this article. 
(k)	As provided in Act 222, the notice and claim procedures of this article shall not apply to non-economic damages arising from a sewage disposal system event. 
(l)	In the event of a conflict between the notice and claim procedures set forth in this article and the specific requirements of Act 222, the specific requirements of Act 222 shall control. 
(Ord. No. 03-1, § 1, 1-6-03)
Chapter 27 - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other officer or employee of the city authorized by this Code, state law or any other ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infractions violation notices. 
    Bureau means the municipal ordinance violations bureau, as currently existing or as may be established. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in 63rd District Court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited and to answer to the allegations contained in the citation. 
    Municipal civil infraction determination means a determination that a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one of the following: 
(1)	An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction;
(2)	An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation;"
(3)	A preponderance of evidence at an informal hearing or formal hearing pursuant to MCL 600.8719 or 600.8721, respectively; or 
(4)	A default judgment for failing to appear as directed by a citation or other notice at a scheduled appearance pursuant to MCL 600.8715(3)(b) or (4), at an informal hearing pursuant to MCL 600.8719, or at a formal hearing under MCL 600.8721. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice, prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at a municipal ordinance violations bureau now existing or hereafter established to answer to the allegations made in the municipal civil infraction violation notice and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized by state law. 
    State law means the statutory law enacted by the state, including but not limited to, the Home Rule City Act, Act 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909, as amended (MCL 117.1, et seq.), the Revised Judicature Act, Act 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961, as amended (MCL 600.1, et seq.) and the City and Village Zoning Act, Act 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921, as amended (MCL 125.581, et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-2. - Adoption and incorporation of state law by reference. 
    As provided for in state law, the city hereby adopts and incorporates the provisions of state law enabling municipalities to adopt and enforce ordinances declared to be municipal civil infractions to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-3. - Commencement of municipal infraction action. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in 63rd District Court or a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-4. - Issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)	The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)	The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 63rd District Court.
(3)	Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the 63rd District Court and copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided for in state law. 
(4)	A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as if it were made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the citation and if the citation contains the following statement above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief." 
(5)	An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
a.	Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.	Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(6)	Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.	Except as provide immediately below, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.	If the municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting a copy on the land or attaching a copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-5. - Contents of municipal civil infraction citations. 
(a)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction(s) alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)	Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one (1) of the following: 
(1)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction(s) by mail, in person or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction(s) "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance in person or by representation. 
(3)	Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following:
a.	Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a 63rd District Court judge or magistrate without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.	Appearing in 63rd District Court for a formal hearing before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)	The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1)	That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the 63rd District Court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)	That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the 63rd District Court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)	That the hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)	That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a 63rd District Court judge or magistrate without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)	That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a 63rd District Court judge and will have the opportunity of being represented by an attorney retained at his or her own expense. 
(d)	The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type stating that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-6. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)	Establishment. There is hereby established a municipal ordinance violations bureau, as authorized by state law, to accept responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials and to collect and retain civil fines. 
(b)	Location and supervision. The bureau shall be located at city hall and be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. 
(c)	Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice, and not a municipal civil infraction citation, has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle a person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from taking other action permitted by law. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed by the 63rd District Court. The unwillingness of a person to dispose of a violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protections accorded by law. 
(d)	Scope of authority. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining scheduled civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility "only with explanation," and in no event shall the bureau determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter related to an alleged violation. 
(e)	Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as are provided for citations in this chapter. In addition to any other information required by this Code, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine for the alleged violation and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)	Appearance and payment of fine and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs on or before the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation. 
(g)	Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal civil infraction violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the fine and costs prescribed by the schedule of fines set forth in this chapter are not paid for the violation at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation shall be filed with the 63rd District Court and a copy of the citation shall be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by state law, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil infraction violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-7. - Schedule of municipal civil infraction fines. 
(a)	A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility served with municipal civil infraction violation notices is hereby established as follows: 
(1)	For violation of violations listed in section 27-8 with letters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, J, K, L, M, N, O and Q: 
Initial offense: Fifty dollars ($50.00). 
First repeat offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Second or any subsequent repeat offense: Two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(2)	For violation of violations listed in section 27-8 with the letters H and P: 
Initial offense: One hundred ($100.00). 
First repeat offense: Two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
Second or any subsequent repeat offense: Five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)	A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-8. - Violations constituting municipal civil infractions. 
    A municipal civil infraction shall include the following offenses set forth in this Code: 
(1)	Violations of chapter 5, "Animals," of this Code.
(2)	Violations of chapter 6, "Auctions and Auctioneers," of this Code.
(3)	Violations of chapter 7, "Buildings and Building Regulations," of this Code.
(4)	Violations of chapter 9, "Cemeteries," of this Code.
(5)	Violations of chapter 10, "Fire Prevention and Protection" of this Code except for section 10-5. 
(6)	Violations of chapter 11, "Garbage, Trash and Refuse," of this Code.
(7)	Violations of chapter 11.5, "Historic District," of this Code. 
(8)	Violations of chapter 12, "Nuisances," of this Code.
(9)	Violations of chapter 13, "Offenses," of this Code except sections 13-2, 13-3, 13-4, 13-21, 13-22, 13-23, 13-42, 13-43, 13-44, 13-61, 13-63, 13-64, 13-65, 13-66, 13-67, 13-68, 13-86, 13-87, 13-108, 13-133, 13-151, 13-152, 13-153, 13-154, 13-155, 13-156, 13-176, 13-177, 13-178, 13-179, 13-180, 13-196 and 13-198. 
(10)	Violations of chapter 14, "Parks and Recreation," of this Code except section 14.55.
(11)	Violations of chapter 15, "Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants," of this Code. 
(12)	Violations of chapter 19, "Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places," of this Code.
(13)	Violations of chapter 21, "Traffic and Motor Vehicles," of this Code.
(14)	Violations of chapter 23, "Vegetation," of this Code.
(15)	Violations of chapter 24, "Vehicles for Hire," of this Code.
(16)	Violations of chapter 25, "Water and Sewage Disposal Service," of this Code. 
(17)	Violation of Appendix A, "Zoning," of this Code except chapter 17A. 
    Upon the effective date of this chapter, the offenses noted above are municipal civil infractions only and shall no longer constitute misdemeanor criminal offenses or subject the violator to any criminal sanctions, except as provided for by state law. This, however, shall not affect the sanctions provided for by state law or this chapter for a violator's or alleged violator's failure to comply with an order or judgment of the 63rd District Court nor shall this section limit or restrict the authority of the court to enforce its orders by appropriate sanctions or actions. This section shall not restrict, limit or bar any action permitted under any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Sec. 27-9. - Miscellaneous municipal civil infraction provisions. 
(a)	If a person is cited as a minor, he or she shall be permitted to appear in court or to admit responsibility for a civil infraction without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. A court having jurisdiction over a municipal civil infraction shall have jurisdiction over the minor and may proceed in the same manner as if he or she were an adult. 
(b)	A municipal civil infraction action is a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by state law and this Code. The plaintiff in a municipal civil infraction action shall be the city if the alleged civil infraction is a violation of this Code, any other city ordinance designating the violation as a municipal civil infraction or a state law designating a violation as a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)	Each act of violation and every day upon which any violation is permitted or suffered to exist or continue shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate fine upon admission or determination of responsibility. The fines provided by this chapter shall apply to any amendment or addition to this chapter or to the provisions elsewhere in this Code defining a municipal civil infraction whether or not such fines are reenacted in the amendment or addition. 
(d)	Municipal civil infractions shall be disposed of as follows:
(1)	If a defendant is determined to be responsible or responsible "with explanation" for a municipal civil infraction, the 63rd District Court judge or magistrate may order the defendant to pay a civil fine, costs as provided by law and, if applicable, damages and expenses as provided in MCL 600.8733(2). In the order of judgment, the judge or magistrate may grant a defendant permission to pay a civil fine, costs and damages and expenses within a specified period of time or in specified installments; otherwise the civil fine, costs and damages and expenses are due immediately. 
(2)	If a defendant is ordered to pay a civil fine, the judge or magistrate shall determine the costs of the action, which are not limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil actions and may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction up to the entry of a judgment, of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Except as otherwise provided by state law, costs shall be payable to the general funds of the city. 
(3)	In addition to ordering the defendant to pay a civil fine, costs and damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate may issue a writ or order under MCL 600.8302. 
(4)	A judge or magistrate may impose the sanctions permitted under subsections (1) and (3) above only to the extent expressly authorized by the chief judge of the 63rd District Court. 
(5)	The schedule of civil costs and fines and costs to be imposed for municipal civil infractions shall be posted at city hall and readily available for public inspection. The schedule need not include all municipal civil infractions, but shall be regularly updated. 
(6)	A default in the payment or the payment of an installment of a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses may be collected by any means authorized for enforcement of a judgment under state law. 
(7)	If a defendant fails to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to state law within the time prescribed by the judge or magistrate, the 63rd District Court may proceed under MCL 600.8729, 600.8731 or 600.8733, as applicable. 
(8)	A defendant who fails to answer a notice to appear or citation for a municipal civil infraction is guilty of a criminal misdemeanor as provided for in state law. 
(e)	The following shall apply with respect to the default in the payment of fines, costs, damages and expenses: 
(1)	If a defendant defaults in the payment or the payment of an installment of a civil fine, costs or, if applicable, damages and expenses as provided in state law, upon the motion of the city or upon its own motion, the court may require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt and may issue a summons, order to show cause, or a bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance. 
(2)	If a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses, the individual authorized to make disbursement on behalf of such entity shall timely pay the fine, costs or damages and expenses and his or her failure to do so shall be civil contempt unless he or she makes the showing in subsection (3) below. 
(3)	Unless the defendant shows to the satisfaction of the court that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may order the defendant imprisoned until all or a specific part, as determined by the court, of the amount due is paid. 
(4)	If it appears to the court that the default in the payment of a fine, costs or damages and expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of the payment or of any installment(s), or revoking the fine, costs or damages and expenses. 
(5)	The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses shall be specified in the order or commitment and shall not exceed one (1) day for each fifty dollars ($50.00) due. A person imprisoned for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs or damages and expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 
(6)	A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages and expenses shall not be released from custody until one of the following occurs: 
a.	The defendant is credited with the amount due pursuant to subsection (5) above;
b.	The amount due is collected through execution of process or otherwise; or
c.	The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of subsections a. and b. above.
(7)	The civil contempt shall be purged by the court upon satisfaction of subsection (6) above. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-20-99)
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city, Ordinance Number 87, adopted on March 1, 1982. Amendments are indicated by a history note in parentheses following the amended section. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Subsequently, Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, adopted Dec. 27, 1995 amended App. A, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table.
Charter reference- Zoning, § 7.10.

CHAPTER 1. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Section 1.01. - Short title. 
    This appendix shall be known as the "City of Lowell Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 1.02. - Purpose. 
    This ordinance, enacted under the authority of the city or village zoning act, is intended to insure that uses of land shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion of population and transportation systems and other public facilities; to facilitate adequate and efficient provision of transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation, and other public service and facility needs; and to promote public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 1.03. - Scope. 
A.	Interpretation and application. In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to impair or interfere with any other existing provision of law or ordinance. However, where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations, or permits, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
B.	Vested rights. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification, or any permissible activities therein; and all rights are hereby declared to be subject to such subsequent amendment, change or modification hereof as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 1.04. - Severability. 
    Sections of this ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph, or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 2.01. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules apply to the text of this ordinance: 
A.	The particular shall control the general.
B.	In the case of any difference in meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
C.	The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
D.	Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural; and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
E.	A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
F.	The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
G.	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the conjunctions noted below shall be interpreted as follows. 
1.	"And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
2.	"Or," indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
3.	"Either..or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
H.	Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. Defined terms are indicated in bold print in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.02. - Definitions - A. 
    Abutting. The sharing of a lot line or boundary. 
    Accessory building. A subordinate building on the same premises with a main building or portion of a main building and occupied or devoted to an accessory use; for example, a private garage. 
    Accessory use, or accessory. A use of a zoning lot which is clearly incidental to the principal use of the lot and customarily found in connection with the principal use. When "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. 
    Adjacent. Lying near, but not necessarily sharing a lot line or boundary. 
    Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
A.	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
B.	Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A principal business purpose need not be a primary or majority use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment. 
    Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features one or more of the following: 
A.	Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
B.	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; 
C.	Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
D.	Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers. 
    Adult entertainment. Any exhibition, display or dance which involves exposure to view of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Adult live entertainment theater. An enclosed building for presenting live entertainment involving the use of strip dancers, naked individuals, individuals who wear see through clothing which permits the view of "specified anatomical areas," individuals who are partially clothed and partially unclothed so as to permit the view of "specified anatomical areas," or individuals conducting "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
A.	Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
B.	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours; or 
C.	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building used for presenting motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this ordinance, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Alley. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders. 
    Arterial. An arterial roadway as designated in the City of Lowell Comprehensive Plan. 
    Average grade. The average finished ground elevation at the center of all walls of a building established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building or structure being measured. 
    Awning. A roof-like structure not requiring a foundation attached to a building that serves as a shelter, as over a storefront, window, door, deck or installed equipment. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 1, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Section 2.03. - Definitions - B. 
    Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment. A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals be provided as a commercial operation. 
    Berm. A mound of earth graded, shaped and improved with landscaping in such a fashion as to be used for visual or audible screening purposes. 
    Boarding house or lodging house. A dwelling having one (1) or more kitchens and primarily used for the purpose of providing meals or lodging or both meals and lodging for compensation of any kind. 
    Board of zoning appeals, or board, or board of appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Lowell. 
    Body shop. Any building, premises, or land in which or upon which the primary use is: collision servicing, including body, frame and fender straightening or repair; vehicle painting; or provision of wrecker service with storage of vehicles included. 
    Buffer strip. A strip of land required between certain zoning districts reserved for plant material, berms, walls, or fencing to serve as a visual barrier. 
    Building. A structure erected on-site, pre-manufactured or precut structure, above or below ground, designed primarily for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building code. The code or codes governing the erection and maintenance of buildings as currently adopted by the City of Lowell. 
    Building frontage. A percentage expressed as the width of that part of a building wall which faces the public street and occupies the build-to zone divided by the total lot width. 
    Building line. A line formed by the eaves of the building, or the most horizontal appendage of the building, and for the purposes of this section, a minimum building line is the same as the front setback. 
    Building inspector. The person designated by the city council to administer the provisions of the adopted building codes for the city. 
    Build-to zone. The area located between the required minimum and maximum front yard setback as illustrated below. 

(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 99-10, § 1, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 2-17-15) 
Section 2.04. - Definitions - C. 
    Canopy. A protective roof-like covering not requiring a foundation mounted independently on a frame over a walkway, door or installed equipment. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A document signed by an authorized city official as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the construction of a structure or building which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
    Child care center. A facility other than a private residence, licensed by the Michigan Department of Social Services, in which one (1) or more children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, and where a parent or legal guardian is not immediately available to the child. Child care center includes a facility which provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. 
    Child care center does not include a sunday school, a vacation Bible school, or a religious class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not greater than four (4) hours per day for an indefinite period, or not greater than eight (8) hours per day for a period not to exceed four (4) weeks, during a twelve (12) month period, or a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not greater than four (4) hours, while persons responsible for the children are attending religious classes or services. 
    City. City of Lowell, Michigan. 
    City council, or council. The City Council of the City of Lowell. 
    City or Village Zoning Act. Act 207 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1921, as amended. 
    Club. An organization or persons for special purposes such as sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Commercial storage warehouse. A building or buildings used primarily as a commercial business for the storage of goods and materials. 
    Commercial wireless communication tower. A structure designed and constructed to support one (1) or more antennas used for licensed telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public. The term commercial wireless communication tower does not include amateur radio antennas. 
    Comprehensive plan. The Comprehensive Community Plan currently adopted by the City of Lowell, including graphic and written proposals, indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan and any amendment to such plan. 
    Convalescent or nursing home. A structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 2, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 00-4, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 06-01, § 2, 2-21-06) 
Section 2.05. - Definitions - D. 
    Drive-through. A business establishment so developed that its retail or service character provides a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle either exclusively or in addition to service within a building or structure, or to provide self-service for patrons and food carry-out. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A dwelling, or a portion of a building, designed exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A dwelling designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.06. - Definitions - E. 
    Employee. For purposes of Chapter 17A hereof, means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, including the manager, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the manager or owner of said business. 
    Entertainer. Any person who performs any entertainment, exhibition or dance of any type within an adult cabaret, whether or not such person or anyone else charges or accepts a fee for such entertainment, exhibition, or dance. 
    Erected. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage, etc. 
    Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie, to privately perform a striptease for another person, or to otherwise display specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Essential public services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel, or water transmission, distribution, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment, but not including buildings and storage yards, which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. Essential public services shall not include commercial wireless communications towers. 
    Excavation. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 3, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 00-4, § 2, 9-18-00) 
Section 2.07. - Definitions - F. 
    Family. One person residing in a household; or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or legal arrangement, including foster children and servants residing together; or unrelated persons residing together as one housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
    Family day care home. A private residence in which the operator permanently resides as a member of the household, registered with the Michigan Department of Social Services, in which one (1) but less than seven (7) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
    Farm. A contiguous parcel of land of not less than ten (10) acres in area, directly farmed or used for commercial agriculture by the owner-operator, manager, or tenant farmer by his own labor or with assistance of members of his household or hired employees. A farm includes a farm dwelling and accessory buildings necessary for the storage or housing of farm implements, products, or animals, or used for the operation of the farm. Farms may include greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, hatcheries, dairy farms, poultry farms, piggeries, commercial feedlots, apiaries, truck farms, and forestry operations. Fish hatcheries, stockyards, recreation parks, stone quarries, gravel, dirt or sand pits, keeping furbearing animals or game, kennels, stables, riding academies, or mineral extraction, are not considered farm uses. 

Floor Area 
    Fence. A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a boundary. Such barriers are made typically of posts and wire or boards. 
    Floor area, dwelling (DFA). That area used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking as measured to the outside surfaces of the exterior walls. DFA does not include a garage, open porch, balcony, terrace, court, deck, storage space and other similar space not used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. 
    Foot candle. A measure of illumination on a surface that is everywhere one (1) foot from a uniform point source of light of one (1) candle and equal to one (1) lumen per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 03-5, § 1, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 04-1, § 1, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-3-11) 
Section 2.08. - Definitions - G. 
    Grade. The gradient, the rate of incline or decline expressed as a percent. For example, a rise of twenty-five (25) feet in a horizontal distance of one hundred (100) feet would be expressed as a grade of twenty-five (25) percent. 
    Greenbelt. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs, trees, or grasses to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Group day care home. A private residence in which the operator permanently resides as a member of the household, licensed by the Michigan Department of Social Services, in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care home includes a home that gives care to unrelated minor children for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.09. - Definitions - H. 
    Height. The vertical distance measured from the average grade to the highest point of a structure. In the case of a building, height shall be measured from the average grade to the highest point of the roof surface for a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the midpoint between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 

Building Height 
    Home occupation. An occupation or profession that is clearly a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit. Without limiting the foregoing, a single-family residence used by an occupant of that residence to give instruction in a craft or fine art within the residence shall be considered a home occupation. 
    Hotel/motel. A facility offering lodging accommodations for automobile travelers on a daily rate to the general public and which may or may not provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.10. - Definitions - I. 
    Inoperable vehicle. A motor vehicle which can no longer propel itself. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.11. - Definitions - J. 
    Junk. Any worn out or discarded materials including, but not necessarily limited to, scrap metal, inoperable motor vehicles and parts, construction material, household wastes, including garbage and discarded appliances, and yard debris. 
    Junkyard. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled. These materials include, but are not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than two hundred (200) square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.12. - Definitions - K. 
    Kennel, commercial. Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, cats, or other household pets, six (6) months of age or older, are either permanently or temporarily boarded for commercial purposes. A kennel shall also include any lot or premises where household pets are bred or sold for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.13. - Definitions - L. 
    Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. It also means the general partners of a partnership, the partners of a limited liability partnership and the members of a limited liability company that is a licensee. 
    Loading space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot. A parcel, vacant land, occupied land, or land intended to be occupied by a building and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal accessory use(s) together with yards and open spaces required under the provisions of this ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. A lot may also mean a portion of a condominium project, as regulated by Public Act 59 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1978, as amended, designed and intended for separate ownership and use. 
    Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines. 
    Lot, corner. Any lot having at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve, at its points of beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line, intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Lot coverage. The percentage of the lot occupied by any building or structure, including accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot, flag lot, or through lot. 
    Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 
A.	Front lot lines. In the case of an interior lot, it is the line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, it is that line separating said lot from either street. 
A corner lot shall have two (2) front lot lines: a principal front lot line and a secondary front lot line. The principal front lot line shall be the shorter of the two (2) lot lines. Where the lot lines are of equal length, and/or the principal front lot line is not evident, then the zoning administrator shall determine the principal front lot line. 
General provisions. 
1.	The secondary front lot setback shall be one-half (1/2) of the principal front lot setback.
2.	The required front setback shall be measured from both the principal and secondary front lot lines. For a corner lot with three (3) front setbacks, the remaining setback shall be a rear setback. 
3.	The remaining setbacks shall be a rear and a side setback. The rear setback shall be measured from the rear lot line, which in the case of a corner lot, shall be the lot line opposite the principal front lot line. 
4.	The width of a corner lot shall be determined by the entire length of that front lot line which is opposite the rear lot line. 
    Lot of record. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, which actually exists as shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through. Any interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel streets. 
    Lot width. The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two (2) points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 

Lots and Lot Lines 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 4, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 02-1, § 1, 3-18-02) 
Section 2.14. - Definitions - M. 
    Main building. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Manager. An employee, other than the licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or who is otherwise responsible for the operation of, or in charge of, a licensed sexually oriented business. 
    Manufactured home. A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling. 
    Manufactured home park. A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three (3) or more manufactured homes are located on a continual non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a manufactured home and which is not intended for use as a temporary trailer park. 
    Massage parlor. Any establishment having a fixed place of business where massages are administered for pay, including but not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths, and steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist duly licensed by the State of Michigan, nor barber shops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulder. This definition shall not be construed to include a nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court, or other educational, cultural, recreational, and athletic facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area, nor practices of massage therapists who meet one or more of the following criteria: 
A.	Proof of graduation from a school of massage licensed by the State of Michigan;
B.	Official transcripts verifying completion of at least three hundred (300) hours of massage training from an American community college or university; plus three references from massage therapists who are professional members of a massage association referred to in this section; 
C.	Certificate of professional membership in the American Massage Therapy Association, International Myomassethics Federation, or any other recognized massage association with equivalent professional membership standards; or 
D.	A current occupational license from another state.
    Mixed use development. A development consisting of one (1) or more buildings that contain a mix of commercial, office, retail, residential, recreational or similar land uses, or any combination of such uses. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 5, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 15-01, § 2, 2-17-15) 
Section 2.15. - Definitions - N. 
    Nonconforming building. A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto and not conforming to the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use. A use or activity, which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonresidential district. The C-1, C-2, C-3, I, and PF Zone Districts. 
    Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears nude or in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity. The display of any specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 6, 11-17-97)
Section 2.16. - Definitions - O. 
    Off-street parking lot. A facility providing parking spaces, along with adequate drives, maneuvering areas, and aisles, for the parking of more than three (3) vehicles. 
    Open air business. Retail sales establishments operated substantially in the open air, including, but not necessarily limited to: 
A.	Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicle, boats, or home equipment sales, repair or rental services. 
B.	Outdoor display area and sale of garages, motor homes, recreation vehicles, manufactured homes, snowmobiles, swimming pools and similar activities, but not including farm implements or commercial construction equipment. 
C.	Retail sales of trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seeds, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment, but not including lumberyards. 
D.	Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving range, children's amusement parks or similar recreational uses (transient or permanent). 
    Operator. All persons who own, operate, direct, oversee, conduct, maintain, or effectively exert management control or authority over a sexually oriented business or its affairs, without regard to whether such person(s) owns the premises in which the sexually oriented business does business. An operator effectively exerts management control or authority when he or she actually does, or is in a position to, participate in the management, direction or oversight of a sexually oriented business or its affairs, whether or not such person's name appears on any public record filed with any government agency in connection with a sexually oriented business or any parent company or affiliate. 
    Outdoor furnace. Any device, appliance, facility, apparatus or structure that is designed, intended and/or used to provide hot water heat and/or hot water to any associated structure, operates by burning solid fuel and is not located within the structure to be heated. 
    Owner. A person owning, directly or beneficially, any interest or part interest, however identified, in a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 7, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Section 2.17. - Definitions - P. 
    Parking facility. Any portion of a parking space, access drives, aisles, or any other land used for the purpose of parking a motor vehicle. 
    Parking space. An area of definite length and width, exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and fully accessible for the parking of permitted motor vehicles. 
    Peep booth. A viewing room, other than a private room not authorized for admittance by patrons, of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space upon the premises of a sexually oriented business where there is exhibited photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or other video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, association or other legal entity. 
    Personal service establishment. A commercial business conducting services that are performed primarily on the premises. 
    Planned unit development (PUD). A development of land that is under unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development stages. 
    Planning commission, or commission. The City of Lowell Planning Commission. 
    Premises. All lands, structures, places and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. 
    Primary accessory building. That building which has as its main purpose the housing of the daily driven vehicles of the residents of a premises. 
    Principal use. The main use to which the premises are devoted. 
    Privacy screen. A structure designed to serve as a partial barrier to views of or from contact with others. 
    Private room. A room in an adult motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed in the room, has a bath in the room or adjacent to the room, and is used primarily for lodging. 
    Public utility. A person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish to the public under federal, state or municipal regulations, gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation, or water. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 8, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 04-1, § 2, 3-15-04) 
Section 2.18. - Definitions - R. 
    Recreational vehicle or equipment. Vehicles or equipment used primarily for recreational purposes. For the purpose of this ordinance, recreational vehicle shall mean: 1) A vehicle primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel purposes, including a vehicle having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted on or drawn by another vehicle such as a motor home or camper; 2) Boats and trailers designed to transport boats; 3) Snowmobiles and trailers designed to transport snowmobiles; 4) Off-road vehicles and trailers designed to transport off-road vehicles; 5) Pop-up tent and camper trailers; 6) Other similar vehicles deemed by the zoning enforcement officer to be a recreational vehicle. This term shall not include motorcycles or motorbikes or other similar means of transportation intended primarily for on-street use. 
    Residential district. The RS, R-1, R-2, R-3, MPH, and PUD Districts. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.19. - Definitions - S. 
    Satellite dish antenna. An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
    Semi-nudity. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. This definition does not apply to any actions otherwise authorized by law or the examination of another person for a bona fide medical purpose consistent with reasonable medical practices. 
    Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult live entertainment theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center and includes: 
A.	The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
B.	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to a sexually oriented business; 
C.	The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; 
D.	The relocation of any sexually oriented business;
E.	The substantial enlargement of an existing sexually oriented business; or
F.	The continuation of any sexually oriented business in existence on the effective date of this ordinance. 
    Setback. The distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this ordinance. 
    Sign. A lettered board, or other notice advertising an individual, firm, profession, business or other thing and visible to the general public. 
    Significant natural feature. A natural area as designated by the planning commission, city council, or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources or Department of Environmental Quality, or other applicable agency which exhibits unique topographic, ecological, hydrological, or historical characteristics such as a wetland, floodplain, water features, or other unique natural features. 
    Specified anatomical areas. The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal even if completely and opaquely covered, any portion of female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of buttocks, vulva or genitals of any person. 
    Specified sexual activities. Includes any of the following: 
A.	The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
B.	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
C.	Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
D.	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (A) through (B) above. 
    Story. That part of a building included between the surface of any floor above the average grade or ground at the foundation and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. 
    Story, half. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least two hundred (200) square feet with a clear height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches. For the purpose of this ordinance, the usable floor area is only that area having at least five (5) feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street, private. An undedicated, privately controlled and maintained right-of-way or other interest in land which affords the principal means of access to three (3) or more lots or parcels. 
    Street, public. A public dedicated right-of-way other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something on the ground. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor areas exist on the effective date of this ordinance. 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either, before improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Michigan Register of Historic Places. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 9, 11-17-97)
Section 2.19A. - Definitions - T. 
    Temporary storage unit. A transportable unit, container or structure designed primarily for temporary storage of personal property, household goods and other such materials for use on a temporary basis. Such unit shall not be considered an accessory building as provided in section 4.08 of chapter 4 of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 11-5-07)
Section 2.20. - Definitions - V. 
    Vehicle repair facilities. Any building, premises or land where the primary use is the repair of motor vehicles, including body shops, provided all work is performed within an enclosed building and the storage of motor vehicles is within a completely secure area. 
    Vehicle service station. Building and premises where the primary use is the supply and dispensing at retail of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires and other similar motor vehicle accessories. 
    Vehicle towing service. The dispatching, towing and transporting of motor vehicles for service, repair, salvage and the temporary storage of motor vehicles not more than thirty (30) days on the site of the vehicle towing service within a completely secure area. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 04-5, § 1, 11-15-04; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 6-4-12) 
Section 2.21. - Definitions - W. 
    Wall. A structure designed to serve as a full barrier to views of or from contact with others. 
    Waste dumpster. A container used for the temporary storage of rubbish and/or materials to be recycled pending collection, having capacity of at least one (1) cubic yard. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 04-1, § 3, 3-15-04)
Section 2.23. - Definitions - Y. 
    Yards. The open spaces on the same lot with a main building that are unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, and as defined herein. 

Yard Locations 
A.	Frontyard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the building line of the main building. 
B.	Rearyard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the building line of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
C.	Side yard. An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the building line of the main building. 
    Yard, required. The required yard shall be that set forth in the zoning ordinance as the minimum yard requirement for each district. 

Required Yards 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 2.24. - Definitions - Z. 
    Zoning Act. Act 207 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1921, as amended. 
    Zoning enforcement officer. The person designated by the city council to administer the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS - GENERAL 

Section 3.01. - Districts established. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the City of Lowell is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
SRSuburban Residential DistrictR-1Single-Family Residential DistrictR-2Single- and Two-Family Residential DistrictR-3Multiple-Family DistrictMHPManufactured Home Park DistrictC-1Neighborhood Business DistrictC-2Central Business DistrictC-3General Business DistrictIIndustrial DistrictI-LLight Industrial DistrictF-1Floodplain DistrictPUDPlanned Unit Development DistrictPFPublic Facilities DistrictMUMixed Use District 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 98-2, § 1, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 15-01, § 3, 2-17-15) 
Section 3.02. - District boundaries. 
A.	Boundaries. The boundaries of the districts listed in section 2.01 are hereby established as shown on the City of Lowell Zoning Ordinance Map, which is part of this ordinance. 
B.	Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines or city limits shall be construed as following such lot lines or city limits. 
3.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midpoint between the main tracks. 
4.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in section 2.02, B., 1-3, shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
5.	Where physical or natural features existing on the ground differ from those shown on the zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by this section, the zoning enforcement officer shall interpret the district boundaries. 
6.	For the sake of map clarity, various districts may not cover public rights-of-way. It is intended that such district boundaries extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
7.	The F-1 Floodplain District boundaries shall follow the officially delineated 100 year floodplain line as identified in "The Flood Insurance Study, City of Lowell," dated May 16, 1983 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps. 
8.	Where a district boundary line, as established in this chapter or as shown on the zoning map divides a lot or lots in single ownership and of record at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the least restricted use shall not extend beyond said line. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 3.03. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the City of Lowell, one (1) of the following rules shall apply: 
A.	Land zoned previous to annexation shall be a district of the class to which it most nearly conforms under this ordinance. The planning commission shall recommend the classification to the city council, who shall determine by resolution the zoning classification into which the property will be placed. 
B.	Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as an R-1 District until a zoning map for the area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend the appropriate zoning districts for such area within three (3) months after the city council shall have referred the matter to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 3.04. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever all or part of a street, alley or other public way is vacated, it shall automatically become a part of the district to which it attaches. If a vacated area is bordered by two (2) different districts, the area is divided along a line halfway between them according to the abutting zone, unless the city council shall otherwise designate. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 4.01. - Required area, space, height, and use conditions and exceptions. 
A.	No lots or lots in common ownership and no yard, parking area or other space shall be so divided, altered or reduced as to make such area or dimension less than the minimum required under this ordinance. If already less than the minimum required under this ordinance, said area or dimension shall not be further divided or reduced. 
B.	A lot which is platted, or otherwise lawfully of record as of the effective date of this ordinance, may be used as specified in the district in which it is located. The side yards of such lots may be reduced by the same percentage the area of such lot bears to its zoning district requirements, provided that no side yard shall be less than five (5) feet. In all cases, the minimum front and rear yard requirements of this ordinance shall be met. 
C.	Lots in common ownership.
1.	Except as noted in (2) below, if two (2) or more lots of record or combination of lots and portions of lots of record, in existence at the time of the passage of this ordinance, or an amendment thereto, are: 
a.	In common ownership;
b.	Abutting each other or have continuous frontage, and;
c.	Individually do not meet the lot width or lot area requirements of this ordinance,
the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance. Such parcels shall be combined into such lot or lots meeting the lot width and lot size requirements of this ordinance. No portion of such parcel shall be used or divided in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements of this ordinance. 
2.	The planning commission may permit use of abutting nonconforming lots of record in common ownership provided that the commission finds that: 
a.	The nonconforming lots of record were not created by the owner of the properties; and 
b.	There is not a substantial number of vacant, nonconforming lots of record in a similar situation within the vicinity of the lot(s) proposed for use that, if used, would alter the character of the neighborhood. 
D.	Height exceptions.
1.	The following buildings and structures shall be exempt from height regulations in all districts: parapet walls not exceeding four (4) feet in height, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators, silos, stacks, elevated water towers, stage towers, scenery lofts, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires, penthouses housing necessary mechanical appurtenances, wind-powered electrical generator, and television and radio reception and transmission antennas and towers which do not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height. 
2.	Additions to existing buildings and structures which now exceed the height limitations of their district may be constructed to the height of the existing to which the addition is attached if the lot is large enough to encompass a circular area with a radius at least equal to the height of the tallest structure or building. 
3.	In the industrial districts stack chimneys, cooling and fire towers, elevator building and bulkheads, storage tanks and other necessary structures are permitted, provided the lot is large enough to encompass a circular area with a radius at least equal to the height of the tallest structure or building. 

(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.02. - Principal use. 
A.	No lot or parcel of land shall contain more than (1) main building or one (1) principal use, except as may be permitted otherwise in this ordinance. 
B.	Land and buildings may be considered a principal use collectively if the following conditions are met. 
1.	The land and buildings are planned and designed as a single integral development, including joint parking, compatible architecture, shared driveways, shared signs, and other similar features. 
2.	All uses, if not the same, shall be similar in function and/or operation.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.03. - Street access. 
    Any lot of record created after the effective date of this ordinance shall front upon a public or private street right-of-way for the minimum lot width required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.04. - Basis of determining yard and lot requirements. 
A.	The minimum lot width for a lot on a cul-de-sac or other irregularly shaped lot shall be measured at the required front yard setback line and shall not be diminished throughout the rest of the lot. Such lots shall have a minimum width of forty (40) feet from the front property line to the required front yard setback line. 

B.	The required front yard setback line shall be measured from the right-of-way line or property line, to an imaginary line across the width of the lot drawn at the minimum required front setback distance for that district, excepted as noted in C., below. 
C.	Where an average setback line which is less than that required by this ordinance has been established by existing buildings located within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed building, such average setback shall apply. 
D.	Corner and through lots. On corner and through lots, the front yard requirements shall apply on both streets. In such cases, the remaining yards shall be side yards, with no rear yard. In the case of a row of through lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and through yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.05. - Projections into yards. 
A.	Certain architectural features, such as cornices, bay windows (or windows without foundations), gutters, chimneys, pilasters and similar features: 
1.	May project a maximum of four (4) feet into a required front or rear yard; and
2.	Shall not project into the required side yard.
B.	Porches, terraces, decks, balconies, window awnings, and similar structures which are open on all sides, unenclosed, and uncovered: 
1.	May project a maximum of ten (10) feet into a required front yard;
2.	May project a maximum of fifteen (15) feet into a required rear yard;
3.	Shall not project into a required side yard; and
4.	Shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet to any front or rear lot line.
5.	If such structures enclosed on any side or covered in any manner they shall be considered part of and subject to the same setbacks as the main building. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.06. - Clear vision. 
A.	No plantings, fencing, or other obstruction shall be established or maintained on any corner lot which will obstruct the view of a vehicle driver approaching the intersection. Such unobstructed corner shall mean a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the street lines or in the case of a rounded property corner from the intersection of the street property lines extended. This shall not prohibit the planting of shrubbery which will not achieve a height at maturity of more than thirty (30) inches. 

Clear Vision Corners 
B.	No plantings shall be established in any required front yard which, in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, will obstruct the view from of vehicles entering or leaving the site from driveways or adjacent roadways. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.07. - Fences and walls. 
A.	Fences or walls shall be located on the same property as the use to which they apply.
B.	No fences or walls may be erected or maintained within the right-of-way of any public street, alley or other public way or other clear vision requirements applicable in section 4.06 hereof. 
C.	Unless specifically provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, a fence or wall or that portion of a fence or wall that is greater than fifty (50) percent solid may not exceed a height of thirty-six (36) inches and may not otherwise exceed a height of forty-eight (48) inches within any required front yard or a height of seventy-two (72) inches in any other area, except as noted in D. below. Fences shall be measured from the finished grade to the top of the fence. Posts will not be considered a part of fence height unless in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer they obstruct vision. 
D.	No fence or wall shall contain any exposed spike, nail, barb, other pointed instrument or electrification unless necessary for security in a nonresidential district, or for the protection of public utility buildings or improvements, or for livestock containment in agricultural areas. The exposed spike, nail, barb or other pointed instrument portion of the fence or wall shall be at least six (6) feet from the finished grade, in which case the height of the fence or wall may extend to a maximum of seven (7) feet above the finished grade. 
E.	Fence shall be residential in appearance and intent. Farm type fences are allowed on farmland in residential districts. 
F.	In an industrial district, an open, wire protective fence may be constructed in the required front yard, where necessary, to enclose secure areas or to prevent access to potentially hazardous areas. 
G.	All fences located along a property line shall have exposed posts and/or bracing of the fence located so as to face the interior of the property. 
H.	Any fence or wall erected or maintained along or near a lot line or other property boundary line shall be located and maintained so that no part of the fence or wall is located upon or encroaches on or above any other adjacent lot or parcel of property. 
I.	All fences and walls shall be kept in good repair and condition: Both sides of a fence or wall, including a fence erected along a property line, shall be maintained in good repair and condition to maintain the original aesthetic of the fence including but not limited to finish, shape and style. If not maintained as prescribed, the fence shall be required to be repaired or removed. 
J.	Privacy screens shall be permitted in side and rear yards only. The maximum allowable footage of a privacy screen per section shall not exceed twenty-seven (27) feet. Sections of privacy screens may not be contiguously installed, but shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches per space between sections and no more than three (3) sections shall be permitted per property side and rear yard lot lines or other property boundaries. Privacy screens shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet above the finished grade. 
K.	A permit shall be obtained from the zoning enforcement officer prior to the installation of a fence, wall or privacy screen and the design of all fences, walls or privacy screens, including openings for vehicular traffic or other purpose, shall only be as permitted in this section and the permit issued by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 04-1, § 4, 3-15-04)
Section 4.08. - Accessory building and uses. 
A.	Accessory buildings attached to dwellings or other main buildings, including enclosed porches and garages, shall be deemed a part of such buildings and must conform to all regulations of this ordinance applicable to such main buildings. 
B.	An accessory building or use shall only be permitted on lot which contains a principal use or main building. 
C.	No part of an accessory building shall be used as a dwelling for residential purposes.
D.	On corner lots, where the side lot line is a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, the accessory building or use shall be located no nearer than the required front yard setback line on the lot behind the corner lot. 
E.	No more than two (2) detached accessory buildings may be permitted on any lot or parcel.
F.	Detached accessory buildings shall be located:
1.	A minimum of ten (10) feet from any main building;
2.	A minimum of three (3) feet to any side or rear lot line, as measured to the eave of the building; 
3.	No nearer than the front yard setback required for the main building.
G.	Detached accessory buildings-Maximum total floor areas for all such buildings:
1.	For single- and two-family dwellings, including a garage:
a.	On lots less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet: nine hundred sixty (960) square feet; and 
b.	On lots of nine thousand (9,000) square feet or more: one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
2.	Other uses:
a.	Multiple-family developments: nine hundred sixty (960) square feet, excluding garages for the use of residents; 
b.	Manufactured home parks: as permitted by chapter 9 hereof;
c.	For uses in the C-3 zoning districts: not exceeding the floor area of the main building(s); and 
d.	For uses in all nonresidential zoning districts other than the C-3 zoning districts: not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the main building(s). 
H.	No detached accessory building in a residential district shall exceed the height of the main building located on the same lot. 
I.	Any accessory building with a floor area greater than six hundred (600) square feet shall be permanently constructed on a concrete foundation and shall conform to all applicable building codes and other similar codes and regulations that apply to such structures. 
J.	Accessory buildings with a floor area greater than two hundred (200) square feet shall (i) comply with applicable building codes and other similar codes and regulations that apply to such structures and (ii) be compatible in design and similar to the main building with respect to exterior finish materials, color, overall design and aesthetic quality. The following additional standards shall apply to such accessory buildings: 
1.	Accessory buildings covered with vinyl, canvas, nylon or other similar membrane materials shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in ground coverage and shall be securely attached or anchored to the ground. 
2.	Bright contrasting stripe or patterned covers and orange tarp covers shall not be permitted. 
3.	An accessory building shall be well maintained and kept in a clean and safe condition; rips in the cover, hanging cover material, leaning frames and other visual detriments that present an unkept image shall not be permitted. 
4.	An accessory building shall not detract from or undermine the character or quality of the surrounding neighborhood. 
    Gazebos, pergolas or other accessory buildings erected and used by a retail and commercial business for no more than one hundred eighty (180) days during any consecutive 12-month period and accessory buildings erected for no more than three (3) consecutive days during any consecutive three-month period for social events such as weddings, graduations and family reunions shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
K.	Accessory buildings not meeting the requirements of subsection J. of this section may be permitted as a special land use in an I-L Light Industrial District and an I Industrial District as regulated by chapter 17. 
L.	Upon construction of a primary accessory building or the construction of an additional bay(s) to the primary accessory building, a hard surfaced driveway must be constructed from the public street or alley to the primary accessory building. The intent of this section of the ordinance is to create a dustless surface, minimize maintenance and establish an attractive pathway to garages. 
    A minimum width of ten (10) feet for a driveway and a minimum of twelve (12) feet for a new curb cut shall be established. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 99-6, § 1, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 04-1, § 5, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 11-02, §§ 1-4, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 14-02, § 1, 11-17-14) 
Section 4.08A. - Requirements for placement of temporary storage units. 
    The following shall apply to the placement of temporary storage units within the City: 
A.	Temporary storage units may only be placed upon or within a driveway or parking area, or, if access exists at the side or rear of a lot, the side or rear yard. 
B.	No temporary storage unit shall be placed upon or within public property or a public place including without limitation a street, sidewalk or out-lawn between a public street and sidewalk. 
C.	A limit of one (1) temporary storage unit may be located upon or within a lot for a maximum of thirty (30) consecutive days, including the day of delivery and removal, within any six-month period. 
D.	A temporary storage unit may not exceed eight (8) feet in height, eight (8) feet six (6) inches in width or sixteen (16) feet in length. 
E.	A temporary storage unit shall be secured in a manner that does not endanger the safety of persons or property. 
F.	A temporary storage unit shall at all times, be maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing, holes or breaks. 
G.	No temporary storage unit shall be used for human occupancy or to store solid waste, construction debris, demolition debris, business inventory, commercial goods, goods for property other than the property where the temporary storage unit is located, or any illegal or hazardous material. Upon reasonable notice, the city may inspect the contents of any temporary storage unit at any reasonable time to confirm that it is not being used to store said materials. 
H.	A temporary storage unit which is not removed at the end of the time for which it may lawfully remain in place, may be removed by the city, without notice, and the cost of such removal shall be a lien upon the property on which such unit was located which costs may be collected by the city in the same manner as the city collects delinquent and ad valorem property taxes. 
I.	A sign advertising the company or vendor supplying a temporary storage unit located on a temporary storage unit shall not be subject to the provisions of chapter 20 hereof provided the temporary storage unit is in compliance with this section 4.08A. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 11-5-07)
Section 4.09. - Regulations applicable to all single-family dwellings. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish minimum standards of appearance and construction for all single-family dwellings placed in the city, whether constructed on a lot or a manufactured home. Construction and/or placement of a single-family dwelling on any lot or parcel shall be permitted only if the dwelling complies with all of the following standards: 
A.	If the dwelling unit is a manufactured home, the manufactured home must either be:
1.	New and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as amended, or any similar successor or replacement standards which may be promulgated; or 
2.	Used and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in subsection (1) above, and found, on inspection by the building inspector or his designee, to be in excellent condition and safe and fit for residential occupancy. 
B.	The dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building, electrical, plumbing, fire energy and other similar codes which are or may be adopted by the city, and with applicable federal or state standards or regulations for construction. Appropriate evidence of compliance with such standards or regulations shall be provided to the building inspector. 
C.	The dwelling unit shall comply with all restrictions and requirements of this ordinance, including, without limitation, the lot area, lot width, residential floor area, yard, and building height requirements of the district in which it is located. 
D.	The dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent continuous foundation which complies with applicable provisions of the building code adopted by the city. 
E.	If the dwelling unit is a manufactured home, the manufactured home shall be installed with the wheels and towing mechanism removed. 
F.	The dwelling unit shall have a minimum horizontal dimension across any front, side or rear elevation of twenty (20) feet at time of manufacture, placement or construction. 
G.	The dwelling shall be provided with one (1) accessory building or garage, either attached to the dwelling unit or detached on the same lot, having minimum dimensions of ten (10) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length. 
H.	The dwelling unit shall be connected to public sewer and water supply systems approved by the City of Lowell. 
I.	The foregoing standards shall not apply to a manufactured home located in a manufactured home park licensed by the Michigan Mobile Home Commission and approved by the city according to the provisions contained in chapter 12 of this ordinance except to the extent required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.10. - Temporary uses or buildings requiring zoning enforcement officer authorization. 
A.	Upon application, the zoning enforcement officer may issue a permit for the following temporary buildings or uses. Each permit shall specify a location for such building or use and shall be valid for a period of not more than six (6) calendar months. Permits may be renewed by the zoning enforcement officer for one (1) additional successive period of six (6) calendar months or less at the same location and for the same purpose. 
1.	Temporary office building or construction yard incidental and necessary to construction at the site where located. 
2.	Temporary sales office or model home incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real property in a new subdivision or housing project. In any case, such temporary office or model home shall be removed when fifty (50) percent or more of the lots or units have been sold or leased. 
B.	In considering authorization for all temporary uses or buildings, the zoning enforcement officer shall consider the following standards and may attach reasonable conditions to temporary uses or structures to ensure that the standards of this section are met. The zoning enforcement officer shall determine that: 
1.	The use or structure will not have an unreasonable detrimental effect upon adjacent properties; 
2.	The use or structure is reasonably necessary for the convenience and safety of the construction proposed; 
3.	The use or structure does not adversely impact the character of the surrounding neighborhood;
4.	Access to the use area or structure is located at a safe location.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.11. - Home occupations. 
A.	No person other than members of the resident family shall be engaged in the home occupation.
B.	The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than a total of twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit and/or accessory building shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
C.	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one (1) sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the main building. 
D.	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. Parking areas for such home occupation shall be located off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
E.	No merchandise or articles for sale shall be displayed for advertising purposes and no sign or device relative to the sale of such merchandise shall be displayed on the premises. Only those materials produced on the premises as a result of such home occupation may be submitted for sale. 
F.	No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family dwelling, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family dwelling. In case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.12. - Satellite dish antennas. 
A.	In any nonresidential district, the following restrictions shall apply:
1.	The dish antenna shall be permitted in the side and rear yard or mounted on top of a building, and securely anchored. 
2.	The nearest part of the antenna shall be at least five (5) feet from any property line. 
3.	The height shall not exceed the height restrictions in the district in which the proposed device is to be located. 
4.	No portion of the dish antenna shall contain any name, message, symbol, or other graphic representation. 
5.	A site plan shall be prepared and submitted to the building inspector for approval prior to issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall include the proposed location and an elevation drawing showing the proposed height and foundation details. 
B.	In any residential district, the following restrictions shall apply:
1.	The dish antenna shall be permitted in the rear yard only, unless such location prohibits the antenna from receiving signals in which case the zoning enforcement officer may approve another location on the lot. 
2.	The nearest part of the antenna shall be at least (5) feet from any property line.
3.	The unit shall be securely anchored as determined by the building inspector.
4.	The maximum height measured from the ground to the top edge of the dish shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
5.	The antenna shall be an unobtrusive color, as approved by the building inspector. Nor shall any portion of the dish antenna contain any name, message, symbol, or other graphic representation. 
6.	A site plan shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall include the proposed location of the antenna and an elevation drawing showing the proposed height, color, and foundation details. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.13. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.	Except where specifically provided to the contrary, and subject to the provisions of this section, the lawful use of any building or structure or of any land or premises which is existing and lawful on the effective date of this ordinance, or in the case of an amendment of this ordinance, then on the effective date of such amendment, may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
B.	Except where specifically provided to the contrary and subject to the provisions of this section, a building or structure which is existing and lawful on the effective date of this ordinance, or, in the case of an amendment of this ordinance, then on the effective date of such amendment, may be maintained and continued even though such building or structure does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
C.	Structures, buildings or uses nonconforming by reason of height, area and/or parking and loading space provisions may be extended, enlarged, altered, remodeled or modernized only when the following conditions are met: 
1.	The building or structure shall comply with all height, area, and/or parking and loading provisions with respect to such extension, enlargement, alteration, remodeling or modernization. 
2.	The zoning enforcement officer shall determine that such alteration, remodeling, or modernization will not substantially extend the life of any nonconforming building or structure. 
3.	Any use of a building or structure which is nonconforming by reason of parking and loading provisions and which is thereafter made conforming or less nonconforming by the addition of parking and/or loading space shall not thereafter be permitted to use such additionally acquired parking and/or loading space to meet requirements for any extension, enlargement, or change of use which requires greater areas for parking and/or loading space. 
Legal nonconforming buildings and structures in the MU District may be extended, enlarged, remodeled or modernized only if the extension, enlargement, remodeling or modernization does not increase the degree of the nonconformity. 
D.	No nonconforming use of any land or structure shall hereafter be moved, enlarged or extended. 
E.	Restoration and repair.
1.	Subject to the provisions of this section, nothing in this section shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure which is unsafe. 
2.	All repairs and maintenance work required to keep a nonconforming building or structure in sound condition may be made but it shall not be structurally altered to permit the use of such building or structure beyond its natural life except for repairs necessary to maintain public safety. 
3.	In the event any non-residential nonconforming building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, act of God or public enemy, it may be rebuilt or restored if the cost thereof does not exceed sixty (60) percent of the true cash value of the nonconforming building or structure prior to its damage or destruction. 
4.	In the event any non-residential nonconforming building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, act of God or public enemy such that the cost of restoration or repair would exceed sixty (60) percent of the true cash value of the nonconforming building or structure prior to its damage or destruction, a substantial improvement or rebuilding shall only be permitted if first authorized by the board of zoning appeals. In considering such authorization, the board of zoning appeals shall consider the following standards: 
a.	Whether such substantial improvement will significantly extend the probable duration of the nonconforming use. 
b.	Whether or not the land previously occupied by the nonconforming use can be reasonably used for a use permitted in the applicable district. 
5.	In the event any residential nonconforming building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, act of God or public enemy such that its replacement cost would exceed sixty (60) percent of the true cash value of the nonconforming building or structure prior to its damage or destruction, it may be rebuilt or restored provided that all yard and requirements of the district in which it is located are met, or the necessary variances obtained from the board of zoning appeals. 
6.	In the event any residential nonconforming building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, act of God or public enemy such that its replacement cost is less than sixty (60) percent of the true cash value of the nonconforming building or structure prior to its damage or destruction, it may be rebuilt or restored in its original nonconforming condition. 
7.	If a building or structure that is considered a historic resource pursuant to chapter 11.5 of the Code by the historic district commission is damaged by fire, wind, act of God or public enemy, such building or structure may be rebuilt or restored to its original nonconforming condition, regardless of the extent of the damage. 
F.	Change or discontinuance.
1.	The nonconforming use of a building or structure or of any land or premises shall not be: 
a.	Changed to any other nonconforming use.
b.	Re-established after it has been changed to a conforming use.
c.	Re-established after abandoned or discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months. A nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if one or more of the following conditions exists, and which shall be deemed to constitute an intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the nonconforming use: 
(1)	Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property, have been disconnected;
(2)	The property, buildings, and grounds, have fallen into disrepair;
(3)	Signs or other indications of the existence of the nonconforming use have been removed;
(4)	Removal of equipment or fixtures which are necessary for the operation of the nonconforming use; 
(5)	Other actions, which in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, constitute an intention of the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon the nonconforming use. 
G.	Any building or structure shall be considered existing and lawful and for purposes of section 4.13, A., to have been in use for the purpose for which constructed if on the effective date of this ordinance, a building permit has been obtained therefor, if required, or, if no building permit is required, a substantial start has been made toward construction and construction is thereafter pursued diligently to conclusion. 
H.	Any structures or uses which fail to conform to the previous City of Lowell Zoning Ordinance, were not permissible, nonconforming uses or structures thereunder, and which violate the within zoning ordinance shall not be considered permissible nonconforming uses under the within ordinance but shall be considered impermissible nonconforming uses and subject to the enforcement provisions of this ordinance. 
I.	Nonconforming Residential Structures.
1.	A nonconforming residential structure may be increased as long as the parallel line of the structure does not encroach any closer than conditions that presently exist. By doing so, they may not create any new nonconformities on any other setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 01-4, § 1, 10-15-01; Ord. No. 15-01, §§ 4, 5, 2-17-15) 
Section 4.13A. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
A.	In any district in which residential dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding other limitations imposed by the provisions of this zoning ordinance, a residential dwelling and permitted accessory building may be constructed or located on a single lot of record in existence at the effective date of the adoption of or applicable amendment to this zoning ordinance, provided, the lot meets at least eighty (80) percent of the required (i) lot area, (ii) lot width and (iii) side yard setback required by that district and, further, provided, that any building or structure constructed or located on the lot complies with all other yard setback requirements. 
B.	If two (2) or more lots of record or combination of lots and portions of lots of record in existence at the effective date of the adoption of or applicable amendment to this zoning ordinance with continuous frontage along a public street and under single ownership do not meet the requirements established for lot width, lot area or setbacks, the property involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this zoning ordinance, and no portion of such parcel shall be used or divided in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width, lot area and setback requirements established by this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 4-2-07)
Section 4.14. - Essential services. 
    The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential services, shall be permitted as authorized or regulated by law and other ordinances in any use district, it being the intention hereof to exempt such erection, construction, alteration, and maintenance from the application of this ordinance, except those which may be considered a danger to the community health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.15. - Excavations or holes. 
    The construction, maintenance, or existence within the city of any unprotected, unbarricaded, open, or dangerous excavations, holes, pits, or wells, which constitute or are likely to constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety, or welfare, are hereby prohibited; provided, however, this section shall not prevent any excavation under a permit issued by the building inspector where such excavations are properly protected and warning signs posted in such manner as approved by the building inspector; and provided further, that this section shall not apply to streams, natural bodies of water, or to ditches, reservoirs, and other such bodies of water created or existing by authority of governmental units or agencies. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.16. - Recreational vehicle storage in residential districts. 
    Licensed and operable recreational vehicles may be stored or parked in residential districts, provided the following regulations are complied with: 
A.	Recreational vehicles may be stored or parked to the rear of the front building line of the primary structure. 
B.	Recreational vehicles may be stored or parked in a driveway not less than ten (10) feet from the front lot line. 
C.	Recreational vehicles may be used for temporary occupancy for one (1) period not to exceed nine (9) consecutive days during any six (6) consecutive calendar months as long as they are otherwise in compliance with this section 4.16. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 02-3, § 1, 7-16-02)
Section 4.17. - Swimming pools. 
A.	Pools used for swimming or bathing shall conform with the requirements of this section; provided, however, these regulations shall not be applicable to any such pool less than twenty-four (24) inches deep or having a surface area less than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet, except where such pools are permanently equipped with a water recirculating system or involve structural materials. 
B.	A swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall not be constructed, installed, enlarged or altered until a permit has been obtained from the zoning enforcement officer. 
C.	The outside edge of the pool wall shall not be located closer than six (6) feet from any rear or side lot line; provided, that if any part of the pool walls are more than two (2) feet above the surrounding grade level, such pool shall be placed or erected not less than ten (10) feet from any lot line. No pool shall be located under any electrical wiring or in a front yard. 
D.	Each pool shall be enclosed by a fence or wall with a height of at least four (4) feet, sufficient to make such body of water inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure, including gates therein, must be not less than four (4) feet above the underlying ground; all gates must be self-latching with latches placed four (4) feet above the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. 
E.	All swimming pool installations shall comply with the State Construction Code and all standard codes referred to therein. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.18. - Mechanical work. 
A.	Mechanical work on trucks over one (1) ton or more, or race cars, stock cars or otherwise, owned by the occupant of a dwelling, or on any vehicles not owned by an occupant of the premises is prohibited in residential districts. Any permitted work on vehicles must be performed entirely within a building, and no parts or vehicles not in a legally operable condition shall be stored outside. 
B.	In all residential districts, motor vehicles not intended for private passenger use shall be garaged at all times. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 4.19. - Keeping of pets and other animals. 
A.	No more than three (3) adult dogs or cats in combination shall be kept or housed in one (1) residential unit in any residential district. 
B.	One (1) horse may be kept on a lot of not less than one and one-half (11/2) acres, providing the structure containing such use is located not less than one hundred (100) feet from all adjoining residential district lot lines or residential use. An additional horse may be permitted for each one-half (1/2) acre over one and one-half (11/2) acres. 
C.	As long as applicable public health standards are met, fowl (excluding roosters), rabbits or similar animals may be kept within the living space of a residential unit in all residential zone districts. Fowl (excluding roosters), rabbits or similar animals kept outside or in an outside enclosure in any residential zone districts is (i) permitted by right if the lot is at least an acre in size and (ii) permitted by special use permit if the lot is less than an acre, but at least one-half (1/2) acre. Two (2) such animals are permitted for each one-half (1/2) acre in lot size. Roosters may not be kept either inside or outside in any residential zone district. Any outside structure housing such animals shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from all adjoining lot lines. Setback requirements do not, however, apply to such animals housed within the living space of a residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 6-4-07)
Section 4.20. - Private streets. 
A.	Purpose. The city determines that it is in the best interest of the public health, safety, and welfare to regulate the construction, improvement, extension, relocation, and use of private streets. These provisions have been enacted to assure that private streets: 
1.	Will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare;
2.	Will not adversely affect the long term development policies of the city;
3.	Will be designed and constructed with width, surface, and grade to assure safe passage and maneuverability of private vehicles, police, fire, ambulance, and other safety vehicles. 
4.	Will be constructed so as to protect against or minimize soil erosion and prevent damage to the lakes, streams, wetlands, and natural-environment of the city. 
B.	Definitions. As used in this section, "safe and unimpeded route of travel" shall mean a roadway of adequate width to accommodate the safe, two-way passage of vehicles, and of sufficient construction to accommodate any fire, police, rescue, or other emergency vehicle which may be utilized by the city. 
C.	Frontage and access. 
1.	Any lot not having frontage on a public street shall have frontage upon a private street. 
2.	All parcels utilizing a private street shall have frontage on the private street for a distance equal to or greater than the minimum lot width required for the district in which the parcel is located. 
3.	All private streets shall have direct access to a public street.
D.	Permits. 
1.	No individual, association, corporation, or entity, either public or private, shall construct a private street without first having obtained a private street permit from the city council. 
2.	The building inspector shall not issue building permits for construction of any building or structure on lots served by a private street until construction of the private street as approved by the city council has been completed. 
3.	A driveway permit shall be obtained from the Michigan Department of Transportation, where applicable, or from the City of Lowell. 
4.	A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit shall be obtained, as may be required by the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1972, as amended. 
5.	All other required State of Michigan permits shall be obtained.
6.	The city council may elect to have all design and construction plans reviewed by the city's attorney, fire chief, engineer, or planner prior to consideration of the application for the private street permit. 
E.	Application. An application for a private street permit shall contain the following: 
1.	A completed private street permit application, provided by the city.
2.	A detailed written description of the development to be served by the private street.
3.	Seven (7) copies of a plan, drawn to scale, prepared by a registered engineer, showing the precise location, grade, route, elevation, dimensions, and design of the private street and any proposed extensions thereto, existing and proposed curb cuts, and the location and distance to any public streets which the private street is to intersect. However, the plan may be prepared by a registered surveyor, rather than a registered engineer, if the proposed private street is to serve five (5) or fewer parcels or main buildings, and if the zoning enforcement officer waives in writing the requirement for the plan to be prepared by a registered engineer. 
4.	A survey of the right-of-way by a registered land surveyor, together with surveys for each parcel to be served by the private street. 
5.	The location of all public utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, telephone, gas, electricity, and television cable to be located within the private street right-of-way or within twenty (20) feet of either side thereof. Copies of the instruments describing and granting such easements shall be submitted with the application. 
6.	The location of any lakes, streams, wetlands, and drains within the proposed right-of-way or within one hundred (100) feet thereof. 
7.	The location of any other buildings and structures located, or to be located, within one hundred (100) feet of the private street right-of-way. 
F.	Design requirements. 
1.	The specifications for width, surface and base materials, curbing, drainage utility locations and method of construction of a private street shall conform to the standards set forth in sub-subsections 2. and 3. below based on the number of dwelling units served by such private streets as well as the other provisions of this subsection F. 
2.	Private streets serving three (3) to five (5) dwelling units shall:
a.	Have a minimum sixty-six (66) foot right-of-way easement granted to adjacent properties principally served by such private street. 
b.	Be constructed in a good and workmanlike manner upon and parallel to the centerline of the right-of-way easement. 
c.	Be constructed so as to control storm water runoff and permit effective storm water drainage by such means as ditches and valley gutters constructed parallel to and on either side of the street, sloping the sides of the street from the center thereof or other effective methods. 
d.	Have a driving surface of either asphalt or concrete with a firmly compacted base consisting of the following cross sections: 
i.	Asphalt -
- six (6) inches of sand in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City 
- six (6) inches of gravel in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City 
- three (3) inches of asphalt placed as two (2) layers in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City. 
ii.	Concrete -
- six (6) inches of sand in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City 
- six (6) inches of concrete in accordance with specifications as established from time to time buy the City. 
e.	Have a finished driving surface width of not less than sixteen (16) feet with a six (6) inch thick by two (2) feet wide gravel shoulder on each side of the driving surface. 
f.	Be constructed, when and where necessary, over adequate culverts.
g.	If ending with a cul-de-sac, have a minimum turnaround radius of forty-five (45) feet.
h.	Not be expanded to serve more than five (5) dwelling units without meeting the requirements of subsection 3 immediately below. 
i.	If in the future a determination is made to convert the private street to a public street, conform to public street specifications. 
3.	Private streets serving six (6) or more dwelling units shall:
a.	Have a minimum sixty-six (66) foot right-of-way easement granted to adjacent properties principally served by such private street. 
b.	Be constructed in a good and workmanlike manner upon and parallel to the centerline of the right-of-way easement. 
c.	Have culverts placed at all natural drainage courses or other waterways; sizes and grades shall be determined using the appropriate stormwater runoff formula calculations and culvert materials shall conform to city engineer specifications. 
d.	Receive the approval of the engineer designated by the City of all designs, materials and methods of installation where the placement of underground storm sewers and valley gutters is determined necessary by the city engineer. 
e.	Shall receive the approval of the engineer designated by the City of the layout including their location, intersections, cul-de-sacs, vertical street alignment, street grades, street signs, horizontal curves, curb openings at or near intersections and other aspects as determined by the engineer designated by the City. 
f.	Have a driving surface of either asphalt or concrete with a firmly compacted base consisting of the following cross sections: 
i.	Asphalt -
- twelve (12) inches of sand in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City 
- six (6) inches of gravel in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City 
- three (3) inches of asphalt placed as two (2) layers in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City. 
ii.	Concrete -
- twelve (12) inches of sand in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City 
- six (6) inches of concrete in accordance with specifications as established from time to time by the City. 
g.	Have a finished driving surface width of not less than twenty-four (24) feet with a six (6) inch thick by two (2) feet wide gravel shoulder on each side of the driving surface. 
h.	If ending with a cul-de-sac, have a minimum turnaround radius of forty-five (45) feet.
i.	If in the future a determination is made to convert the private street to a public street, conform to public street specifications. 
4.	Length of private streets.
a.	No private street shall extend for a distance of more than eight hundred (800) feet in length from the nearest public street right-of-way from which access is gained, as measured along the centerline of the private street to the furthest point of any private street, except as otherwise noted, without a private street access complying with this section being provided to another public street. 
b.	The maximum length of a proposed private street may be exceeded if the city council, after recommendation of the planning commission, finds that at least one (1) of the following conditions exists: 
(1)	That topography or other significant natural features preclude access to any other public street or adjoining property on which a public street may be constructed. Such significant natural features shall be clearly identified and marked on the proposed private street plans. 
(2)	That not allowing a longer private street would result in inefficient use of land. Alternate development plans demonstrating that no other development is feasible shall be submitted by the applicant and reviewed by the city council prior to confirming this finding. 
(3)	That other methods of access are available such that emergency vehicles are assured a safe and unimpeded route of travel to the properties served by the private street. Such access shall be reviewed by the fire chief and the recommendation forwarded to the planning commission. 
c.	The city council, upon a finding that at least one (1) of the above conditions exists, shall establish the maximum length of the proposed private street. 
5.	Right-of-way/easement width.
a.	All private streets constructed after the effective date of this ordinance shall have a recorded permanent right-of-way and easement with a minimum width of at least sixty-six (66) feet. The right-of-way shall also expressly permit public or private utilities to be installed within the right-of-way. 
b.	Private streets in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance whose right-of-way or easement width is less than sixty-six (66) feet need not provide additional right-of-way or easement width, but such width shall not be subsequently reduced so as to increase its noncompliance with these requirements. 
6.	The layout of the private street and the intersections of the private street with either a public or private street shall be such that clear vision, safe turning and travel in all directions at the posted speed limit is assured, as determined by the city engineer. The minimum distance between intersections of public and/or private street rights-of-way shall not be less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet, as measured along the right-of-way line thereof. 
7.	Existing private streets.
a.	A private street existing on the effective date of this ordinance may continue in existence and be maintained and used, though it may not comply with the provisions of this section. Such private streets shall be continuously maintained so as to provide a safe and unimpeded route of travel for motor vehicle traffic, pedestrians, and emergency vehicles in all weather conditions. 
b.	Any private street existing on the effective date of this ordinance to which one (1) or more additional lots or parcels are created or otherwise permitted access, shall have the entire length of the existing private street upgraded to comply with the applicable requirements of this subsection F. 
c.	If a private street existing on the effective date of this ordinance is extended by the construction and use of an additional length of private street the entire private street, including the existing portion and the additional portion, shall comply with the applicable requirements of this subsection F. 
G.	Review standards; modification of certain requirements. 
1.	Prior to approving a private street permit application, the city council shall determine the following: 
a.	The proposed private street will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
b.	The proposed private street will not adversely affect the use of land.
c.	The private street is constructed to assure a safe and unimpeded route of travel for motor vehicle traffic, pedestrians, and emergency vehicles in all weather conditions. 
d.	The private street is constructed so as to protect against or minimize soil erosion and prevent damage to the lakes, streams, wetlands, and natural environment of the city. 
e.	The construction of the private street will conform to the requirements of this section.
2.	The city council may require that the applicant comply with reasonable conditions relative to the design and construction of the private street. 
3.	Upon application the city council may modify any of the private street requirements of this section after finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.	Topography, soils, and/or other significant natural features physically preclude or prevent compliance with the requirements of this section without substantial alteration of such natural features. Such natural features shall be clearly identified and described in the application for any such modification; 
b.	The justification of any modification is not due solely to financial considerations which, upon approval of the requested modification would provide a financial benefit; 
c.	That no other reasonable private street design alternatives are available that would comply with the requirements of this section; and 
d.	That the request for modification was reviewed by the fire chief and/or city engineer, and/or any other person or official designated by the city council and a recommendation submitted to the council. 
H.	Maintenance and repairs. 
1.	Private streets shall be maintained in a manner that complies with the provisions of this section. 
2.	All private streets shall be continuously maintained in such a way that they will not constitute a danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. All private streets shall be continuously maintained in such a way that they assure a safe and unimpeded route of travel for motor vehicle traffic, pedestrians, and emergency vehicles in all weather conditions. 
3.	All costs for maintenance and repair of the private street shall be the responsibility of the property owners or any property owners association served by the private street. 
4.	Private street maintenance or restrictive covenant agreements.
a.	The applicant(s)/owner(s) of the proposed private street right-of-way or private street shall provide the city council with a recordable private street maintenance or restrictive covenant agreement between the owner(s) of the private street right-of-way and any other parties having any interest therein, or other documentation satisfactory to the city council which shall provide for and assure that the private street shall be regularly maintained, repaired, and snow plowed so as to assure that the private street is safe for travel at all times and the cost thereof paid. 
b.	The applicant(s) agree, by filing an application for and receiving a permit under this ordinance, that they will assure that any building(s) or parcels thereafter created or constructed on the private street shall also be subject to the street maintenance or restrictive covenant agreement and that said agreement shall be recorded and shall run with the land. A copy of said agreement shall be furnished to the city council prior to the issuance of the permit. 
I.	Performance guarantee. The city council may, as a condition of the private street construction permit, require that the applicant provide a performance guarantee, in accordance with the provisions of Act 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921, as amended. 
J.	Inspections/certificate of compliance. 
1.	Upon completion of construction of the private street, the city engineer shall inspect the completed construction to determine whether it complies with the approved plans, specifications, permit, and this ordinance. 
2.	The applicant(s), at the applicant(s)'s expense, shall provide the city with a set of "as built" drawings bearing a certificate and statement from a registered engineer certifying that the private street has been completed in accordance with the requirements of the permit and the City of Lowell. 
3.	If the completed private street does not satisfy the requirements of the permit or this ordinance, the applicant(s) shall be notified of the noncompliance in writing and shall be given a reasonable period of time within which to correct the deficiencies. Failure to correct the deficiencies within the time provided shall subject the applicant(s) to the penalties provided for in this ordinance. 
K.	Fees for the permits required hereunder shall be set by the city council from time to time by resolution. Additionally, the city council may require that the applicant(s) put sufficient funds in escrow to cover the costs of having the city attorney, engineer, planner, or other professional review the private street plans, specifications, and maintenance agreements, and to do the necessary inspections. 
L.	The applicant(s)/owner(s) of the private street agree that by applying for or securing a permit to construct the private street that they shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims for personal injury and/or property damage arising out of the use of the private street or of the failure to properly construct, maintain, use, repair, and replace the private street. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 04-3, § 1, 7-19-04)
Section 4.21. - Wireless communication towers. 
A.	A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a commercial wireless communication tower on such lot when such tower is approved in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.	Commercial wireless communication antennas and related equipment may be permitted within any zone district if mounted on an existing commercial wireless communication tower, publicly-owned tower or other structure provided the conditions in section 17.04BB have been met, and provided the height of the tower or other structure will not be increased, and provided the footprint of the related buildings, structures and supports will not be increased. If these conditions have not been met, the applicant must obtain site plan review and approval from the planning commission. The planning commission shall have the discretion of holding a public hearing on the review of the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, § 7, 9-18-00)
Section 4.22. - Amateur radio antennas. 
    Amateur radio antennas (being antennas operating for the purpose of receiving or transmitting communications by a radio station described in section 153(q) of title 42 of the United States Code and licensed by the federal communications commission) may be approved by the planning commission as a special land use in any zone district if it is reasonably demonstrated that the application of any of the provisions of this article would be to preclude or prevent the operation of such amateur radio antenna. In granting such special land use, the planning commission may impose reasonable conditions upon such approval, but such conditions shall not interfere with the reasonable accommodation of amateur radio communications. Such conditions, if any, shall not be more than the minimum practicable regulations necessary to accomplish the city's legitimate purposes in regulating such amateur radio antennas. 
(Ord. No. 00-4, § 8, 9-18-00)
Section 4.23. - Canopies and awnings. 
    Canopies and awnings are permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3 and PF Districts to be placed around door or window openings in buildings and structures without limitation as to number. The height of such canopies and awnings from the lowest point on canopies and awnings shall not encroach beyond the public sidewalk into the public street. In addition, canopies and awnings are permitted over installed equipment attached to a building or structure. Such awnings shall be compatible with the building or structure. In addition to the provisions of this section, chapter 11.5 of the Code shall apply to awnings and canopies located in a historic district. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 3, 2-21-06)
Section 4.24. - Outdoor lighting requirements and restrictions. 
A.	Purpose. The purpose of this section 4.24 is to allow for nighttime use of property through proper illumination while creating and maintaining safety for pedestrians and motorists by minimizing glare directed onto public rights-of-way. In addition, the requirements of this section 4.24 are meant to preserve the restful quality of nighttime by eliminating intrusive, artificial light and illumination that unnecessarily contributes to "sky glow," and to reduce light pollution and light trespass onto adjacent properties. 
B.	Exempted lighting. Lighting commonly associated with single-family or two-family dwellings, including porch lights, low-level lawn lights, soffit-mounted facade illumination and special seasonal lights, such as holiday decorations, shall be exempted from the requirements of this section 4.24, provided, however, that flood lights, spot lights or yard lights mounted higher than ten (10) feet above grade shall be subject to the standards of section 4.24E hereof. Lighting associated with temporary or special events, may be exempted from the requirements of this section 4.24 hereof upon prior request and approval of the city manager or his or her designee. 
C.	Scope and application. 
1.	The requirements of this section 4.24 shall apply to any new development or renovation requiring a site plan pursuant to chapter 18 of this ordinance and to the installation of any new regulated lighting as provided under section D of this section 4.24. New developments shall comply with this section 4.24, as shall existing developments under consideration for an other than minor changes in a site plan as described in section 18.09 hereof. 
2.	Any new development or renovation requiring a site plan pursuant to chapter 18 of this ordinance shall include detail on the design and location of all exterior lighting, including light poles, wall-mounted fixtures and illuminated signs. The planning commission or zoning enforcement officer may require submission of additional details, including lighting output, bulb type, planned lighting coverage and other elements to determine the extent of proposed lighting on the site and any potential impacts off the property subject to site plan approval. 
D.	Regulated lighting. The following types of outdoor lighting shall be regulated by this section 4.24: 
1.	Lighting intended to illuminate a site, facade and/or parking area for commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple family residential uses. 
2.	Private street lighting and public street lighting, including that installed by a municipality or power company. 
3.	All forms of neon lighting.
4.	Lighting of signs.
5.	Lighting not exempted under section 4.24B hereof.
E.	General standards. Outdoor lighting shall be designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the following standards: 
1.	Direct light and directly-reflected light shall be confined to the subject property by screening, shielding, landscaping or other measures such that no lighting in excess of one-half (1/2) foot candle shall be cast on adjoining private property. This standard shall not apply to internally lit signs meant to be visible from the adjoining public right-of-way. 
2.	Lamps or bulbs, fixtures and other physical parts of the fixture assembly shall be shielded or hooded to prevent glare from traveling beyond the subject property and to ensure that the light source is not directly visible from beyond the boundary of the subject property. 
3.	Light fixture assemblies shall have one hundred (100) percent cut-off above the horizontal plane at the lowest part of the light source. The light rays may not be emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as illustrated by figure 4.24. 
Figure 4.24. Fully Cut-off, Downward Facing Fixtures 

4.	There shall be no lighting of a blinking, flashing or fluttering nature including changes in light intensity, brightness or color. Beacon, strobe and search lights shall be prohibited. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner which might be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
5.	In addition to the requirements of this section 4.24, parking area lighting shall comply with the standards of section 19.03C of this ordinance. 
6.	The planning commission or zoning enforcement officer may impose additional conditions on site illumination to further the purpose of this section 4.24. 
7.	Internally-lit signs, electronic message boards, back-lit changeable copy signs and signs incorporating light emitting diode (LED), liquid crystal, video or other types of internally-lit systems shall be designed, shielded and oriented so as not to interfere with adjacent public rights-of-way or adjacent property and such signs shall not emit light exceeding either ten (10) foot candles measured four (4) feet perpendicular to the sign face or one-half (1/2) foot candle measured at the property line of adjoining privately-owned property. 
F.	Departures. Outdoor lighting shall comply with the requirements of this section 4.24, provided, the planning commission may, upon written application approve departures from the standards of this section 4.24 if the planning commission finds that the following standards are demonstrated by the applicant: 
1.	The use is a permitted or special land use in the zoning district.
2.	The applicant will undertake reasonable measures to assure that the public health, safety and welfare would not be undermined by approving the proposed departure. 
3.	The proposed plan includes reasonable measures to mitigate any glare, annoyance, intrusion or distraction would be caused by the proposed lighting. 
4.	The general public would benefit from the proposed lighting and the proposed lighting and related land use are consistent with the city master plan. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 2, 1-3-11)
Section 4.25. - Outdoor furnaces. 
A.	Purpose. The city desires to regulate the location and operation of outdoor furnaces to secure and promote the health, safety and welfare of the public. Outdoor furnaces are an alternative to traditional home-heating methods and have increased in popularity because of rising fuel costs. This increased usage has led to the recognition that outdoor furnaces can impact health, safety and welfare if not designed and used properly and these impacts are multiplied when used in densely populated areas. Outdoor furnaces shall only be permitted under certain circumstances and only when specific requirements are met in order to broaden home-heating options for city residents while insuring regulations are in place to protect residents from, health, safety and welfare impacts. 
B.	Application. An outdoor furnace shall not be installed on any property unless a certificate of zoning compliance and any required mechanical and building permits have been issued by the city. A mechanical permit application along with the applicable fee shall be submitted to the city with descriptive information that is necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and any applicable building codes. In addition, the applicant shall submit a signed acknowledgement indicating that combustion in the outdoor furnace of material prohibited by this section is grounds for revocation of the certificate of zoning compliance requiring immediate discontinuance of its use. 
C.	Eligibility. Outdoor furnaces are permitted in side and rear yards as an accessory use to residential dwellings (i) on parcels in a SR-Suburban Residential District and (ii) on parcels in a R-1 Residential District with a parcel area of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. In a R-1 Residential District the application for a mechanical permit shall include a recordance deed restriction in a form acceptable to the city signed by the property owner prohibiting the subdivision or splitting of the parcel in a manner which would result in the outdoor furnace being located on a parcel of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or with isolation and setback dimensions less than those required by this section. 
D.	Isolation and setback. An outdoor furnace shall be located a minimum of eighty (80) feet from any residential dwelling on an adjacent parcel and shall be located a minimum of forty (40) feet from the property line of the parcel where it is located. 
E.	Stack height. Stack or chimney height of an outdoor furnace shall extend to an elevation at least two (2) feet above the roof peak of any residential dwelling within three hundred (300) feet of the outdoor furnace. 
F.	Combustion materials. Only dry, seasoned wood or pellets manufactured for use in an outdoor furnace may be used in an outdoor furnace. The city may approve an alternative fuel if it is recommended by the outdoor furnace manufacturer and will result in air emissions no greater than that of dry, seasoned wood or pellets manufactured for outdoor furnace use. Combustion of toxic or other materials that generate offensive odors or excessive smoke or that are harmful to human health are prohibited. Such prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, trash, garbage, plastics of any kind, wood that is painted, varnished or treated, gasoline, oil, rubber, naphtha, materials treated with petroleum products, leaves and paper products including cardboard. Any use of prohibited construction materials shall result in the revocation of the zoning compliance certificate requiring the immediate discontinuance of use of the outdoor furnace. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 2, 4-18-11)
CHAPTER 5. - SR - SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 5.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district, compatible with the Low Density Single Family Future Land Use Category of the Master Plan, is intended for residential uses on lots that are generally larger than those found in more developed areas of the city. The purpose of this district is to foster an open space character of the lands within this district, minimizing public service costs, limiting urban influence, and preserving natural features. Certain compatible, nonresidential uses may also be permitted within the district. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 08-03, § 1, 4-7-08)
Section 5.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the SR District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right: 
A.	Farms for both general and specialized farming, together with farm dwellings and buildings and other installations useful to such farms, including roadside stands with less than two hundred (200) square feet of sales area. 
B.	Single-family dwellings.
C.	State licensed residential family care facilities, but not including state licensed residential facilities caring for four (4) or less minors. 
D.	Family day care homes.
E.	Home occupations in accordance with the requirements of section 4.11.
F.	Public parks, playgrounds, fairgrounds, and cemeteries.
G.	Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right, or special land uses. 
H.	Single-family dwellings otherwise meeting the requirements of this chapter permitted in accordance with the requirements of chapter 23 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 03-2, § 1, 2-18-03)
Section 5.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the SR District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Country clubs, golf courses, riding stables, and private athletic grounds and parks, and other similar uses, including related uses, such as snack bars or small retail shops selling goods directly related to the primary use. 
B.	Commercial greenhouses and nurseries, when operated primarily as wholesaling operations and limited retail sales. 
C.	Removal and processing of topsoil, stone, rock, sand, gravel, lime or other soil or mineral resources. 
D.	Kennels.
E.	Radio and television transmitting buildings and towers.
F.	Bed and breakfast establishments.
G.	Schools, churches, libraries, and community center buildings.
H.	Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.
I.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires, and underground utility systems. 
J.	Group and commercial day care homes and facilities.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-5-09)
Section 5.04. - District regulations. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building of structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
Front yard30 feetSide yardResidential Buildings - 20 feet total/8 feet minimum
Non-residential Buildings - 30 feetRear yard35 feetBuilding height35 feet or 21/2 storiesLot coverage35%Minimum lot area23,000 square feetMinimum lot width125 feetMinimum dwelling unit floor area1,500 square feet DFA 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 03-5, § 2, 8-18-03) 
CHAPTER 6. - R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 6.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district, compatible with the Single Family 1 Future Land Use Category of the Master Plan, is primarily intended for residential uses on moderate sized lots. Its purpose is to foster stable neighborhoods and to minimize the encroachment of incompatible uses. Certain related non-residential uses are also provided. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 08-03, § 2, 4-7-08)
Section 6.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the R-1 District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right: 
A.	Single-family dwellings.
B.	State licensed residential family care facilities, but not including state licensed residential facilities caring for four (4) or less minors. 
C.	Family day care homes.
D.	Home occupations in accordance with the requirements of section 4.11.
E.	Public parks, playgrounds, fairgrounds, and cemeteries.
F.	Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right, or special land uses. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 6.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the R-1 District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	State licensed residential group care facilities.
B.	Group and commercial day care homes and facilities.
C.	Bed and breakfast establishments.
D.	Schools, churches, libraries, and community center buildings.
E.	Public or private campgrounds.
F.	Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.
G.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires, and underground utility systems. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 6.04. - District regulations. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
Front yard30 feetSide yardSingle-family dwellings - 20 feet total/8 feet minimum
Non-residential buildings - 30 feetRearyard25 feetBuilding height35 feet or 21/2 storiesLot coverage35%Minimum lot area9,750 square feetMinimum lot width75 feetMinimum dwelling unit floor area1,500 square feet DFA 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 03-3, § 2, 2-18-03; Ord.No. 03-5, § 3, 8-18-03)
CHAPTER 7. - R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 7.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district, compatible with the Single Family 2 Future Land Use Category of the Master Plan, is intended for residential uses, and related non-residential uses. The overall purpose of this district is to provide additional housing opportunities by providing a variety of housing options, including single- and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 08-03, § 3, 4-7-08)
Section 7.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the R-2 District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right: 
A.	Single-family dwellings.
B.	Two-family dwellings.
C.	State licensed residential family care facilities, but not including state licensed residential facilities caring for four (4) or less minors. 
D.	Family day care homes.
E.	Home occupations in accordance with the requirements of section 4.11.
F.	Public parks, playgrounds, and cemeteries.
G.	Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right, or special land uses. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 7.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in a R-2 District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Multiple-family dwellings.
B.	Public or private campgrounds.
C.	Schools, churches, libraries and community center buildings.
D.	Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.
E.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires and underground utility systems. 
F.	Bed and breakfast establishments.
G.	Group and commercial day care homes and facilities.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-3, § 1, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 10-5-09) 
Section 7.04. - District regulations. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
Front yard30 feetSide yardSingle- and two-family dwellings - 15 feet total/6 feet minimum
Non-residential buildings - 20 feet
Multiple-family dwellings - 20 feet or equal to the height of the building, whichever is greater Rear yard25 feetBuilding height35 feet or 21/2 storiesLot coverage30%Minimum lot areaSingle- and two-family dwellings - 8,200 square feet
Multiple-family dwelling - 12,000 square feet for the first 4 units plus 2,500 square feet for each unit over 4. Overall net density shall not exceed six (6) units per acre Minimum lot widthSingle-family dwellings - 66 feet
Two-family and multiple-family dwellings - 100 feetMinimum floor areaSingle- and two-family dwellings - 1,000 square feet DFA per unit/700 square feet DFA per unit on the ground floor
Multiple-family dwellings - 500 square feet + 150 square feet per bedroom DFA per unit  
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 03-5, § 4, 8-13-03)
CHAPTER 8. - R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 8.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district, compatible with the Multiple Family Residential Future Land Use Category and the Downtown Edge Future Land Use of the Master Plan, is intended for residential uses, and related non-residential uses. The overall purpose of this district is to provide additional housing opportunities by providing a variety of housing options, including single- and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 08-03, § 4, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 4-6-09) 
Section 8.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the R-3 District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right, subject to the approval of a site plan, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18: 
A.	Single-family dwellings.
B.	Two-family dwellings.
C.	Multiple-family dwellings.
D.	State licensed residential family care facilities, but not including state licensed residential facilities caring for four (4) or less minors. 
E.	Family day care homes.
F.	Home occupations in accordance with the requirements of section 4.11.
G.	Public parks, playgrounds, and cemeteries.
H.	Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right, or special land uses. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 8.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the R-3 District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Public or private campgrounds.
B.	Schools, churches, libraries and community center buildings.
C.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires and underground utility system. 
D.	Bed and breakfast establishments.
E.	Group and commercial day care homes and facilities.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-3, § 2, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.04. - District regulations. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
Front yard30 feetSide yardSingle- and two-family dwellings - 13 feet total/5 feet minimum
Multiple-family dwellings - 20 feet or equal to the height of the building whichever is greater
Non-residential buildings - 30 feet Rear yard25 feetBuilding height35 feet or 21/2 storiesLot coverage30%Minimum lot areaSingle-family dwellings - 8,200 square feet
Two-family dwellings - 9,000 square feet
Multiple-family dwellings - 12,000 square feet for the first 4 units plus 2,500 square feet for each unit over 4. Overall net density shall not exceed 10 units per acre Minimum lot widthSingle-family dwellings - 66 feet
Two-family dwellings - 80 feet
Multiple-family dwellings - 100 feetMinimum floor areaSingle- and two-family dwellings - 1,000 square feet DFA per unit/700 square feet DFA per unit on the ground floor
Multiple-family dwellings - 500 square feet plus 150 square feet per bedroom DFA per unit  
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 03-5, § 5, 8-18-03; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-2-07) 
CHAPTER 9. - MHP - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT 

Section 9.01. - Scope. 
A.	This district shall be compatible with the Manufactured Housing Future Land Use Category of the Master Plan. For the preservation of the interests of various types of residential developments which should be permitted in every community and for the protection to the residents of any manufactured home park development, these regulations are considered to be minimum standards to be applied to all manufactured home park developments in the city. 
B.	All manufactured home parks shall comply with the applicable requirements of Act 419 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976, as amended, provided further that said developments meet the standards, conditions and all other provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 4-6-09)
Section 9.02. - Installation and occupation of manufactured homes. 
A.	No manufactured home shall be placed or parked or installed in a manufactured home park until such time as a building permit is obtained from the building inspector. Such permit shall be issued by the building inspector after making a finding that said manufactured home meets construction standards as approved by the Federal HUD Code, or has been certified by a manufacturer as constructed according to the requirements of the Federal HUD Code. 
B.	No manufactured home shall be occupied by any person as a residence or for any other purpose until such time as said manufactured home park is placed or situated on a specific lot in the manufactured home park and has been inspected by the building inspector and issued an occupancy permit. Such inspection shall include the placement, the interconnection to utilities, and review compliance with all necessary state, city, or other ordinances and regulations. Such permit shall be issued by the building inspector on payment of inspection fee as may be authorized by resolution of the city council from time to time. In the event said manufactured home is moved to another lot or another manufactured home is placed on the specific lot, a new certificate of occupancy must be obtained by the owner or resident from the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 9.03. - Application procedures. 
    Preliminary approval shall not be issued by the city until application for the manufactured home park has been approved by the City of Lowell in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
A.	Site plan: Any application for the extension, alteration, or construction of a manufactured home park shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed development and all permanent buildings indicating the proposed methods of compliance with these requirements. Said site plan shall be [in] conformance with the provisions and requirements of Chapter 18 of this ordinance. 
B.	Approval: In reviewing the proposed development's acceptability the following shall be among the major considerations prior to official action being taken: 
1.	Whether the proposal is in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
2.	Whether the proposal meets all the design standards of this ordinance and other applicable local codes, regulations, or ordinances. 
3.	Whether the density of the proposed development could adversely affect adjacent properties and land uses. 
4.	Whether the proposed development can be reasonably expected to constitute a health hazard or public nuisance to adjacent properties because of inappropriate in [or] inadequate sanitation and/or drainage facilities. 
5.	Whether the proposed development produces an extreme or undue demand on available fire and police protection. 
6.	Whether the traffic characteristics of the proposed development can be expected to place an extreme or undue burden on the adjacent publicly available vehicular and/or pedestrian circulation facilities. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 9.04. - Standards and regulations. 
    All manufactured home parks shall be designed and developed in accordance with the following standards and regulations. 
A.	Minimum site size for a manufactured home park shall be ten (10) acres.
B.	Minimum number of manufactured home spaces shall be forty (40). Required streets and utilities shall be completed for at least twenty-five (25) manufactured home spaces along with related improvements before first occupancy. 
C.	Each manufactured home park shall have direct access only to a major street or state trunkline highway. 
D.	No access to the site shall be located closer than two hundred (200) feet from any public street intersection. Minimum street widths within the manufactured home park shall be accordance with the following schedule: 
ParkingDirectionMinimum Street WidthNo on-street parkingone (1) way13 feettwo (2) way21 feetParallel parking one sideone (1) way21 feettwo (2) way31 feetParallel parking both sidesone (1) way34 feettwo (2) way40 feet 
E.	No manufactured home or other building or structure for residential purposes shall be in excess of two and one-half (21/2) stories, or in excess of a maximum height of thirty five (35) feet. 
F.	Each manufactured home lot, exclusive of streets, shall have a minimum size of five thousand (5,000) square feet and a minimum width of forty (40) feet, as measured at the minimum building setback line. No more than one (1) manufactured home shall be parking on any one (1) lot, and no manufactured home shall be occupied by more than one (1) family. 
G.	The minimum setback between any part of any manufactured home and/or structure permanently or temporarily attached thereto (excluding hitch), or used in conjunction therewith, including, but not by way of limitation, storage sheds, cabanas, and porches shall be: 
1.	Ten (10) feet from the inside of the sidewalk;
2.	Fourteen (14) feet from the rear lot line;
3.	Sixteen (16) feet from the side lot line on the entry side; and
4.	Ten (10) feet from the side yard on the non-entry side, except that a manufactured home may be placed on the side lot line, provided there is minimum of fifteen (15) feet open space between said lot line and any other structure or manufactured home, including but not by way of limitation storage sheds, cabanas or porches. 
H.	Each lot shall front on sidewalks at least four (4) feet in width, located directly next to and parallel to the manufactured home park street. 
I.	Each lot shall provide a minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces, each of which shall have a paved area of not less than one hundred and eighty (180) square feet (9 feet by 20 feet). 
J.	The front, back and side yards of every lot shall be suitably landscaped and properly maintained with lawn area, and there shall be one (1) shade tree, at least ten (10) feet in height provided for each lot. 
K.	The manufactured home park shall provide a buffer strip separating the manufactured home park from adjacent property. The buffer strip shall be properly planted with trees or shrubbery or other nursery stock of varying height, so as to provide a density sufficient to block the view of the manufactured home park and buildings up to a minimum of five (5) feet in height. No part of the buffer strip shall be used for any structure, board fences, right-of-way, or parking purposes. The buffer strip shall be maintained by the owner of the park. 
1.	In the event the back yard of any lot or lots within a manufactured home abuts adjacent property, the rear ten (10) feet of each back yard may be used as part of the buffer strip, provided further that no buildings, houses or other structure may be constructed with said strip. 
2.	The width of the buffer strip shall be at least twenty (20) feet.
L.	The manufactured home park shall have minimum setback from any public street of fifty (50) feet, which shall be properly landscaped with grassed area and maintained by the owner and operator of the manufactured home park. 
M.	All streets within the manufactured home park shall be of bituminous aggregate or similar surface meeting AASHTO public street construction specifications, and provided with proper curbing. 
N.	The manufactured home park shall contain one (1) or more open space areas intended primarily for the use of park residents on a minimum ratio of two hundred and fifty (250) square feet for every manufactured home lot provided that buffer strip areas shall not be included as part of such requirement. 
O.	The manufactured home park shall provide one (1) or more storm shelters of size and capacity so as to accommodate all the residents of the park. 
P.	All street intersections and designated pedestrian crosswalks shall be illuminated by not less than .25 foot candles. All roads, parking bays and pedestrian walkways shall be illuminated by not less than .5 foot candles. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 9.05. - Utility standards. 
    The following utility standards shall apply to all manufactured home parks. 
A.	All utilities shall be underground.
B.	All lots shall be provided with a public water and sanitary sewer service approved by the City of Lowell and other applicable agencies. All manufactured homes shall be connected thereto and all expenses of installation and connection shall be borne by the owner or operator of the manufactured home park, and no costs shall be applied or taxed against owners of any adjacent property or along any main extended from the manufactured home park to the present public sanitary sewer system, unless such adjacent owners shall install a sewer connection to such main. 
C.	The manufactured home park shall provide sufficient storm sewer facilities, independent of sanitary sewers, to prevent flooding of either streets or lots within the park in accordance with the requirements of the City of Lowell. All storm drainage and surface drainage facilities flowing from the park to adjacent areas shall be approved by the City of Lowell. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 9.06. - Manufactured home standards. 
A.	Every manufactured home shall be supported on a permanent concrete pad or foundation for at least the width and length of the manufactured home, and four (4) inches thick; and all areas between the trailer and ground shall be enclosed by a skirt, providing said skirting is constructed or installed and is fire resistant. 
B.	In the event the soil or topographic conditions of the proposed manufactured home park are such that other foundations or support are appropriate, and the developer provides to the building inspector a report by a certified engineer that piers are equal to or superior to the specifications as set forth in section 9.06 A. of this chapter, such foundations may be approved by the building inspector, provided such construction includes provisions for proper drainage and covering ground under each manufactured home. 
C.	Every manufactured home shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and have a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of living area exclusive of porches and cabanas. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 9.07. - Inspection and permits. 
A.	The building inspector or such other person designated by the city council shall have the right to inspect the manufactured home park to determine whether or not the park owners or operators, or any owners or person occupying manufactured homes within the park are in violation of this ordinance, or any other state ordinance or state or governmental regulations covering manufactured home parks affecting the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants, under the following conditions: 
1.	He has reasonable reason to believe that the owner, operator or resident or owner of manufactured home in the park is in violation of any part of this or other municipal ordinance. 
2.	That notice has been sent to the owner or operator of the manufactured home park at its last known address, and to the owner or resident of the manufactured home park at their last known address as shown on the occupancy permit for said manufactured home, and that the city has not received satisfactory proof or indication that the purported violation is not a violation, or that the purported violation has been corrected within fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing said notice. 
B.	All persons, including but not by limitation, city officials or police officers, whose entry upon the manufactured home park property is necessary, proper or advisable in the execution of their duties, or to the execution of work authorized by a governmental body, or for the preservation of the peace, shall have the right to enter upon and inspect the manufactured home park at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 9.08. - Manufactured home sales. 
A.	No person desiring to rent a dwelling unit site shall be required, as a condition to such rental, to purchase a manufactured home from the owner or operator of the park as long as the manufactured home intended to be located on such rented site conforms in size, style, shape, price, etc. as may be required by any reasonable rules and regulations governing the operation of the manufactured home park. 
B.	Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a manufactured home lot by the individual owner or his agent, or those home occupations as permitted in the zoning ordinance. Provided such sales and occupations are permitted by the park regulations; provided further that a commercial manufactured home sales lot shall not be permitted in conjunction with any manufactured home park. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 9.09. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be considered severable and the invalidation of any one or more of the provisions of this ordinance for any reason whatsoever shall in no way affect any of the other provisions thereof which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 10. - C-1 - NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Section 10.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district is intended to permit local retail business and service uses which are desirable to serve the residential areas of the city. These areas are intended to serve the residents within the city's neighborhoods. Generally, neighborhood commercial uses should not exceed five thousand (5,000) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building area. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 10.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the C-1 District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right, subject to the approval of a site plan, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18: 
A.	Office buildings for any of the following occupations:
1.	Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, drafting, and other similar professional activities, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
2.	Medical and dental offices and clinics.
B.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other similar uses as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, including those with drive-through facilities. 
C.	Personal service establishments conducting services on the premises, including barber and dry-cleaning service outlets, beauty shops, fitness centers, travel agencies, and other similar uses, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
D.	Retail stores.
E.	Drug stores and pharmacies.
F.	Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
G.	Commercial child care centers.
H.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires and underground utility systems. 
I.	Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right, or special land uses. 
J.	Outdoor merchandise display.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-2, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-00)
Section 10.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the C-1 District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.
B.	Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.
C.	Veterinary hospitals, animal clinics, and kennels.
D.	Commercial storage warehouses.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 10.04. - Site development requirements. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
A.	The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials shall be prohibited in the required front yard. Goods or materials stored in the side or rear yard shall be screened from the view from the street or from abutting properties. 
B.	The front yard and the street side of a corner lot, except for necessary entrance drives, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of a minimum of one (1) canopy tree and three (3) deciduous shrubs for each twenty (20) feet of lot width. Upon approval of the planning commission, the equivalent landscaping may be located in areas other than the front yard and the street side of a corner lot. 
C.	Entrance driveways shall be located as far as possible from any street intersection and from any other driveways. 
Front yard25 feetSide yardSide abutting Residential Districts or Uses - 25 feet
Side abutting other Districts - 0 or 10 feet Street side of a corner lot - 35 feetRear yard35 feetLot coverage60% (including building and parking areas)Building height35 feet or 21/2 storiesMinimum lot area15,000 square feetMinimum lot width80 feet 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 98-7, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 99-5, § 1, 8-16-99)
CHAPTER 11. - C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Section 11.01. - Intent. 
    This district is intended to accommodate uses which can provide office, personal services, convenience (day-to-day), and comparison commercial goods for visitors to and residents of Lowell. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 11.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the C-2 District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right: 
A.	Office buildings for any of the following occupations:
1.	Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, drafting, and other similar professional activities, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
2.	Medical and dental offices and clinics.
B.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other similar uses as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, exclusive of drive-through facilities. 
C.	Personal service establishments conducting services on the premises, including barber and dry-cleaning service outlets, beauty shops, fitness centers, travel agencies, and other similar uses, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
D.	Retail stores.
E.	Drug stores and pharmacies.
F.	Restaurants, exclusive of drive-through facilities.
G.	Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
H.	Indoor recreational facilities, excluding bowling alleys.
I.	Child care centers.
J.	Accessory buildings, structures, and uses.
K.	Outdoor merchandise display.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-2, §§ 3, 4, 4-24-00)
Section 11.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the C-2 District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.
B.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other similar uses as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, with drive-through facilities. 
C.	Hotels and motels.
D.	Theaters, concert halls, or similar places of public assembly, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
E.	Residential dwellings, in the same building with commercial uses.
F.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires, and underground utility systems. 
G.	Off-street parking lots.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 11.04. - Site development requirements. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
Front yardNoneSide yardSide abutting Residential Districts or uses - 5 feet
Side abutting other Districts - 0 or 10 feetRear yardAbutting Residential Districts or uses - 25 feet
Abutting other districts - NoneLot coverage100%Building height40 feetMinimum lot areaNoneMinimum lot widthNone 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 11.05. - Outdoor merchandise display. 
    Outdoor merchandise displays shall meet the following requirements: 
A.	No merchandise and related displays and fixtures shall be located closer than eight (8) feet from the curb line of a public street or a tree. 
B.	No merchandise and related displays and fixtures shall be located so as to obstruct the visibility of vehicles on the public street. 
C.	All merchandise and related displays and fixtures shall be removed and stored indoors at all times when the related business is closed to the public. 
D.	The area used for an outdoor merchandise display shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 99-9, § 1, 11-15-99; Ord. No. 00-2, § 5, 4-24-00)
CHAPTER 12. - C-3 - GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Section 12.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district, compatible with the Mixed Use Future Land Use Category of the Master Plan, is intended to permit a mixture of residential, office and commercial land uses but not necessarily in downtown style buildings. This district is intended to accommodate users which can provide office, personal services and commercial goods for visitors to and residents of the city including automobile related uses which would ordinarily be incompatible with the character of residential districts. These uses are principally intended to serve the community and M-21 traffic. Areas proposed for this district will be reviewed with consideration toward traffic, impact on adjacent areas, size and access to the lot, and whether or not the proposed area helps prevent strip commercial development. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 09-02, § 3, 4-6-09)
Section 12.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the C-3 District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right, subject to the approval of a site plan, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18: 
A.	Office buildings for any of the following occupations:
1.	Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, drafting, and other similar professional activities, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
2.	Medical and dental offices and clinics.
B.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other similar uses as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, including those with drive-through facilities. 
C.	Personal service establishments conducting services on the premises, including barber and dry-cleaning service outlets, beauty shops, fitness centers, travel agencies, and other similar uses, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
D.	Retail stores.
E.	Drug stores and pharmacies.
F.	Restaurants, exclusive of drive-through facilities.
G.	Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
H.	Dry-cleaning and laundry establishments performing cleaning operations on the premises, including retail/service operations. 
I.	Indoor recreational facilities, including bowling alleys.
J.	Commercial child care centers.
K.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires, and underground utility systems. 
L.	Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right, or special land uses. 
M.	Outdoor merchandise display.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-2, §§ 6, 7, 4-24-00)
Section 12.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the C-3 District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Boarding houses or lodging houses.
B.	Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.
C.	Commercial kennels.
D.	Commercial storage warehouses.
E.	Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.
F.	Hotels and motels.
G.	Open air business.
H.	Theaters or similar places of public assembly as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
I.	Restaurants and drive-through facilities.
J.	Retail business supplies.
K.	Sexually oriented businesses (as further regulated by Chapter 17A). 
L.	Vehicle repair facilities, including body shops.
M.	Vehicle service stations, excluding body shops.
N.	Vehicle towing service.
O.	Vehicle wash establishments, either self-service or automatic.
P.	Veterinary hospitals and animal clinics.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 10, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 99-11, § 3, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 04-5, § 2, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 12-03, § 2, 6-4-12) 
Section 12.04. - Site development requirements. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
A.	The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials shall be prohibited in the required front yard. Goods or materials stored in the side or rear yard shall be screened from the view from the street or from abutting properties. 
B.	The front yard and the street side of a corner lot, except for necessary entrance drives, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of a minimum of one (1) canopy tree and three (3) deciduous shrubs for each twenty (20) feet of lot width. Upon approval of the planning commission, the equivalent landscaping may be located in areas other than the front yard and the street side of a corner lot. 
C.	Entrance driveways shall be located as far as practicable from two (2) intersecting streets and shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from an intersection or from any other driveway. 
D.	Only one (1) driveway per principal use, or collective principal use, per street shall be permitted. A second driveway may be permitted provided that such drive is constructed and permitted to share access with an abutting or adjacent principal use or existing lot. The planning commission may permit additional driveways, if justified by a professional traffic study indicating the need for such additional driveways. 
Front yard35 feetSide yardSide abutting Residential Districts or uses - 25 feet
Side abutting other Districts - 0 or 10 feet Street side of a corner lot - 35 feetRear yard35 feetLot coverage60% (including building and parking areas)Building height40 feet or 3 storiesMinimum lot area20,000 square feetMinimum lot width100 feet 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 99-5, § 2, 8-16-99)
Section 12.05. - Outdoor merchandise display. 
    Outdoor merchandise displays shall meet the following requirements: 
A.	No merchandise and related displays and fixtures shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line abutting a public street. 
B.	No merchandise and related displays and fixtures shall be located so as to obstruct the movement of pedestrians along the public sidewalk or obstruct the visibility of vehicles on the public street. 
C.	The area used for an outdoor merchandise display shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 00-2, § 8, 4-24-00; Ord. No. 05-4, § 1, 7-5-05)
CHAPTER 12A. - I-L LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Section 12A.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district is intended to permit light industrial and related uses which are desirable to serve the employment needs of the city, but which are lower intensity uses than those permitted in the I-Industrial district. The uses permitted in this district vary in intensity of use, but in no case is it intended that these uses negatively affect residential and other uses in the city. Rather, it is intended to allow these uses to operate as freely as possible while insuring that the natural and residential areas of the city are protected. This district may act as a buffer between an I-Industrial District and less intensive uses. As such, this district permits the compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or materials, but does not permit heavy manufacturing or the processing of raw materials. This district also provides for certain other services and uses that are compatible with light industrial uses. 
(Ord. No. 98-2, § 2, 2-17-98)
Section 12A.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the I-L Light Industrial District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right, subject to the approval of a site plan, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18: 
A.	Office buildings for any of the following occupations:
1.	Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, drafting, and other similar professional activities as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
2.	Medical and dental offices and clinics.
B.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other similar uses as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, including those with drive-through facilities. 
C.	The manufacture, compounding, processing, packing, or treatment of such products as candy, cosmetics, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, and food products, except the rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
D.	The manufacture, compounding, assembly, or treatment of articles from the following previously prepared materials: aluminum, bone cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibers, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paint, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, rubber, tin, iron, steel, tobacco, wood, and yarn. 
E.	Vehicle service stations.
F.	Bulk printing shops with or without retail outlets.
G.	Warehouses and storage, including commercial storage warehouses.
H.	Wholesale sales outlets.
I.	Off-street parking lots.
J.	Utility and public services buildings, including storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires, and underground utility systems. 
K.	Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right, or special land uses. 
L.	Off-site parking lots not associated with another principal use.
(Ord. No. 98-2, § 2, 2-17-98)
Section 12A.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or building in the I-L District may be used for the following purposes following review by the Planning Commission as a special land use as regulated by chapter 17: 
A.	Radio and television transmitting buildings and towers.
B.	Retail building supplies, including outside storage yards.
C.	Dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or parts thereof.
D.	Machine shops.
E.	Other light industrial uses not included in section 12A.02 that involved the compounding, assembly, treatment of goods, articles, or materials, but which do not involve heavy manufacturing or the processing of raw materials, provided any environmental effects such as noise, smoke, dust, vibration, odor or other similar effects shall not be substantially greater than that from the uses permitted in this district. 
F.	Vehicle repair facilities, excluding body shops.
G.	Vehicle service stations, excluding body shops.
H.	Accessory buildings not meeting the requirements of section 4.08.J.
(Ord. No. 98-2, § 2, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 00-6, § 1, 10-16-00; Ord. No. 11-02, § 5, 1-3-11)
Section 12A.04. - Site development requirements. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
A.	Permitted and special land uses in this chapter shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid noncombustible fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height; provided further that no goods, materials, or objects shall be stacked higher than the fence or wall. 
B.	The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited in the required front yard or within any yard abutting a residential district or use. 
C.	The first twenty-five (25) feet of the front yard area, except for necessary entrance drives, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of a minimum of one (1) canopy tree and three (3) deciduous shrubs for each twenty (20) feet of lot width. Upon approval of the planning commission, the equivalent landscaping may be located in areas other than the front yard. 
D.	Any side yard or rear yard adjoining any lot or parcel of land abutting a residential district or residential use shall be screened by a compact hedge of deciduous or evergreen trees, having such minimum height as determined by the planning commission in its review and approval of the site plan under the terms of Chapter 18. 
E.	No parking area shall be located nearer than twenty-five (25) feet to any rear lot line. 
F.	No use permitted in this chapter shall create or cause to be created fire and explosion hazards, smoke, fumes, odors, gases, dust, liquid or solid waste, vibration, noise, or glare which shall affect adjoining properties adversely. 
G.	Ingress to and egress from any lot or parcel of land shall be designed and used so as to maximize pedestrian safety, ease of traffic flow and control and ready access by emergency vehicles and personnel. 
H.	Off-street parking and loading areas must be hard surfaced and designed and used so as to avoid significant adverse impact on adjacent and nearby lands. 
I.	Refuse and service areas shall be designed and used so as to maximize motor vehicle and pedestrian safety and convenience, promote ease of traffic flow and to minimize the effects, if any, of smoke, noise, dust, vibration, or odor on adjacent or nearby lands. 
Front Yard50 feetSide YardSide abutting Residential Districts or uses- 50 feetSide abutting other Districts- 20 feetStreet side of a corner lot- 50 feetRear YardSide abutting a Residential Districts or uses- 50 feetSide abutting other Districts- 25 feetLot Coverage60% (including building and parking areas)Building Heights40 feetMinimum Lot Area20,000 square feetMinimum Lot Width100 feet 
(Ord. No 98-2, § 2, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 98-7, § 2, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 99-5, § 3, 8-16-99)
CHAPTER 13. - I - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Section 13.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district is intended to permit industrial and related uses which are desirable to serve the employment needs for the residents of the city. The uses permitted in this district vary in intensity of use, but in no case is it intended that these uses negatively affect residential and other uses in the city. Rather it is intended to allow these uses to operate as freely as possible while ensuring that the natural and residential areas of the city are protected. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 13.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the I District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right, subject to the approval of a site plan, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18: 
A.	Office buildings for any of the following occupations:
1.	Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, drafting and other similar professional activities, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
2.	Medical and dental offices and clinics.
B.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and other similar uses as determined by the zoning enforcement officer including those with drive-through facilities. 
C.	The manufacture, compounding, assembly or treatment of such products as candy, cosmetics, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, toiletries and food products except the rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
D.	The manufacture, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles from the previously prepared materials: aluminum, bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibers, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paint, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, rubber, tin, iron, steel, tobacco, wood and yarn. 
E.	Vehicle repair facilities, including body shops, provided, if a body shop includes a towing or wrecker service, the site design standards of section 17.04.CC. must be met. 
F.	Vehicle service stations.
G.	Bulk printing shops without retail outlets.
H.	Warehouse and storage, including commercial storage warehouses.
I.	Wholesale sales outlets.
J.	Off-street parking lots.
K.	Utility and public service buildings, including storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires and underground utility systems. 
L.	Vehicle towing service (provided the requirements of section 17.04.CC. are met).
M.	Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right; or special land uses. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-6, § 2, 10-16-00; Ord. No. 04-5, § 3, 11-15-04; Ord. No. 12-03, § 3, 6-4-12) 
Section 13.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the I District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Landing and take-off areas for rotocraft, and airports.
B.	Petroleum storage located at least five hundred (500) feet from any residentially zoned property. 
C.	Radio and television transmitting buildings and towers.
D.	Retail building supplies including outside storage yards.
E.	Commercial wireless communication towers.
F.	Accessory buildings not meeting the requirements of subsection 4.08.J.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 97-2, § 11, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 00-4, § 4, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 11-02, § 6, 1-3-11) 
Section 13.04. - Site development requirements. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be hereafter erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
A.	Permitted and special land uses in this chapter shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid non-combustible fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height; provided further that no goods, materials, or objects shall be stacked higher than the fence or wall. 
B.	The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited in the required front yard or within any yard abutting a residential district or use. 
C.	The first twenty-five (25) feet of the front yard area, except for necessary entrance drives, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of a minimum of one (1) canopy tree and three (3) deciduous shrubs for each twenty (20) feet of lot width. At the discretion of the planning commission, the equivalent landscaping may be located in areas other than the front yard. 
D.	No parking area shall be located nearer than twenty five (25) feet to any rear lot line. 
E.	No use permitted in this chapter shall create or cause to be created fire and explosion hazards, smoke, fumes, odors, gases, dust, fumes, liquid or solid waste, vibration, noise, or glare shall exist to affect adjoining residential properties adversely. 
Front yard50 feetSide yardSide abutting Residential Districts or uses - 50 feet
Side abutting other Districts - 20 feet
Street side of a corner lot - 50 feetRear yardSide abutting Residential Districts or uses - 50 feet
Side abutting other Districts - 25 feetLot coverage60% (Including building and parking areas)Building height40 feetMinimum lot area20,000 square feetMinimum lot width100 feet 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 98-07, § 3, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 99-5, § 4, 8-16-99) 
CHAPTER 14. - F-1 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT 

Section 14.01. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended primarily to protect those undeveloped areas of the city which are subject to predictable flooding in the floodplain area of the Grand River so that the reservoir capacity will not be reduced or to impede, retard, accelerate or change the direction of flow or carrying capacity of the river valley or to otherwise increase the possibility of flood. Said regulations, while permitting reasonable use of such properties, will help to protect human life, prevent or minimize material and economic losses and reduce the cost to the public in time of emergency through public aid or relief efforts occasioned by the unwise occupancy of such flood areas. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 14.02. - Delineation of the flood hazard overlay zone. 
A.	The flood hazard area zone shall overlay existing zoning districts delineated on the official City of Lowell Zoning Map. The boundaries of the flood hazard area zone shall coincide with the boundaries of the areas indicated as within the limits of the 100-year flood in the report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study, City of Lowell," dated May 16, 1983 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps. Within the flood hazard area zone a regulatory floodway shall be designated. The boundaries of the regulatory floodway shall coincide with the floodway boundaries indicated on the flood boundary and floodway map. The study and accompanying maps are adopted by reference, appended, and declared to be part of this ordinance. The term flood hazard area as used in this ordinance shall mean the flood hazard area zone and the term floodway shall mean the designated regulatory floodway. 
B.	Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard area zone boundary, the zoning board of appeals shall resolve the dispute. 
C.	In addition to other requirements of this ordinance applicable to development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be necessary for all development occurring within the flood hazard area zone. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 14.03. - Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, land and/or buildings in the F-1 District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right: 
1.	Open space uses such as farms, truck gardens, nurseries, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, nature preserves, bridle trails, natural trails, and recreation, provided no alteration is made to the existing level of the floodplain or erected structure which may interfere with the flow of the river or floodplain capacity. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 14.04. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the F-1 District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by Chapter 17: 
A.	Development, including the erection of structures and placement of manufactured homes, within a flood hazard area shall not occur except upon issuance of a zoning compliance permit in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and the following standards: 
1.	The requirements of this chapter shall be met.
2.	The requirements of the underlying zoning district and applicable general provisions of this ordinance shall be met; 
3.	All necessary development permits shall have been issued by appropriate local, state, and federal authorities, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of no authority from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources under authority of Act 245, of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended. Where a development permit cannot be issued prior to the issuance of zoning compliance permit, a letter from the issuing agency indicating intent to issue contingent only upon proof of zoning compliance shall be acceptable. 
B.	The use pattern and structure proposed to accomplish said use shall be so designed as not to reduce the water impoundment capacity of the floodplain or significantly change the volume or speed of the flow of water. 
C.	Specific base flood elevation standards:
1.	On the basis of the most recent available base flood elevation data all new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated at least one (1) foot above the flood level; or for nonresidential structures, be constructed such that at or below base flood level, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that these standards are met and that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood in the location of the structure. Such certification shall be submitted as provided in this ordinance and shall indicate the elevation to which the structure is floodproofed. 
2.	The most recent flood elevation data received from the Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from other sources. 
D.	Utilities, streets, off-street parking, railroads, structures, and buildings for public or recreational uses may be permitted when designed so as not to increase the possibility of flood or be otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
E.	Removal and processing of topsoil, stone, rock, sand, gravel, lime or other soil or mineral resources. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 14.05. - Data submission. 
    Prior to the issuance of building permit for structures on or adjacent floodplain areas, the city manager shall require the applicant for such permit to submit an approved permit by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, topographic data, engineering studies, proposed site plan and/or other similar data needed to determine the possible effects of flooding on a proposed structure and/or the effect of the structure on the flow of water. All such required data shall be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 14.06. - City liability. 
    The City of Lowell shall incur no liability whatsoever by permitting any use of building within the floodplain within the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 14.07. - General standards for flood hazard reduction. 
A.	All new construction and substantial improvements within a flood hazard area, including the placement of prefabricated buildings and manufactured homes, shall: 
1.	Be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
2.	Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistance to flood damage; and
3.	Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
B.	All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
C.	All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from systems into flood waters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
D.	All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed and located to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
E.	Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
F.	The zoning enforcement officer or his representative shall review development proposals to determine compliance with the standards of this section. 
G.	Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
H.	The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourses not subject to state or federal regulations designed to ensure flood carrying capacity shall be maintained. 
I.	Available flood hazard data from federal, state, or other sources shall be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this chapter. Data furnished by the Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from other sources. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 14.08. - Manufactured home standards. 
A.	All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement by meeting the following specifications: 
1.	Over the top ties shall be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, except that on manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet in length one (1) tie per side shall be required. 
2.	Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, except that on manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet in length four (4) ties per side shall be required. 
3.	All components of the anchoring systems shall be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. 
4.	All additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored.
B.	An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with the City of Lowell for manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
C.	Manufactured homes within zones A1-30 on the flood insurance rate map shall be located in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	All manufactured homes shall be placed on stands or lots which are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be one (1) foot above the base flood level. 
2.	Adequate surface drainage away from all structures and access for a manufactured home hauler shall be provided. 
3.	In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots shall be large enough to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten (10) feet apart; and reinforcement shall be provided for piers more than six feet above ground level. 
4.	In manufactured home parks and subdivisions which exist at the time of the adoption of this chapter is adopted, where repair, reconstruction or improvement of streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, the standards of this chapter shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 15. - PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Section 15.01. - Description and purpose. 
A.	The use, area, height, bulk and placement regulations of this ordinance are primarily applicable to the usual situation of one (1) principal building on a lot. In certain large developments, these requirements might result in situations less in the interest of public health, safety and welfare than if a controlled degree of flexibility were allowed. The planned unit development (PUD), is intended to permit and control the development of planned areas for various compatible uses allowed by the zoning ordinance and for other exceptional uses not so provided. 
B.	It is intended that uses in a PUD shall afford each type of land use reasonable protection from encroachment or interference by other incompatible land uses, and that reasonable protection be afforded to uses adjacent to a PUD. 
C.	Under this chapter, all proceedings shall be conducted with due consideration for maintenance of reasonable conditions regarding emission and transmission of injurious or obnoxious noise, fire or explosion hazard, liquid or solid waste disposal, vibration, gas fumes, smoke, dust, dirt, litter, odor, light, glare, traffic congestion, ingress and egress, ease of police and fire protection, drainage, lateral land support, blighting influence, effect on property values, light and air, overcrowding of persons, sanitation, general appearance of the area, surface and ground water quality, and other similar considerations having an effect on public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 15.02. - Objectives and qualifying conditions. 
A.	The following objectives shall be met by any application for any PUD in order to realize the inherent advantages of coordinated, flexible, comprehensive, long-range, planning and development of such planned development: 
1.	To provide more desirable living, shopping and working environments by preserving as much of the natural character of the property as possible, including, but not limited to, open space, stands of trees, brooks, ponds, floodplains, hills and similar natural assets. 
2.	To encourage the provision of open space and the development of recreational and, where included in the plan, other support facilities in a generally central location within reasonable distance of all living units. 
3.	To encourage developers to use a more creative and imaginative approach in the development of areas. 
4.	To encourage underground utilities which can be more efficiently designed when master planning a larger area. 
5.	To allow phased construction with the knowledge that subsequent phases will be approved as originally planned and approved by the city. 
6.	To promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the location of structures. 
7.	To promote the efficient use of land to facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land use and utilities. 
8.	To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms, and building relationships within the PUD. 
9.	To insure a quality of construction commensurate with other developments within the city. 
B.	Qualifying conditions.
1.	The tract of land for which a PUD application is received must be either in one (1) ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all affected properties. 
2.	The property which is the subject of a PUD application must be a minimum of five (5) contiguous acres in total area. 
3.	To be considered as a PUD the proposed development must fulfill at least one (1) of the following conditions: 
a.	The PUD contains two (2) or more separate and distinct uses, for example, single-family and multiple-family dwellings; 
b.	The PUD site exhibits significant natural features encompassing at least twenty-five (25) percent of the land area of the PUD which will be preserved as a result of the PUD plan. 
c.	The PUD is designed to preserve in perpetuity at least sixty (60) percent of the total area of the site in open space. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 15.03. - Application procedures. 
A.	An application for a planned unit development shall be submitted and acted upon as a rezoning in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance, and as noted in this chapter. 
B.	An application for planned unit development shall be accompanied by a statement with regard to compliance with the criteria required for approval in section 15.04, and other criteria imposed by this ordinance affecting the planned unit development under consideration. 
C.	Review and approval. The planning commission shall review the application for a planned unit development, comments received at the public hearing, the site plan, and other materials submitted in relation to the application, and recommend to the city council denial, approval, or approval with conditions, the planned unit development application in accordance with the purpose of this chapter and the criteria for approval stated in section 15.04, and such standards contained in this ordinance which relate to the planned unit development under consideration, including those for site plan review. The planning commission shall prepare a report stating its conclusions on the request for a planned unit development, the basis for this recommendation, and any conditions relating to an affirmative recommendation. 
D.	Upon the approval, or approval with conditions by the city council, the applicant may apply for preliminary plat approval, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 15.04. - Basis of determination. 
    Prior to approval of a planned unit development application, the planning commission and city council shall insure that the standards specified in this section, as well as applicable standards established elsewhere in this ordinance, shall be satisfied by the completion of the planned unit development under consideration. 
A.	General standards. The planning commission and city council shall review the particular circumstances of the planned unit development application under consideration in terms of the following standards and shall approve a planned unit development only upon a finding of compliance with each of the following standards: 
1.	The general standards for special land use in section 17.03A;
2.	The standards of review for site plan review in section 18.06. 
3.	The applicable standards of this chapter; and
4.	The applicable standards as may be established elsewhere in this ordinance.
B.	Conditions. The city council may impose conditions with the approval of a planned unit development which are necessary to insure compliance with the standards for approval stated in this section and any other applicable standards contained in this ordinance. Such conditions shall be considered an integral part of the planned unit development approval and shall be enforced by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 03-2, § 2, 2-18-03)
Section 15.05. - Uses permitted by right and residential density. 
A.	The following uses may be permitted, either singly or in combination, in accordance with the applicable PUD requirements: 
1.	Single-family dwellings.
2.	Two-family dwellings, provided that such units make up no more than twenty (20) percent of the total number of residential dwelling units in the total PUD. 
3.	Multiple-family dwellings, provided that such units make up no more than thirty (30) percent of the total number of residential dwelling units in the total PUD. 
4.	Uses permitted by right in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District, subject to the standards noted for non-residential uses in the PUD and the requirements of the C-1 District. 
B.	Except as noted in section 15.07, the maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall not be greater than that permitted by the most restrictive zone district in which the proposed uses are permitted. If the PUD lies in more than one (1) zone district the number of dwelling units shall be calculated on a proportionate basis. 
C.	The total amount of land to be used for the calculation of the permitted density in a PUD shall be determined by using the net developable area, which shall be determined by taking the total site area and subtracting lands used or dedicated for existing public easements and existing public or private street rights-of-way. 
D.	The minimum setbacks and yard requirements for any lot designated for residential use shall comply with the most restrictive zone district in which the proposed uses are permitted. 
E.	Land not proposed for development, but used for the calculation of overall density shall be considered open space and subject to the requirements of section 15.06. 
F.	Non-residential uses.
1.	All non-residential uses allowed in the PUD, shall occupy no more than ten (10) percent of the PUD project's developable area. 
2.	All such uses shall be integrated into the design of the project with similar architectural and site development elements, such as signs, landscaping, etc. 
3.	Such uses shall be permitted only if they will not materially alter the residential character of the neighborhood and/or the PUD. 
4.	All merchandise for display, sale or lease shall be entirely within an enclosed building(s).
5.	Buildings designed for non-residential uses shall be constructed according to the following requirements: 
a.	If the entire PUD contains fewer than twenty (20) dwelling units, seventy-five (75) percent of these units must be constructed prior to construction of any non-residential use. 
b.	If the PUD contains more than twenty (20) dwelling units, fifty (50) percent of these units shall be constructed prior to the construction of any non-residential use. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 15.06. - Open space. 
A.	Any open space provided in the PUD shall meet the following considerations and requirements:
1.	Open space may be established to separate use areas within the PUD.
2.	Open space areas shall be large enough and of proper dimensions so as to constitute a useable area, with adequate access, through easements or other similar arrangements, such that all properties within the entire PUD may utilize the available open space. 
3.	Evidence shall be given that satisfactory arrangements will be made for the maintenance of such designated land to relieve the city of the future maintenance thereof. 
4.	Open space may be provided where significant natural features may be preserved and/or be used for passive or active recreation. 
5.	All land set aside as open space shall be deed restricted to ensure that the open space remains in a natural and undisturbed condition in perpetuity. Land set aside for agriculture may, at the discretion of the property owner(s) be converted to open space, but shall not be used as land for the construction of additional dwellings, nor used for any other development. 
6.	All open space shall be in the joint ownership of the property owners within the PUD. A property owner's association shall be formed which shall take responsibility for the maintenance of the open space. 
7.	The maintenance requirements of dedicated open space are not intended to include regular clearing and mowing or other active maintenance. For the purposes of this chapter, maintenance is intended to include such items as the removal of any accumulation of trash or waste material within the dedicated open space area, clean up of storm damage, or removal of diseased plant materials. 
8.	To the extent possible, dedicated open space areas shall be continuous and contiguous throughout the PUD. Open space areas shall be large enough and of proper dimensions so as to contribute significantly to the purpose and objectives of the PUD. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 15.07. - Other requirements. 
A.	All electric, television cable, and telephone transmission wires within the PUD shall be placed underground. 
B.	Signs are permitted in accordance with the most restrictive zone district in which the proposed uses are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 16. - PF PUBLIC FACILITIES DISTRICT 

Section 16.01. - Intent. 
    This district is compatible with the Parks and Recreation Future Land Use Category of the Master Plan and is established to achieve the following purposes: 
A.	To provide a proper zoning classification for governmental, civic, welfare and recreational facilities in proper locations and extent to promote the general safety, convenience, comfort and welfare; 
B.	To protect the public and semi-public facilities and institutions from the encroachment of certain other uses and to make such uses compatible with adjoining residential uses; and 
C.	To provide an environment for the proper functioning of public facilities in relation to the comprehensive plan and other plans for community facilities. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 09-02, § 4, 4-6-09)
Section 16.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the PF District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right, subject to the approval of a site plan, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18: 
A.	Municipal, county, state, and federal buildings and uses.
B.	Civic uses, including:
1.	Churches;
2.	Public art galleries;
3.	Libraries;
4.	Museums;
5.	Places for public assembly;
6.	Memorials and monuments;
7.	Cemeteries.
C.	Primary and secondary public, private, or parochial schools and institutions of higher education. 
D.	General and psychiatric hospitals.
E.	Medical clinics.
F.	Institutions for children and the aged, including family day care homes and group day care homes. 
G.	Child care centers.
H.	Parks, recreation fields and playgrounds, lakes, beaches, pools, public gardens, and publicly-owned golf courses. 
I.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires, and underground utility systems. 
J.	Accessory buildings, structures, and uses.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 16.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the PF District shall be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use as regulated by chapter 17: 
A.	Outside storage yards which are accessory to a permitted use as listed in section 16.02. 
B.	Incinerators which are accessory to a permitted use as listed in section 16.02. 
C.	Indoor police small arms firing ranges.
D.	Commercial wireless communication towers.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-4, § 5, 9-18-00)
Section 16.04. - Site development requirements. 
    All uses permitted by right and special land uses are subject to the following site development requirements: 
A.	Setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below.
1.	Area requirements.
a.	The area or parcel of land for a permitted public facility shall not be less than required to provide a site adequate for the main and accessory buildings, off-street parking, and other accessory uses, yards, and open spaces to accommodate the facility and maintain the character of the neighborhood. The area or parcel of land for a permitted public facility shall be approved by the planning commission. 
b.	Building site coverage shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total area devoted to the public facility. 
2.	Yard regulations.
a.	Where two (2) districts are adjacent to the use, the average of the two (2) setbacks shall be used. The yard requirements for each public facility building shall not be less than the requirements set forth in the following schedule: 
UseAbutting ZoneResidentialNon-ResidentialNon-Assembly Buildings50 ft.25 ft.Assembly Buildings75 ft.25 ft.Churches50 ft.25 ft.Public, Private and Parochial Schools50 ft.25 ft.General Hospitals and Clinics75 ft.25 ft.Psychiatric Hospitals200 ft.50 ft.Institutions for Children and the Aged50 ft.25 ft.Recreational75 ft.25 ft. 
b.	Driveways and parking areas serving the public facility may be located within the side or rear yard setback, except that driveways and parking areas shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any adjacent lot lines and shall be landscaped. Play areas may be constructed up to an abutting property line except that all playground equipment shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the abutting property line. 
3.	Building heights for public facilities shall not exceed the height of the taller of any adjacent building, or where no adjacent building exists, the nearest building, in either a residential or nonresidential district by more than twenty-five (25) percent. 
4.	In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard setback abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the district in which located and all regulations applicable to the front yard shall apply. 
B.	Sidewalks shall be constructed on all sides of the property abutting a public street, in accordance with city standards. The planning commission may waive the requirement for a sidewalk when, in the opinion of the commission, no good purpose would be served by the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 16A. - MU MIXED USE DISTRICT 

Section 16A.01. - Description and purpose. 
    This district is intended to encourage pedestrian-oriented mixed-uses which are desirable to both nearby residential neighborhoods and the central business district. This district permits a mix of commercial and residential uses within the same building or on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 6, 2-17-15) 
Section 16A.02. - Uses permitted by right. 
    Land and/or buildings in the MU District may be used for the following purposes as uses permitted by right: 
A.	Mixed use developments.
B.	Retail stores.
C.	Drug stores and pharmacies.
D.	Art galleries and museums.
E.	Restaurants, without drive-through facilities.
F.	Personal service establishments conducting services on premises, including barber and dry-cleaning service outlets, beauty shops and fitness centers. 
G.	Office buildings for executive, administrative, professional, accounting, drafting and other similar professional activities. 
H.	Medical and dental offices.
I.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and similar financial institutions.
J.	Multiple-family dwellings.
K.	Outdoor merchandise display in accordance with section 11.05. 
L.	Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses permitted by right or as a special land use. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 6, 2-17-15) 
Section 16A.03. - Special land uses. 
    Land and/or buildings in the MU District may be used for the following purposes following review by the planning commission as a special land use regulated by appendix A, chapter 17: 
A.	Theaters, concert halls or similar places of public assembly.
B.	Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls.
C.	Hotels and motels.
D.	Single-family dwellings.
E.	Two-family dwellings.
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 6, 2-17-15) 
Section 16A.04. - Site development requirements. 
    No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be erected unless the following requirements are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement: 
A.	There shall be no off-street parking located in the front yard of a lot; parking shall be located in the rear or side yard. 
B.	Buildings must have the primary entrance facing a public sidewalk.
C.	For all development adjacent to key frontages as illustrated on the zoning map, except single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the street-facing principal building façade between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above grade must be comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas. 
Minimum front yard setback0 feetMaximum front yard setback10 feet, except as provided in section 16A.04D.Minimum required side yardSide abutting residential districts or uses - 10 feet
Side abutting other districts - 0 feetMinimum required rear yardSide abutting residential districts or uses - 25 feet
Side abutting other districts - 0 feetMaximum lot coverage100%Maximum building height40 feetMinimum lot areaNoneMinimum lot widthNoneMinimum building frontage80% in primary front yards, except as provided in section 16A.04D.
50% in secondary front yards where applicable, except as provided in section 16A.04D. 
D.	Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings proposed in the MU District shall meet the following standards: 
1.	Minimum front yard setback shall be zero (0) feet.
2.	Maximum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
3.	If an attached garage is proposed, such garage shall be offset such that it is set back at least ten (10) feet from the front-facing building façade. 
4.	Minimum building frontage is not required.

(Ord. No. 15-01, § 6, 2-17-15) 
CHAPTER 17. - SPECIAL LAND USES 

Section 17.01. - Scope. 
    This section provides a set of procedures and standards for special uses of land or structures which, because of their unique characteristics, require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole. The regulations and standards, herein, are designed to allow, on one hand, practical latitude for the applicant, but at the same time maintain adequate provision for the protection of the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the city. For purposes of this ordinance, all special land uses within the various districts are subject to the conditions and standards of this chapter. In addition, the following uses shall conform to the specific standards cited in section 17.04, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 17.02. - Application and review procedures. 
A.	An application shall be submitted through the zoning enforcement officer. Each application shall be accompanied by: 
1.	The payment of a fee as established by the city council;
2.	A completed application form, as provided by the city;
3.	Complete site plans as specified in chapter 18; and
4.	A written statement indicating compliance with section 17.03, A., and the applicable provisions of section 17.04. 
B.	Applications for a special land use shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the next planning commission meeting. 
C.	The application and accompanying materials shall be forwarded to the planning commission at its next scheduled meeting for a public hearing. 
D.	The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application, providing the notice of such hearing in accordance with the Zoning Act. The planning commission shall then review the application and such other information available to it through the public hearing or from any other sources, including recommendations or reports from the city planner, engineer, or other party, and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request, and incorporate the basis for the decision and any conditions which should be imposed. 
E.	No petition for special land use approval, which has been disapproved, shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from thee date of disapproval, except as may be permitted after learning of new and significant facts or conditions which might result in favorable action upon resubmission. 
F.	A special land use approved pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of approval. Each development shall be under construction and proceeding meaningfully toward completion within one (1) year after the date of approval of the special land use, except as noted below. 
1.	The planning commission may grant one (1) six (6) month extension of such time period, provided the applicant requests the extension prior to the date of the expiration of the special land use approval. 
2.	The extension shall be approved if the applicant presents reasonable evidence to the effect that said development has encountered unforeseen difficulties beyond the control of the applicant, and the project will proceed within the extension period. 
3.	If neither of the above provisions are fulfilled or the six (6) month extension has expired prior to construction, the special land use approval shall be null and void. 
G.	The planning commission shall have the authority to revoke any special land use approval after it has been shown that the holder of the approval has failed to comply with any of the applicable requirements of this chapter, other applicable sections of this ordinance, or conditions of the special land use approval. Prior to any action, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 17.03. - General standards. 
    The following general standards, in addition to those specific standards established for certain uses, shall be satisfied before the planning commission makes a decision regarding a special land use application. 
A.	Each application shall be reviewed for the purpose of determining that the proposed special land use meets the following standards and, in addition, that each use of the proposed site will: 
1.	Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance, with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such a use will not change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed; 
2.	Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police, fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities; 
3.	Not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services; and 
4.	Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, and equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors. 
B.	The planning commission may stipulate such additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary to accomplish the following purposes. Failure to comply with such conditions may result in the revocation of the special land use approval, pursuant to section 17.02, G. Conditions imposed shall be those necessary to: 
1.	Meet the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance;
2.	Relate to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration; 
3.	Insure compliance with those standards;
4.	Protect the general welfare;
5.	Protect individual property rights; and
6.	Ensure that the intent and objectives of this ordinance will be observed.
C.	As a condition of approval of a special land use the planning commission or zoning enforcement officer, whichever is designated as the approving authority, may require a financial guarantee of sufficient sum to assure the installation of those features or components of the approved activity or construction which are considered necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and of users or inhabitants of the proposed development. Such features or components, hereafter referred to as "improvements," may include, but shall not be limited to, roadways, curbing, landscaping, fencing, walls, screening, lighting, drainage facilities, sidewalks, driveways, utilities, and similar items. Performance guarantees shall be processed as required in section 22.03, B. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 17.04. - Site design standards. 
    The general standards and requirements of section 17.03 are basic to all special land uses. The specific and detailed requirements set forth in this section relate to particular uses and are requirements which must be met by those uses in addition to the foregoing general standards and requirements. 
    Those uses specified in this ordinance as permitted by right or as special land uses shall be subject to the requirements of the district in which the use is located in addition to all applicable conditions, standards, and regulations as are cited in the following: 
A.	Country clubs, golf courses, riding stables, and public and private athletic grounds and parks, and other similar uses, including related uses, such as snack bars or small retail shops selling goods directly related to the primary use. 
1.	The use shall be located on property with direct access to a public street.
2.	Any outdoor activity areas shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any residential district or use. 
3.	Lighting for parking areas or outdoor activity areas shall be shielded to prevent light from spilling onto any residential district or use. 
4.	Access driveways shall be located no less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest part of the intersection of any street or any other driveway. 
5.	Buildings housing animals, storage equipment, or other similar buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any lot line. 
B.	Commercial greenhouses and nurseries, when operated primarily as wholesaling operations and limited retail sales. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre.
2.	Minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
3.	The planning commission may require a six (6) foot fence or wall to be constructed along the rear and/or sides of the lot to keep trash, paper, and other debris from blowing off the premises. 
4.	All open air businesses shall comply with all applicable health department regulations regarding sanitation and general health conditions. 
5.	The lot area used for parking for customers shall be hard-surfaced and the display or storage areas shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. 
6.	Ingress and egress shall be provided as far as practicable from two (2) intersecting streets and shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from an intersection. 
7.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential areas.
8.	The storage or materials display areas shall meet all the yard setback requirements applicable to any building in the district. 
9.	All loading activities and parking areas shall be provided on the same premises (off-street).
10.	The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or similar loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently contained to prevent any adverse effect upon adjacent properties. 
11.	No display area shall be located within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way line.
C.	Removal and processing of topsoil, stone, rock, sand, gravel, lime or other soil or mineral resources. 
1.	No soil, sand, gravel, or other earth material shall be removed from any land within the city without special land use approval, with the following exceptions: 
a.	When the earth removal is incidental to an operation for which a building permit has been issued by the city; 
b.	When the earth removal involves any normal landscaping, driveway installation and repairs, or other minor projects; 
c.	The earth removal will not alter predominate drainage patterns or cause drainage impacts to adjoining properties; 
d.	The earth removal involves less than one hundred (100) cubic yards;
e.	The earth removal is for the purpose of construction of a swimming pool.
f.	The soil removal will not be in violation of any other section of this ordinance, other city ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1972, or any other applicable state or federal law. 
2.	All uses shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable State of Michigan statutes. If any of the requirements of this subsection are less than those in applicable state statutes, the state requirements shall prevail. 
3.	No machinery shall be erected or maintained within fifty (50) feet of any property or street line. No cut or excavation shall be made closer than fifty (50) feet to any street right-of-way line or property line in order to ensure sublateral support to surrounding property. The planning commission may require greater distances for the location of machinery, storage or parking of equipment, or limits of excavation where the site is located within two hundred (200) feet of any residential district or use. 
4.	Where it is determined by the planning commission to be a public hazard, all uses shall be enclosed by a fence six (6) feet or more in height for the entire periphery of the property or portion thereof. Fences shall be adequate to prevent trespass, and shall be placed no closer than fifty (50) feet to the top or bottom of any slope. 
5.	No slope shall exceed an angle with the horizontal of forty-five (45) degrees.
6.	No building shall be erected on the premises except as may otherwise be permitted in this ordinance or except as temporary shelter for machinery or for a field office, subject to approval by the planning commission. 
7.	The planning commission shall recommend routes for truck movement to and from the site in order to minimize the wear on public streets and to prevent hazards and damage to properties in the community. Access roads within the area of operation shall be provided with a dustless surface and the entry road within the site shall be hard surfaced for a distance established by the planning commission to minimize dust, mud, and debris being carried onto the public street. 
8.	All permitted installations shall be maintained in a neat, orderly condition so as to prevent injury to property, individuals, or to the community in general. 
9.	Proper measures, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer shall be taken to minimize the nuisance of noise and flying dust or rock. Such measures may include, when considered necessary, limitations upon the practice of stockpiling excavated material upon the site. 
10.	When excavation and removal operations or either of them are completed, the excavated area shall be graded so that no gradients is disturbed earth shall be steeper than a slope of 3:1 (horizontal-vertical). A layer of arable topsoil, of a quality approved by the zoning enforcement officer shall be spread over the excavated area, except exposed rock surfaces or areas lying below natural water level, to a minimum depth of four (4) inches in accordance with the approved contour plan. The area shall be seeded with a perennial rye grass and maintained until the area is stabilized and approved by the planning commission. 
11.	Where excavation operation results in a body of water five (5) feet deep or greater, the owner or operator shall place appropriate "Keep Out Danger" signs around said premises not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart. 
12.	The planning commission may require an environmental impact statement, engineering data, or other such justification supporting the need for and consequences of such extraction if it is believed that the extraction may have an adverse impact on natural topography, drainage, water bodies, floodplains, or other natural features. 
D.	Veterinary hospitals, animal clinics, and kennels. 
1.	The minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre.
2.	Buildings wherein animals are kept, dog runs, and/or exercise areas shall not be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any adjacent occupied dwelling or any adjacent building used by the public, and shall not be located in any required front, rear or side yard setback area. 
3.	All principal use activities shall be conducted within a totally enclosed main building.
E.	Radio and television transmitting buildings and towers. 
1.	Minimum site size shall be two (2) acres.
2.	Individual setbacks for any tower or other similar structure shall be equal to one-half (1/2) the height of any such structure. 
F.	Bed and breakfast establishments. 
1.	The establishment shall be serviced by approved water and sanitary sewer services.
2.	The establishment shall be located on property with direct access to a paved public street. 
3.	No such use shall be permitted on any property where there exists more than one (1) other bed and breakfast establishment within seven hundred fifty (750) feet, measured between the closest property lines. 
4.	Such uses shall only be established in a single-family dwelling.
5.	Parking shall be located to minimize negative impacts on adjacent properties.
6.	The lot on which the establishment is located shall meet the minimum lot area requirements of the zone district. 
7.	The total number of guest rooms in the establishment shall not exceed three (3), plus one (1) additional guest room for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet or fraction thereof by which the lot area of the use exceeds one (1) acre, not to exceed a total of seven (7) guest rooms in any case. 
8.	Exterior refuse storage facilities beyond what might normally be expected for a single-family dwelling shall be prohibited. 
9.	One (1) sign shall be allowed for identification purposes. Such sign shall be non-illuminated and un-animated, be mounted flat against the wall of the principal building and not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
10.	The establishment shall contain the principal residence of the operator.
11.	Accessory retail or service uses to a bed and breakfast establishment shall be prohibited, including but not limited to gift shops, antique shops, restaurants, bakeries, and other similar uses. 
12.	Breakfast may be served only to the operator's family, employees, and overnight guests.
G.	Schools, churches, libraries, and community center buildings. 
1.	Lighting for parking areas or outdoor activity areas shall be shielded to prevent light from spilling onto any residential district or use. 
2.	Main buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any residential district or use property line. 
3.	For uses exceeding a seating capacity of two hundred and fifty (250) persons, a traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted by the applicant which describes internal circulation and projected impacts on traffic operations, capacity, and access on adjacent and nearby streets which are likely to provide access to the site. 
4.	Access driveways shall be located no less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest part of the intersection of any street or any other driveway. 
H.	Utility and public service buildings, without storage yards, but not including essential public services such as poles, wires, and underground utility systems. 
1.	Any such buildings shall be generally compatible, with respect to materials and color, with the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.	Any such building shall comply with the yard setback requirements of the district in which it is located. 
I.	State licensed residential group care facilities. 
1.	Required off-street parking, as well as off-street pick-up and drop-off areas shall be provided. 
2.	The applicant shall provide evidence of the ability to comply with all applicable state licensing requirements. 
J.	Group and commercial day care homes and facilities. 
1.	There shall be provided, equipped and maintained, on the premises, a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of usable outdoor recreation area for each client of the facility. 
2.	The outdoor recreation area shall be fenced and screened from any abutting residential district or use by a decorative fence or wall, or a landscaped equivalent. 
3.	Required off-street parking, as well as off-street pick-up and drop-off areas shall be provided. 
4.	The applicant shall provide evidence of the ability to comply with all applicable state licensing requirements. 
K.	Multiple-family dwellings. 
1.	All dwelling units in the building shall have a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet per unit. 
2.	Parking areas shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet and side and rear yard setbacks of ten (10) feet. 
3.	Access driveways shall be located no less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest part of the intersection of any street or any other driveway. 
4.	Buildings shall not be constructed closer than a distance equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the taller building. 
5.	Lighting for parking areas or outdoor activity areas shall be shielded to prevent light from spilling onto any residential district or use. 
L.	Public or private campgrounds. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be three (3) acres. The lot shall provide direct vehicular access to a public street. The term lot shall mean a campground or travel trailer park. 
2.	Public stations containing adequate water outlet, waste container, toilet and shower facilities shall be provided. 
3.	No commercial enterprise shall be permitted to operate on the lot, except that a convenience shopping facility may be provided on a lot containing more than eighty (80) sites. Such convenience store, excluding laundry and similar ancillary uses, shall not exceed a maximum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
4.	Each lot shall provide hard-surfaced, dust-free vehicle parking areas for site occupant and guest parking. Such parking area shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the site it is intended to serve (except in the case of sites specifically designated only for tent camping). 
5.	Each site shall contain a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. Each site shall be set back at least seventy five (75) feet from any public or private street right-of-way or property line. 
6.	Each travel trailer site shall have direct access to a hard-surfaced, dust-free roadway of at least twenty four (24) feet in width for two-way traffic and twelve (12) feet in width for one-way traffic. Parking shall not be allowed on any roadway. Sites specifically designated for, and only used for, tent camping, need not have direct vehicular access to any roadway. 
7.	Any open drainage ways must have seeded banks sloped at least 3:1 (horizontal-vertical) and designed to properly drain all surface waters into a public drainage system, subject to approval by the Drain Commission of Kent County and the City of Lowell. 
8.	All sanitary facilities shall be designed and constructed in strict conformance to all applicable county health regulations. 
9.	A minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided between all travel trailers and tents. 
M.	Funeral homes and mortuary establishments. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre with a minimum width of one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
2.	A well designed and landscaped off-street vehicle assembly area shall be provided to be used in support of funeral procession activity. This area shall not obstruct internal circulation within the required off-street parking area or its related maneuvering space. 
3.	A caretaker's residence may be provided within the principal building.
N.	Commercial storage warehouses. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre.
2.	A residence may be permitted on the premises for security personnel or on-site operator. The residence shall conform to the minimum requirements for a single-family dwelling in the R-2 District. 
3.	Parking and circulation:
4.	One (1) parking space shall be provided for each ten (10) storage cubicles, equally distributed throughout the storage area. The parking requirement may be met with the parking lanes required for the storage area. The parking lanes may be eliminated when the access aisle does not serve storage cubicles. 
5.	Two (2) parking spaces shall also be required for the residence of security personnel or on-site operator employed on the premises. 
6.	One (1) parking space shall also be required for every twenty (20) storage cubicles, up to a maximum of ten (10) spaces, to be located adjacent the rental office, for the use of customers. 
7.	All driveways, parking, loading, storage, and vehicular circulation areas shall be paved. 
8.	A ten-foot wide buffer strip along the side and rear lot lines shall be provided.
O.	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other similar uses as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, with drive-through facilities. 
1.	Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through portion of the operation shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into the public street right-of-way. A minimum of five (5) stacking spaces for each outdoor teller or automatic teller device shall be provided. Stacking spaces shall be located so as not to interfere with vehicular circulation and egress from the property by vehicles not using the drive-through portion of the facility. 
2.	Parking areas shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet and side and rear yard setbacks of ten (10) feet. 
3.	Public access to the site shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any intersection as measured from the nearest street right-of-way line to the nearest edge of said access. 
4.	The parking and maneuvering areas of the site shall be fenced and screened from the view of any abutting residential district or use by a decorative fence or wall, or a landscaped equivalent. 
5.	Outdoor speakers for the drive-through facility shall be located in a way that minimizes sound transmission toward neighboring properties and uses. 
P.	Hotels and motels. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be four (4) acres and minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
2.	Parking areas shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet and side and rear yard setbacks of ten (10) feet. 
3.	Access driveways shall be located no less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest part of the intersection of any street or any other driveway. 
Q.	Theaters, concert halls, or similar places of public assembly, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
1.	Lighting for parking areas or outdoor activity areas shall be shielded to prevent light from spilling onto any residential district or use. 
2.	Main buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential district or use. 
3.	For uses exceeding a seating capacity of two hundred and fifty (250) persons, a traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted by the applicant which describes internal circulation and projected impacts on traffic operations, capacity, and access on abutting and nearby streets which are likely to provide access to the site. 
4.	Access driveways shall be located no less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest part of the intersection of any street or any other driveway. 
R.	Residential dwellings, in the same building with commercial uses. 
1.	All commercial uses, excluding storage, shall not be located on the same story of the building as the dwelling unit. 
2.	Dwelling units shall comply with the applicable requirements of the R-3 District for multiple-family dwellings. 
S.	Off-street parking lots. 
1.	The lot area used for parking shall be hard-surfaced and the display or storage areas shall be provided with a permanent, paved surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. 
2.	Ingress and egress shall be provided as far as practicable from two (2) intersecting streets and shall be at least fifty (50) feet from an intersection. 
3.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential areas.
4.	Parking areas shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet and side and rear yard setbacks of ten (10) feet. 
5.	Public access to the site shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any intersection as measured from the nearest street right-of-way line to the nearest edge of said access. 
6.	The parking and maneuvering areas of the site shall be fenced and screened from the view of any abutting residential district or use by a decorative fence or wall, or a landscaped equivalent. 
T.	Restaurants with drive-through facilities. 
1.	Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through portion of the operation shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into the public street right-of-way. A minimum of ten (10) stacking spaces for the service ordering station shall be provided. Stacking spaces shall be located so as not to interfere with vehicular circulation and egress from the property by vehicles not using the drive-through portion of the facility. 
2.	In addition to parking space requirements, at least three (3) parking spaces shall be provided, in close proximity to the exit of the drive-through portion of the operation, to allow for customers waiting for delivery of orders. 
3.	Parking areas shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet and side and rear yard setbacks of ten (10) feet. 
4.	Public access to the site shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any intersection as measured from the nearest right-of-way line to the nearest edge of said access. 
5.	The parking and maneuvering areas of the site shall be fenced and screened from the view of any abutting residential district or use by a decorative fence or wall, or a landscaped equivalent. 
6.	Outdoor speakers for the drive through facility shall be located in a way that minimizes sound transmission toward neighboring property and uses. 
U.	Vehicle service stations, excluding body shops. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be thirty two thousand (32,000) square feet.
2.	Minimum lot width shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
3.	All buildings, structures, and equipment shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line and not less than fifty (50) feet from any side or rear lot line abutting a residential district. 
4.	No more than one (1) curb opening shall be permitted for every seventy-five (75) feet of frontage along any street, with a maximum of one (1) per street when located on a corner lot. 
5.	No driveway or curb opening shall be located nearer than seventy-five (75) feet to any intersection nor more than twenty-five (25) feet to any adjacent residential district property line. No driveway shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet, as measured along the property line, to any other driveway. A driveway shall not be permitted where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it may produce a safety hazard to adjacent pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
6.	A raised curb of six (6) inches in height shall be constructed along the perimeter of all paved and landscaped areas. 
7.	The entire lot used for vehicular activities, excluding the area occupied by a building, shall be hard-surfaced with a concrete or bituminous surface. All areas not paved or occupied by buildings or structures shall be landscaped. 
8.	All lubrication equipment, hydraulic hoists, and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or serviced while parked upon or over-hanging any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way. 
9.	When adjoining residentially zoned property parking and storage areas shall be fenced and screened from the view of any abutting residential district or use by a decorative fence or wall, or a landscaped equivalent. 
10.	All outside storage areas for trash, used tires, auto parts and similar items shall be enclosed on all sides by a six (6) foot sight-obscuring wall or fence. No such outside storage area shall exceed an area of two hundred (200) square feet. Outside parking of disabled, wrecked, or partially dismantled vehicles (not to exceed a maximum of five (5) such vehicles) shall not be permitted for a period exceeding three (3) days (seventy two (72) hours). 
11.	The rental of trucks, trailers, and any other vehicles on the premises is expressly prohibited without specific approval by the planning commission. If such use is permitted, proper screening, landscaping, and additional parking area shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth by the planning commission. 
12.	All exterior lighting, including signs, shall be erected and hooded so as to shield the glare of such lights from view by adjacent property. 
13.	Where applicable, vehicle queuing space shall be provided in front of each service bay for at least two (2) vehicles. 
V.	Vehicle wash establishments, either self-serve or automatic. 
1.	All washing activities must be carried on within a building.
2.	Vacuuming activities may not be conducted within any required yard.
3.	Sufficient space shall be provided to accommodate all vehicle queuing on the property, so no vehicles are required to wait on an adjoining street to enter the site. 
W.	Open air businesses. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre.
2.	Minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
3.	The planning commission may require a six (6) foot fence or wall to be constructed along the rear and/or sides of the lot to keep trash, paper, and other debris from blowing off the premises. 
4.	All open air businesses shall comply with all applicable city and county regulations regarding sanitation and general health conditions. 
5.	The planning commission may require the permittee to furnish a surety bond in accordance with this ordinance to insure strict compliance with any regulation contained herein and required as a condition of special land use approval. 
6.	The lot area used for parking and the display or storage areas shall be provided with a permanent, paved surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. 
7.	Ingress and egress shall be provided as far as practicable from two (2) intersecting streets and shall be at least fifty (50) feet from an intersection. 
8.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts or uses.
9.	In the case of a plant materials nursery:
a.	The storage or materials display areas shall meet all the yard setback requirements applicable to any building in the district. 
b.	All loading activities and parking areas shall be provided on the same premises (off-street).
c.	The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or similar loosely packaged materials shall be contained to prevent any adverse effect upon adjacent properties. 
10.	No display area shall be located within twenty (20) feet of a street right-of-way line. 
X.	Retail building supplies. 
1.	Minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre.
2.	Minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
3.	The planning commission may require a six (6) foot fence or wall to be constructed along the rear and/or sides of the lot to keep trash, paper, and other debris from blowing off the premises. 
4.	Ingress and egress shall be provided as far as practicable from two (2) intersecting streets and shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from an intersection. 
5.	All lighting shall be shielded front adjacent residential districts or uses.
6.	The storage or materials display areas shall meet all the yard setback requirements applicable to any principal building in the district. 
Y.	Landing and take-off areas for rotocraft, and airports. 
1.	The lot area used for vehicle and aircraft parking shall be hard-surfaced and the display or storage areas shall be provided with a permanent, paved surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. 
2.	Public access to the site shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any intersection as measured from the nearest right-of-way line to the nearest edge of said access. 
3.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts or uses.
4.	Vehicle and aircraft parking areas and any landing area shall have setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any lot line, or as required by appropriate federal or state regulations, whichever is greater. 
Z.	Petroleum storage located at least five hundred (500) feet from any residentially zoned property. 
1.	The minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres.
2.	The lot shall be located so that at least one (1) side abuts an arterial street and all access shall be from such arterial street. 
3.	The main and accessory buildings and any storage facilities shall not be located nearer than three hundred (300) feet to any adjacent residential district or use. 
4.	Proper containment facilities shall be constructed to ensure that accidental spills or ruptures are contained on the site and will not cause the contamination of any water source. 
AA.	Site design standards. Sexually oriented businesses shall comply with the requirements of chapter 17A. 
BB.	Commercial wireless communication towers. In addition to the standards of section 17.03, the planning commission shall find that a proposed commercial wireless communication tower meets the following specific special land use standards. 
1.	Purpose and intent. The Telecommunication Act of 1996, as amended, sets forth provisions concerning placement, location and construction of towers and related facilities for communication. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of commercial wireless communication towers, which include antenna structures. In order that such towers not cause visual pollution or create a safety hazard on adjacent properties, reasonable regulations for the location, use of existing structures and design of structures and towers, are appropriate. Commercial wireless communication towers are specifically determined to not be essential services as defined in this section. The intent of these provisions is to encourage users of towers to: 
a.	Protect land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers.
b.	Place the location of new towers in appropriately zoned areas.
c.	Minimize the total number of towers in the city.
d.	Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than the erection of additional single-use towers. 
e.	Locate and configure towers in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
f.	Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
g.	Consider the public health and safety of personal wireless service facilities.
h.	Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
It is not the intent to regulate ham radio antennae under this subsection. 
2.	Administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the zoning enforcement officer after conducting an administrative review: 
a.	Antennas on existing structures: Compact platform-type, omnidirectional or singular-type antenna which is not attached to a new commercial wireless communication tower may be approved by the zoning administrator as a co-location or as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, profession, institutional, or multi-family structure, provided: 
i.	The antenna does not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the structure; 
ii.	The antenna complies with all applicable federal regulations;
iii.	The equipment building for such co-located equipment is incorporated into an existing structure or cabinet; and 
iv.	The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
b.	Microcell networks: Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. 
3.	Additional information required for review. In addition to the other requirements of appendix A, chapter 17, commercial wireless communication tower applications shall include: 
a.	Name and address of the proposed operator of the site.
b.	Name and address, including phone number of the person responsible for determining feasibility of co-location as provided in this subsection. 
c.	Preliminary design of all proposed structures, including elevations and renderings showing the proposed facility from four (4) vantage points located not less than two hundred (200) feet nor more than five hundred (500) feet from the proposed tower location. 
d.	Certification by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state that the proposed commercial wireless communication tower will be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and all applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations. A set of drawings sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state for the installation of the wireless communication equipment and wireless communication support structure shall also be provided. Such certification shall set forth the fall zone area for the proposed tower. If such fall zone area is less than that of a circle whose radius is equivalent to the height of the proposed tower, such certification shall provide structural calculations and detail sufficient to demonstrate the accuracy of such lesser fall zone area determination. 
e.	Method of fencing, the finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination. 
f.	A statement signed by the applicant indicating the number and type of additional antennae the proposed tower will accommodate through co-location. 
g.	An inventory of existing towers, tall structures, antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas that are either within the city or within one (1) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower, antenna and tall structure. 
h.	The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type(s) of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known. The applicant shall also demonstrate the reasons such existing towers or tall structures cannot be used in lieu of the proposed communication tower. 
4.	Planning commission review. Once all required materials are submitted, the planning commission shall review the application in accordance with the standards of appendix A, chapter 17 and shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within ninety (90) days of receipt of all required information, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. If the planning commission does not approve, approve with conditions or deny the application within ninety (90) days, the application shall be considered approved and the planning commission shall be considered to have made any determination required for approval. 
5.	Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. 
6.	General provisions. Commercial wireless communication towers, including their accessory equipment, may be permitted, subject to the following provisions: 
a.	A commercial wireless communication tower is permitted only in the PF - Public Facilities District and I - Industrial District zoning districts. Such towers shall be placed on parcels (whether the land is owned or leased by the tower owner) which have an area no less than the minimum parcel area and width for the zoning district. 
b.	All setbacks for the zoning district shall be met and, in addition, no tower shall be placed closer to any property line than the radius of the certified fall zone as provided in this subsection, and in no case less than two hundred (200) feet from any residence or two hundred (200) feet from a zoning district which does not permit commercial wireless communication towers as a special use. 
c.	All proposed towers of a height greater than the maximum height permitted the zone district in which it is proposed to be located shall be submitted to the Michigan Aeronautics Commission and Federal Aviation Administration (the "FAA") for review and approval prior to the approval by the city. All towers must meet or exceed current federal and state standards and regulations. If such standards and regulations are revised, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this subsection shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
d.	The service building shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with buildings within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which it is located. 
e.	All connecting wires from towers to accessory buildings and all electrical and other service wires to the facility shall be underground. 
f.	Monopole tower design shall be required and guyed towers are prohibited.
g.	The planning commission may require landscape screening of the service building and fencing. 
h.	Strobe lights shall not be allowed except as required by FAA or other federal or state agency. 
i.	No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower. The service building or fence surrounding the service building and tower may contain not more than two (2) signs of not more than two (2) square feet, listing the name, address and contact telephone number of the operator. In addition, not more than two (2) signs not to exceed two (2) square feet signaling "danger" or "no trespassing" may be placed on the fence or service building. 
j.	Towers shall be enclosed by a locked gate and security fencing six (6) feet in height, and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
k.	The applicant shall certify its intent to lease excess space on the proposed tower for co-located antennae of other operators. Such certification shall include a commitment to respond to any request for information from another potential shared use applicant; to negotiate in good faith and allow for leased shared use if a requester demonstrates that it is technically practicable; and to make no more than a reasonable charge for a shared use lease. 
l.	Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, the maximum height for a commercial wireless communication tower in the city shall be one hundred ninety-nine (199) feet. 
m.	Proposed towers shall be at least one-half (1/2) mile from existing towers except for towers dedicated to essential municipal services. 
7.	Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. A tower that is unused for a period of twelve (12) months shall be removed. The applicant or owner is responsible for the removal of an unused tower. Failure to do so after notice to remove shall be sufficient cause for the city to cause the removal of the tower at the owner's expense. 
8.	Bonds. The owner of a tower including related equipment and accessory buildings, shall post an unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit or bond acceptable to the city attorney with the city to cover the reasonable estimated costs and expenses of dismantling and removing the tower. The amount of the letter of credit or bond shall be established by the planning commission and may be adjusted from time to time to reflect changing costs and expenses of dismantling and removing the tower. 
9.	Nonconforming uses. 
a.	Pre-existing towers that do not meet the requirements of this subsection shall be permitted to continue in use as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such pre-existing towers. New construction, other than routine maintenance on a pre-existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this subsection. Modifications to height and type of construction of pre-existing towers shall not be permitted, except in conformance with this subsection. 
b.	Nonconforming towers that are damaged or destroyed may not be rebuilt except in conformance with the requirements of this subsection. 
CC.	Vehicle towing service. 
1.	All buildings, structures and parking areas shall be arranged so as to allow all maneuvering of tow trucks, flatbed trucks and other equipment transporting or towing motor vehicles to conduct operations entirely on the site of the vehicle towing service property without encroaching onto the public right-of-way except when entering and exiting the site. 
2.	A vehicle towing service shall not engage in salvage operations, sale of parts or dismantling of motor vehicles. 
3.	A vehicle towing service shall not engage in motor vehicle repair activities unless it is also approved as a vehicle repair facility. 
4.	Motor vehicles stored at a vehicle towing service site shall (a) be kept within an enclosed building or structure or outdoors in a secure fenced-in area screened from view with appropriate approved landscaping and (b) not be stored outdoors for more than thirty (30) days. 
5.	All surfaces for maneuvering and storage of motor vehicles shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and shall be graded to conduct stormwater to a collection system approved by the city. 
6.	Motor vehicles stored on a vehicle towing service site shall be stored within or upon containment equipment intended to capture any fluids which may leak from the motor vehicles. 
7.	All hazardous or toxic wastes accumulated on a vehicle towing service site shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with applicable state and federal requirements. No hazardous or toxic substances shall be discharged to the public sanitary sewer or stormwater systems or to groundwater or surface water features. 
8.	Any outdoor storage area shall be illuminated and comply with the standards of section 4.24. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 96-6, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 97-2, § 12, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 00-4, § 6, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 12-03, § 4, 6-4-12; Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 9-21-15) 
CHAPTER 17A. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Section 17A.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses, to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects on the community from such sexually oriented businesses. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. It is not the intent of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the United States or Michigan Constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment in their intended market. 
    Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.02. - Location restrictions. 
A.	A sexually oriented business shall only be operated within areas zoned as C-3 - General Business District. 
B.	A sexually oriented business may not be operated within four hundred (400) feet of:
1.	A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship;
2.	A public or private elementary or secondary school or public school academy;
3.	A boundary of any residential zoned district or any residential structure within or without a zoned area; 
4.	A public park;
5.	A public library; or
6.	A child care center, family day care home, or group day care home.
C.	A sexually oriented business may not be operated within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
D.	A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business. 
E.	For the purpose of this chapter, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public school academy, public park or library, child care center, family day care home, group day care home, residential lot, or another sexually oriented business, or to the nearest boundary of a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.03. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.04. - License application. 
A.	All applicants for a sexually oriented business license shall file an application for such license with the zoning enforcement officer. Each individual applicant, partner of a partnership, member of a limited liability company, partner of a limited liability partnership, officer and director of a corporation and all managers shall be named in each application form and each of them shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the city police department. 
B.	An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city.
C.	The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the building inspector and zoning enforcement officer. 
D.	If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a license as applicant, along with each officer and director of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must sign the application. If the applicant is a limited liability company each member must sign the application. If the applicant is a limited liability partnership each partner must sign the application. 
E.	The fact that a person possesses other types of permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
F.	Applications for a license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the zoning enforcement officer by the intended operator of the sexually oriented business. Applications must be submitted by hand delivery to the office of the zoning enforcement officer during regular working hours. Applications forms shall be supplied by the zoning enforcement officer. The intended operator shall be required to give the following information on the application form: 
1.	If the applicant is:
a.	An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and address and any aliases;
b.	A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names and addresses of all partners and whether the partnership is general or limited; 
c.	A limited liability company, the limited liability company shall state its complete name and the names and addresses of all of its members; 
d.	A limited liability partnership, the limited liability partnership shall state its complete name and the names and addresses of all of its partners; or 
e.	A legal entity other than a partnership, limited liability company or limited liability partnership, the application shall state its complete name, the date and place of its organization, the names, addresses and capacity of all officers and directors of a corporation and of the chief executive officer and manager for any other legal entity, and the name of the resident agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
2.	The name under which the sexually oriented business is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. 
3.	The telephone number of the sexually oriented business.
4.	The address and legal description of the real property on which the sexually oriented business is to be located. 
5.	If the sexually oriented business is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the sexually oriented business for which the license is sought, and the date on which the sexually oriented business began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the license is sought. 
6.	If the sexually oriented business is not in operation, the expected start-up date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of the application). If the expected start-up date is to be more than ten (10) days following the date of the application, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same is also required. 
G.	Whether the applicant or any other individual identified in the application had a previous sexually oriented business license under this chapter or other adult business ordinance from another city, village, township or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented or adult business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. 
H.	Whether the applicant or any other individuals identified in the application has been partner in a partnership, a member of a limited liability company or partnership or an officer, director, chief executive officer or manager of any other legal entity that is permitted under this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented or adult business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. 
I.	Whether the applicant or any other individual identified in the application holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented or adult business ordinance from another city, village, township or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted business. 
J.	The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if any. 
K.	The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
L.	The applicant's driver license number, social security number and/or federally issued tax identification number. 
M.	The application shall be accompanied by the following:
1.	Payment of the application, investigation and license fees;
2.	If the applicant is an individual, satisfactory proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
3.	If the applicant is a Michigan corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, and a current good standing certificate; 
4.	If the applicant is a corporation incorporated in another state, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in Michigan; 
5.	If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement, together with all amendments thereto; 
6.	If the applicant is a Michigan limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
7.	If the applicant is a limited partnership formed under the laws of another state, a certified copy of the Michigan certificate of registration; 
8.	If the applicant is a Michigan limited liability company, a certified copy of the articles of organization, together with all amendments thereto; 
9.	If the applicant is a limited liability company formed under the laws of another state, a certified copy of the Michigan certificate of authority; 
10.	If the applicant is a Michigan limited liability partnership, a certified copy of the registration of limited liability partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
11.	If the applicant is a limited liability partnership formed under the laws of another state, a certified copy of the Michigan registration; 
12.	Documentation identifying the owner(s) of the real property on which the sexually oriented business is to be situated; 
13.	If the person(s) identified as the owner(s) of the real property identified above is not also the owner(s) of the sexually oriented business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owner(s) or proposed owner(s) of the sexually oriented business to have or obtain the use and possession of the real property thereof that is to be used for the purpose of the operation of the sexually oriented business; 
14.	A floor plan of the licensed premises with the following requirements:
a.	Location and dimensions of any manager's station, demonstrating that there is an unobstructed view from at least one (1) of the manager's stations of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms; 
b.	Location of all overhead lighting fixtures;
c.	Identification of any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted;
d.	Location of the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted;
e.	The location of any stage;
f.	Identification of the use of each room or other area of the premises; or
g.	A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architects blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one (1) foot; and 
15.	A current certificate and straight-line drawing, prepared within thirty (30) days prior to the application, by a land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of the closest exterior wall of the structure m which the applicant business will be located and depicting the property line of any church, synagogue, regular place of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public school academy, child care center, family day care home, group day care home, public park or library, residential district, or residential lot within 400 feet from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which the applicant business will be located. 
    Any of items 2. through 15. above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the zoning enforcement officer with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
N.	The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
1.	The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and 
2.	The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
O.	A separate application and license shall be required for each sexually oriented business.
P.	The zoning enforcement officer shall not accept any application that is not complete in every detail. In the event that the zoning enforcement officer determines that the applicant has improperly completed the application, the applicant shall be promptly notified of such fact and permitted ten (10) days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
Q.	Applicants for a license under this chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this chapter in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change by supplementing the application on file with the zoning enforcement officer shall be grounds for suspension of the license. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.05. - Approval of license application. 
A.	The zoning enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless he or she finds one (1) or more of the following to be true: 
1.	An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
2.	An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business; 
3.	An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has knowingly answered falsely a question or request for information on the application form; 
4.	The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the building inspector and the zoning enforcement officer as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
5.	The applicant or a director, officer, partner, member, principal manager or chief executive officer of the applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or adult business license revoked or suspended within one (1) year prior to the date of application; 
6.	The applicant or a director, officer, partner, member, principal manager or chief executive officer of the applicant has operated a sexually oriented business or adult business which was determined to be a public nuisance under laws of any state, county, city, village or township within one (1) year prior to the date of application; 
7.	The applicant is not in good standing or authorized to do business in Michigan;
8.	The application, investigation and license fees have not been paid;
9.	An application of the proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter; 
10.	Applicant has been convicted of any of the following criminal offenses in any jurisdiction within the last ten (10) years: 
a.	Prostitution, procuring a prostitute, or solicitation of a prostitute;
b.	Sale, distribution or display of obscene material;
c.	Sale, distribution or display of material which is harmful to minors;
d.	Soliciting, procuring or aiding and abetting an unlawful sexual performance by a minor;
e.	Possession, sale or distribution of child pornography;
f.	Public lewdness;
g.	Indecent exposure;
h.	Indecent conduct with a child;
i.	Sexual assault or rape;
j.	Incest;
k.	Sexual solicitation of a child;
l.	Contributing to the delinquency of a minor; or
m.	Harboring a runaway child.
B.	The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
C.	The building inspector and zoning enforcement officer shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application. 
D.	In the event that the zoning enforcement officer determines that an applicant is not eligible for a license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the application by the zoning enforcement officer, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this chapter. 
E.	An applicant may appeal the decision of the zoning enforcement officer regarding a denial to the board of zoning appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) days after the applicant is given notice of the zoning enforcement officer's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The zoning enforcement officer may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal. After reviewing the relevant information the board of zoning appeals shall vote to either uphold or overrule the zoning enforcement officer's decision. Such vote shall be taken within forty-five (45) calendar days after the date on which the board of zoning appeals receives the notice of appeal. However, applicant shall be required to comply with the zoning enforcement officer's decision during the pendency of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.06. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of a properly completed application, together with all information required in connection therewith, fingerprints and photographs, and the payment of the application, investigation and license fee, the zoning enforcement officer shall transmit the application to the city police department for investigation of the background of each individual applicant, the partners of a partnership, the members of a limited liability company, the partners of a limited liability partnership, or the officers and directors of a corporation and manager of the proposed sexually oriented business. Each applicant shall pay a non-refundable investigation fee at the time the application is filed in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of such investigation. The investigation conducted by the city police department shall be sufficient to verify the accuracy of all the information required by this chapter and shall be non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.07. - Inspection. 
    An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the city police department, or other city, Kent County, or State of Michigan departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.08. - Application fee. 
    Each applicant shall pay an application fee at the time of filing an application in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such application fee shall be non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.09. - License fee. 
A.	Each licensee issued a license pursuant to this chapter shall pay an annual license fee at the time of application for the license as herein provided. The annual license fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The license fee shall be refunded if the license is not approved. 
B.	In the event of suspension or revocation of a license, or termination of business for any reason whatsoever, no portion of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.10. - License renewal. 
    Any application for renewal of a license shall be filed with the zoning enforcement officer not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of expiration. The zoning enforcement officer may, for a good cause shown, waive the requirement for timely filing of a renewal application. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.11. - Term of license. 
A.	All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a term of one (1) year. Said term shall commence on January 1 of each year and terminate upon December 31 of the same year. Applications for a license filed at any other time during the year shall be treated the same as if they were filed January 1 of that year and shall terminate on December 31 of that same year, and no pro-ration fees shall be permitted. 
B.	When the zoning enforcement officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the zoning enforcement officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.12. - Suspension. 
    The zoning enforcement officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he or she determines that the licensee or an employee of a licensee has: (a) violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; (b) become impaired or intoxicated through the use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs while on the sexually oriented business premises; (c) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; or (d) knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.13. - Revocation of license. 
A.	The zoning enforcement officer shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
B.	The zoning enforcement officer shall also revoke a license if he or she determines that any of the following has occurred: 
1.	Any condition exists that would warrant disapproval of a license as set forth in this chapter; 
2.	The licensee, manager or employee has engaged or has allowed patrons or employees to engage in acts of misconduct on the licensed premises in violation of City Code, the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States when the licensee, manager or employee knew or should have known such acts were taking place; or 
3.	Repeated disturbances of public peace have occurred within the licensed sexually oriented business or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, access ways or grounds of the licensed sexually oriented business involving patrons, employees, or the licensee. 
C.	When the zoning enforcement officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the zoning enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, a license may be reinstated if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.14. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated on the license. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.15. - Registration of managers, entertainers and employees. 
A.	No person shall work as a manager at a sexually oriented business without a current manager's registration under this section. No person shall work as an entertainer at a sexually oriented business in the city without a current entertainer's registration under this section. The registration form for each shall require the applicant to provide his/her legal name and any aliases, home address, telephone number, date of birth and satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
B.	The registration year for a manager's registration or an entertainer's registration shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year. Each such registration shall expire at close of business or midnight, whichever is earlier, on December 31 of each year. 
C.	The registration fee for a manager's registration or entertainer's registration shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The registration fee for each such registration is payable for a full year only and is not refundable. 
D.	A manager's registration or entertainer's registration under this section shall not be assigned or transferred. 
E.	No person under eighteen (18) years of age may obtain a manager's registration or entertainer's registration. 
F.	In order to obtain renewal of a current manager's registration or entertainer's registration, a registration holder must file an application for renewal with the zoning enforcement officer. The renewal fee for each year shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
G.	In the event a licensee changes the manager of a sexually oriented business, the licensee shall immediately report such change to the zoning enforcement officer and register the new manager within five (5) days of such change. 
H.	Each licensee will provide to the zoning enforcement officer the full name, address, telephone number and date of birth of any employee of the sexually oriented business within five (5) days of employment. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.16. - Exterior structural requirements. 
A.	It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible from a point outside the sexually oriented business. 
B.	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
C.	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the sexually oriented business to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
1.	The sexually oriented business is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
2.	The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
D.	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.17. - Interior structural requirements. 
A.	The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms from at least one (1) of the manager's station. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
B.	A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area.
C.	No alteration to the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the zoning enforcement officer. 
D.	Viewing rooms or peep booths must be separated from other viewing rooms or peep booths by a solid, opaque, uninterrupted physical divider which is a minimum one (1) inch thick and serves to prevent physical contact between patrons. 
E.	No private viewing rooms or booths shall be constructed unless one (1) side is always open to a central public area. No door shall be placed on any viewing room or peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two (2) adjacent viewing rooms or peep booths. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.18. - Sign regulations. 
A.	It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein. 
B.	Primary and secondary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
C.	Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary or secondary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
D.	Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall be a flat plane, rectangular in shape. 
E.	Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall:
1.	Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
2.	Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
3.	Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and
4.	Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the enterprise.
F.	The requirements of this section are intended to supplement the requirements and limitations of Chapter 20 hereof. In the event of contradictions or inconsistencies, the stricter requirement shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.19. - Lighting requirements. 
A.	All off-street parking areas and premises entries of sexually.oriented businesses shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business to help ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and other criminal conduct. 
B.	The premises of all sexually oriented businesses, except adult motion picture theaters, shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to provide an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candle of light as measured at the floor level. 
C.	Adult motion picture theaters shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to provide an illumination of not less than one (1) foot-candle of light as measured at the floor level. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.20. - Age requirement regulations. 
A.	It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
B.	It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business' regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished a valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or a valid personal identification certificate issued by the State of Michigan verifying that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.21. - Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, shall operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.22. - Standards of conduct. 
A.	The following standards of conduct must be adhered to on the licensed premises by the licensee and all employees, managers, officers and agents of any sexually oriented business: 
1.	No employee or entertainer mingling with the patrons or serving food or drinks shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any specified anatomical areas. 
2.	No employee or entertainer shall engage in, encourage or knowingly permit any specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
3.	No employee or entertainer while in view of the patrons on the licensed premises shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any specified anatomical areas, except upon a stage which shall be fixed and immovable at least eighteen (18) inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six (6) feet from the nearest patron or behind a solid, uninterrupted physical barrier which completely separates the entertainer from any patrons. This barrier must be a minimum of one-quarter (1/4) inch thick and have no openings between the entertainer and any patrons. 
4.	There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common areas of each place offering adult entertainment a list of food and drink prices. 
5.	Any tips for entertainers shall be placed by a patron into a tip box which is permanently affixed in the sexually oriented business and no tip may be handed directly to an entertainer. A licensee that desires to provide for such tips from its patrons shall establish one (1) or more containers to receive tips. Any physical contact between a patron and an entertainer is strictly prohibited. 
6.	A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes shall conspicuously display in the common area of the premises one (1) or more signs in letters at least one (1) inch high to read as follows: 
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF LOWELL. ALL TIPS SHALL BE PLACED IN TIP BOX AND NOT HANDED DIRECTLY TO THE ENTERTAINER. ANY PHYSICAL CONTACT BETWEEN THE PATRON AND THE ENTERTAINER IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED 
7.	No adult entertainment occurring on the premises shall be visible at any time from the outside of the premises. 
8.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly allow the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises. 
9.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly allow prostitution on the premises. 
10.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly operate the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
11.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not knowingly allow any live specified sexual act to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
12.	A licensee, manager, or an employee shall not illegally offer for sale or illegally allow to be consumed or possessed upon the licensed premises, or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds of the licensed premises, narcotics or dangerous drugs or fermented malt, malt, vinous or spirituous beverages. 
13.	At least one (1) registered manager or licensee must be on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that the business is open to the public. 
14.	All doors to public areas on the premises must remain unlocked during business hours.
15.	It shall be the duty of the licensee, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that any view area or peep booth remain unobstructed by any doors, curtain, drapes, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the license application filed pursuant to this chapter. 
16.	No viewing room or peep booth may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.23. - Adult motels. 
A.	Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
B.	It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he or she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
C.	For purposes of B. above, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.24. - Massage business. 
A.	It shall be unlawful for any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, massage parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex unless persons massaging any client or customer is certified as a massage therapist by the American Massage Therapy Association or is a graduate of a school of massage therapy that is certified by the State of Michigan or have other similar qualifications which must be submitted to and approved by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.25. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.	Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of the location or structural configuration requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming. 
B.	A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, synagogue, regular place of religious worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public school academy, child care center, family day care home, group day care home, public park or library, residential district or residential structure, within four hundred (400) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.26. - Exemptions from enforcement. 
A.	It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
1.	By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Michigan or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
2.	By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.27. - Reporting of violations. 
    Any licensee, manager or employee shall immediately report to the city police department any violation of this chapter or any breach of the peace or unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed on the licensed premises, including any parking area or adjoining area under the control or management of the licensee, provided that the licensee, manager or employee knew or should have known of such violation of law. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.28. - Notices. 
A.	Any notice required or permitted to be given by the zoning enforcement officer or any other office, department or other agency pursuant to this chapter to any applicant, operator or owner of an sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license which has been received by the zoning enforcement officer, or any notice of address change which has been received by the zoning enforcement officer. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the zoning enforcement officer or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the sexually oriented business. 
B.	Any notice required or permitted to be given to the zoning enforcement officer by any person pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the zoning enforcement officer. 
C.	It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the zoning enforcement officer in writing of any change of residence or mailing address. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
Section 17A.29. - Penalties and civil remedies. 
A.	Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a suit for injunction and any other applicable civil remedy, as well as criminal prosecution for violation of this chapter. 
B.	It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse or fail to comply with or resist enforcement of any provision of this chapter, and any such violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a criminal misdemeanor. 
C.	Each day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
D.	In case of any violation, failure or omission under this chapter, the city or any person affected by any such violation, failure or omission, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, initiate a civil action for injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate relief 
to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such violation, failure or omission and in addition, initiate an action for a money demand to recover any damages or any lawful costs or charges incurred in abating the violation. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 11-17-97)
CHAPTER 18. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Section 18.01. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for consultation and cooperation between the applicant and the planning commission in order that the applicant may accomplish planned objectives in the utilization of land within the regulations of this zoning ordinance. It is also intended to ensure that the development may be completed with minimum adverse effect on the use of adjacent streets and highways, and on existing and future uses and environment in the immediate area and general vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 18.02. - Regulation. 
    In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission shall be finished a site plan of the proposed development prior to the creation of a use or the erection of a building in the districts and conditions cited below: 
A.	Uses permitted by right in the following zoning districts, except as noted in section 18.03: 
1.	R-3 Multiple-Family District;
2.	MHP Manufactured Home Park District;
3.	C-1 Neighborhood Business District;
4.	C-2 Central Business District;
5.	C-3 General Business District;
6.	I Industrial District;
7.	PUD Planned Unit Development;
8.	PF Public Facilities District;
9.	MU Mixed Use District.
B.	Special land uses in all zoning districts.
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 15-01, § 7, 2-17-15) 
Section 18.03. - Exceptions. 
A.	A site plan shall not be required for a single- or two-family dwelling, state licensed residential, family care facilities, family day care homes and home occupations. 
B.	The zoning enforcement officer shall review site plans meeting the following conditions:
1.	The proposed use is permitted by right in the zoning district; and
2.	No additions, alterations or exterior changes will be made to the existing building(s) and structure(s). 
C.	Where the conditions of subsection B. above are met, the zoning enforcement officer shall have the authority to: 
1.	Establish conditions of approval to ensure compliance with this section;
2.	Request additional information to assist in determining if the site plan meets the requirements of this section; and 
3.	Where it is not clear if a site plan meets the conditions of this section, refer the site plan to the planning commission for review and action pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 15-03, § 1, 6-15-15) 
Section 18.04. - Site plan requirements. 
A.	Preliminary site plan review. 
1.	A preliminary site plan may be submitted to the planning commission for review prior to final site plan review. The purpose of the preliminary site plan review is to allow discussion between the applicant and the planning commission to inform the applicant of the general acceptability of the proposed plans prior to incurring extensive engineering and other costs which may be necessary for the review of the final site plan. 

2.	Preliminary site plans shall include the following, unless deemed unnecessary by the zoning enforcement officer. 
a.	Small scale sketch of properties, streets and use of land within one quarter (1/2) mile of the subject property. 
b.	Twelve (12) copies of a site plan at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (1? = 100') showing any existing or proposed arrangement of: 
(1)	Existing adjacent streets and proposed streets and existing curb cuts within one hundred (100) feet of the property. 
(2)	All lot lines with dimensions.
(3)	Parking lots and access points.
(4)	Proposed buffer strips or screening.
(5)	Significant natural features; and other natural characteristics, including but not limited to open space, stands of trees, brooks, ponds, floodplains, hills, and similar natural assets. 
(6)	Location of any signs not attached to the building.
(7)	Existing and proposed buildings, including existing buildings or structures within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the property. 
(8)	General topographical features including contour intervals no greater than ten (10) feet. 
(9)	Number of acres allocated to each proposed use and gross area in building, structures, parking, public and/or private streets and drives, and open space. 
(10)	Dwelling unit densities by type, if applicable.
(11)	Proposed method of providing sewer and water service, as well as other public and private utilities. 
(12)	Proposed method of providing storm drainage.
(13)	Written description of the computation for required parking.
(14)	Exterior lighting.
c.	The planning commission shall review the preliminary site plan and make such recommendations to the applicant that will cause the plan to be in conformance with the review standards required by this section and this ordinance. To this end, the commission may request from the applicant any additional graphics or written materials, prepared by a qualified person or persons, to assist in determining the appropriateness of the site plan. Such material may include, but need not be limited to, aerial photography, photographs; traffic impacts; impact on significant natural features and drainage; soil tests; and other pertinent information. 
B.	Final site plan review. 
1.	Each site plan submitted shall contain the following information, unless waived by the zoning enforcement officer. 
a.	The date, north arrow, and scale. The scale shall be not less than one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet for property under three (3) acres and at least one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet for those three (3) acres or more. 
b.	The name and firm address of the professional individual responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
c.	The name and address of the property owner or petitioner.
d.	A location sketch.
e.	Legal description of the subject property.
f.	The size (in acres) of the subject property.
g.	Property lines and required setbacks shown and dimensioned.
h.	The location of all existing structures, driveways, and parking areas within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property's boundary. 
i.	The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property. 
j.	The location of all existing and proposed drives (including dimensions and radii), acceleration/deceleration lanes, sidewalks, signs, exterior lighting, curbing, parking areas (including the dimensions of a typical parking space and the total number of parking spaces to be provided), and unloading areas. 
k.	The location, pavement width and right-of-way width of all streets, and access easements within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property. 
l.	The existing zoning and use of all properties abutting the subject property.
m.	The location of all existing vegetation and the location, type, and size of all proposed landscaping, and the location, height and type of existing and proposed fences and walls. 
n.	Size and location of existing and proposed utilities, including any proposed connections to public sewer or water supply systems. 
o.	The location and size of all surface water drainage facilities.
p.	Existing and proposed topographic contours at a minimum of five (5) foot intervals.
q.	Recreation areas, common use areas, floodplain areas and areas to be conveyed for public use and purpose. 
r.	Cost estimates for all public improvements included as part of any performance guarantee.
2.	The planning commission may request from the applicant any additional graphics or written materials, prepared by a qualified person or persons, to assist in determining the appropriateness of the site plan. Such material may include, but need not be limited to, aerial photography, photographs; traffic impacts; impact on significant natural features and drainage; soil tests; building elevations; and any other pertinent information. 
3.	The planning commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the final site plan based on the requirements of this ordinance, and specifically, the standards of section 18.10. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 18.05. - Application and review. 
A.	Twelve (12) copies of a site plan, a completed application form, and an application fee shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer by the petitioner or his designated agent, at least twenty one (21) days prior to the next regular planning commission meeting, or as prescribed by the planning commission. The zoning enforcement officer shall cause the submittal to be placed on the agenda of the next regular planning commission meeting. 
B.	The planning commission shall have the responsibility and authorization to approve, disapprove, or approve subject to conditions, the final site plan, in accordance with this chapter and the purpose of this ordinance. 
C.	Any conditions or modifications desired by the planning commission shall be recorded in the minutes of the appropriate planning commission meeting. 
D.	Three (3) copies of the approved final site plan shall be signed and dated by the applicant and by the secretary of the planning commission, or such other member acting in the place of the secretary. One (1) of these approved copies shall be kept on file by the city clerk as part of the records of the planning commission, one (1) shall be kept on file by the zoning enforcement officer for use in the building permit review process, and the other shall be returned to the petitioner or his designated representative. 
E.	As a condition of approval of a site plan review the planning commission or zoning enforcement officer, whichever is designated as the approving authority, may require a financial guarantee of sufficient sum to assure the installation of those features or components of the approved activity or construction which are considered necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and of users or inhabitants of the proposed development. Such features or components, hereafter referred to as "improvements," may include, but shall not be limited to, streets, curbing, landscaping, fencing, walls, screening, lighting, drainage facilities, sidewalks, driveways, utilities, and similar items. Performance guarantees shall be processed as required in section 22.03, B. 
F.	Each development shall be under construction within one (1) year after the date of approval of the final site plan, except as noted below. 
1.	The planning commission may grant one (1) six (6) month extension of such time period, provided the applicant requests, in writing, an extension prior to the date of the expiration of the final site plan. 
2.	The extension shall be approved if the applicant presents reasonable evidence to the effect that said development has encountered unforeseen difficulties beyond the control of the applicant, and the project will proceed within the extension period. 
3.	If neither of the above provisions are fulfilled or the six (6) month extension has expired prior to construction, the final site plan approval shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 18.06. - Review standards. 
    The following standards shall be utilized by the planning commission in reviewing all site plans. These standards are intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant in the preparation of site plans as well as for the reviewing authority in making judgment concerning them. These standards shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements. They are not intended to discourage creativity, invention, or innovation. 
A.	The uses proposed will not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare. Uses and structures located on the site shall be planned to take into account topography, size of the property, the uses on adjoining property and the relationship and size of buildings to the site. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this ordinance. 
B.	Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be provided for ingress/egress points and within the site. Drives, streets and other circulation routes shall be designed to promote safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at ingress/egress points. 
C.	The arrangement of public or private vehicular and pedestrian connections to existing or planned streets in the area shall be planned to provide a safe and efficient circulation system for traffic within the City of Lowell. 
D.	Removal or alteration of significant natural features shall be restricted to those areas, which are reasonably necessary to develop the site in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. The planning commission requires that approved landscaping, buffers, and/or greenbelts be continuously maintained to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. 
E.	Satisfactory assurance shall be provided that the requirements of all other applicable ordinances, codes, and requirements of the City of Lowell will be met. 
F.	The general purposes and spirit of this ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lowell shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 01-3, § 1, 8-20-01)
Section 18.07. - Plat requirements. 
    In those instances in which Act 288, Public Acts of 1967, as amended, the Subdivision Control Act, is involved, the owner shall, after site plan approval, submit the preliminary and final plats to the proper officer in conformance with Act 288, and in accordance with all other applicable codes, acts and ordinances. Such plats shall remain in conformance with the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 18.08. - Administrative fees. 
    Any site plan application shall be accompanied by a fee, in an amount to be established by the city council. Such fee shall be for the purpose of payment for the administrative costs and services expended by the city in the implementation of this chapter and the processing of the application. Such fee may be used to reimburse another party retained by the city to provide expert consultation and advice regarding the application. No part of such fee shall be returnable. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 18.09. - Changes in the approved site plan. 
    Changes to the approved site plan shall be permitted only under the following circumstances: 
A.	The holder of an approved site plan shall notify the zoning enforcement officer of any proposed change to an approved site plan. 
B.	Minor changes may be approved by the zoning enforcement officer upon determining that the proposed revision(s) will not alter the basic design nor any specified conditions imposed as part of the original approval. Minor changes shall include the following: 
1.	Change in the building size, up to five (5) percent in total floor area.
2.	Movement of buildings or other structures by no more than ten (10) feet.
3.	Replacement of plant material specified in the landscape plan with comparable materials of an equal or greater size. 
4.	Changes in building materials to a comparable or higher quality.
5.	Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use.
6.	Changes required or requested by the city, the Kent County Road Commission, or other county, state or federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or regulations. 
C.	A proposed change not determined by the zoning enforcement officer to be minor shall be submitted to the planning commission as a site plan amendment and shall be reviewed in the same manner as the original application. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 18.10. - Appeal. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the planning commission, appeal in writing to the board of appeals may be taken within ten (10) days after the date of such action. The board of appeals shall fix a time and place for a public hearing to be published in a newspaper prior to the hearing. All interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the board of appeals shall affirm or reverse the action of the planning commission, stating its findings and the reasons for its action and a written copy of such findings, reasons, and action shall be given to the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 19. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Section 19.01. - Scope. 
    In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be provided as herein prescribed. Such space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 19.02. - Location of parking. 
A.	Residential districts and uses.
1.	The off-street parking facilities required for single- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building they are intended to serve, but shall not be considered a parking lot under the provisions of this chapter. Such parking shall only be permitted in a driveway apron in the front yard or in an enclosed garage. Parking on any other portion of the front yard is not permitted. 
2.	The off-street parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the dwellings they are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking lot as defined in this chapter. 
3.	The off-street parking required for manufactured home parks may be located on each site or in parking lots conveniently located and readily accessible to each site. Each parking space must meet the minimum area requirements of this ordinance. 
B.	Except for the C-2 District and the MU District, the off-street parking required for nonresidential districts shall be located on each site or in parking lots within four hundred (400) feet of and readily accessible to each site. 
C.	In the C-2 District and the MU District, parking shall be provided on the same lot as the use, unless the property adjoins or has access to a community parking lot or a common parking area maintained by participating property owners. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 15-01, § 8, 2-17-15) 
Section 19.03. - Parking area application and design. 
A.	Plan submission and approval.
1.	The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the requirements of the provisions of this ordinance and such construction shall be completed and approved by the zoning enforcement officer and building inspector before actual use of the property as a parking lot and before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
2.	Plans for the development of any parking lot must be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer, prepared at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and indicating existing and proposed grades, drainage, pipe sizes, dimensions of typical parking spaces, type of curbing, drive and aisle dimensions, lighting, adjacent main buildings, sidewalks, landscaping, surfacing and base materials to be used, and the layout of the proposed parking lot. The plans are to be prepared in a presentable form by person or persons competent in such work and shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.	All parking facilities, access driveways and commercial storage areas shall be hard surfaced with a pavement of poured cement or rolled asphalt or such surfaces approved by the Planning Commission, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such area, and shall be completely constructed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. 
C.	All illumination for all parking lots in nonresidential districts shall be deflected away from adjacent residential areas and shall be installed in such a manner as to allow the reduction of the amount of light on other than normal parking hours each day. 
1.	The source of illumination in all parking lots abutting a residential district or use shall not be higher than fifteen (15) feet above the parking lot surface. 
2.	All light fixtures shall be of a cutoff design, so as to maximize the direction of the light toward the ground. 

Parking Lot Lighting 
D.	When a required nonresidential parking lot is situated on a parcel which adjoins a residential district, either abutting directly or across a street, the respective parking area shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet, excluding any parking or drives, from any lot line unless a greater setback is required by any other provision of this ordinance. 
E.	Required nonresidential parking lots abutting a residential district or use shall be effectively screened from neighboring residential districts and uses by a decorative fence or wall, or a landscaped equivalent. 
F.	Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot, by means of limited and clearly defined drives, shall be provided for all vehicles. Such drives shall be located so as to minimize traffic conflicts with adjoining uses and streets, but in no case shall be located nearer than twenty-five (25) feet to any public street intersection, as measured from the nearest edge of the driveway to the nearest edge of the public street pavement. 
G.	Wheel stops shall be provided and so located as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the lot or setback lines. Such devices shall be securely anchored into the parking lot to ensure that they remain stationary. 
H.	Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum regulations. The minimum parking space dimensions for a layout not provided for in the regulations shall be nine (9) feet in width, eighteen (18) feet in length, and one hundred and sixty-two (162) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 04-1, § 6, 3-15-04)
Section 19.04. - Parking restrictions. 
A.	Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance which serves an existing building or use, shall not be reduced in size to less than that required under the terms of this ordinance. 
B.	When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, the fraction shall be considered one (1) required parking space. 
C.	Requirements for a use not mentioned shall be the same for that use which is most similar to the use not listed, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
D.	Additional parking shall be provided and maintained in proper ratio to any increase in floor area or building use capacity. 
E.	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any motor vehicle without the express written consent of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property. However, in no case shall vehicles be parked in any required off-street parking lot for the sole purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale, except in approved and licensed vehicle sales lots. It shall be unlawful to use any of the off-street parking or loading area established to meet the requirements of this ordinance for any purpose other than the parking of licensed vehicles or the loading or unloading of necessary service vehicles. 
F.	After the effective date of this ordinance it shall be unlawful for the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of any lot in a residential district to permit or allow the open storage or parking, either day or night, thereon of all vehicles (over one (1) ton rated capacity), semi-trucks and trailers, manufactured homes, construction equipment, and/or any other similar equipment or machinery used for commercial purposes. 
G.	No vehicle parking, storage, or display shall be permitted within any street right-of-way. On-street parking is permitted in location's specifically designated by public authority for on-street parking. On-street parking spaces shall not be counted toward the required parking for any use. 
H.	In hospitals, bassinets shall not be counted as beds.
I.	Where benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities are used as seats, each twenty (20) inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat. 
J.	In the case of mixed uses in the same building, the total requirements for off-street parking and loading shall be the sum of the requirements for each individual use computed separately. 
K.	Joint or collective provision of off-street parking for buildings or uses on two (2) or more properties shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the participating individual uses computed separately. 
L.	Where parking requirements are determined by usable floor area, such area may be calculated exactly or may be calculated by subtracting twenty (20) percent from the gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95; Ord. No. 00-7, § 1, 12-18-00)
Section 19.05. - Nonresidential parking deferment. 
    The planning commission may defer construction of the required number of parking spaces for nonresidential uses if the following conditions are met: 
A.	Areas proposed for deferred parking shall be shown on the site plan, and shall be sufficient for construction of the total number of parking spaces required in accordance with the standards of this ordinance. 
B.	Alterations to the deferred parking area may be initiated by the owner or required by the zoning enforcement officer, and shall require the approval of an amended site plan, submitted by the applicant and accompanied by evidence documenting the justification for the alteration. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 19.06. - Parking lot landscaping. 
A.	This section is applicable to any parking lot serving any nonresidential or multiple family use in any district. A parking lot landscape plan shall be submitted with any application for a building permit or when otherwise required by this ordinance. 
B.	No permit will be issued for major changes to an existing parking lot unless the parking lot is made to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. A major change consists of one (1) or more of the following: 
1.	Replacement or alteration of existing drainage elevations or structures affecting more than fifty (50) percent of the existing parking lot. 
2.	Any expansion or addition of a parking lot equal to or greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the existing parking lot. 
3.	Reconstruction of the parking lot, including the removal of existing pavement or drainage structures, which affects more than twenty-five (25) percent of the existing parking lot. 
4.	Any other change which, in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, constitutes a major change. 
C.	General requirements.
1.	Landscaping shall be planned and installed such that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, or lighting, and does not adversely affect drainage patterns, or obstruct vision at entrances and exits. 
2.	Any landscaped area required by this section shall be constructed outside any public street right-of-way. 
3.	All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised or rolled concrete curb.
D.	Frontage landscaping.
1.	Where any parking area abuts or faces a public street, a screen shall be required between the parking area and the street right-of-way. Such screen shall consist of, at a minimum, one (1) of the following: 
a.	A strip of land at least five (5) feet in width as well as a solid screen of a hedge or decorative wall, or any combination thereof, which measures at least three (3) feet in height; or 
b.	A strip of land at least ten (10) feet in width containing at least one (1) canopy tree and three (3) deciduous shrubs for each twenty (20) feet of lot width 
2.	The required strip of land shall also be covered with grass or other approved ground cover. 

E.	Interior landscaping.
1.	Interior landscaping shall be provided for any parking area containing twelve (12) or more parking spaces. 
2.	The interior of the parking lot shall be considered as any point from the outside boundary of the parking area. 
3.	The interior area of any parking lot shall incorporate planting islands at a minimum ratio of one (1) island per each twelve (12) parking spaces, or part thereof. 
4.	Each planting island shall be at least ninety (90) square feet in area with a minimum horizontal dimension of nine (9) feet. 
5.	Landscaped islands shall be dispersed evenly throughout the entire area of the parking lot in order to break up large expanses of pavement and may be used to separate pedestrian areas, maneuvering areas, and drives. 
6.	A minimum of one (1) approved canopy tree shall be provided for each planting island, with the balance of the island covered with grass, or approved shrubs or ground cover. 
7.	Fifty (50) percent of the required trees shall be installed in the interior of the parking area and fifty (50) percent on the perimeter. The required trees shall be in addition to those which may otherwise be required by this section. 

(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 19.07. - Table of off-street parking requirements. 
Use Parking Space per Unit of Measurement as Follows:Residential   Single and Two-family2Dwelling Unit  Multiple-Family  Manufactured Home ParksCommunity Facilities   Child Care Center, day nurseries, or nursery schools1four (4) persons based on licensed capacity, plus6off-street queuing spaces  Churches1three (3) seats based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein.  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, children's homes1two (2) beds  Elementary and junior high schools1.5classroom, plusamount required for auditorium or assembly hall therein  High Schools, Colleges and trade schools1.5classroom, pluseach eight (8) students, based on maximum occupancy load established by local, county, state, fire, health, or building codes, plus requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall therein  Hospitals2each bed  Libraries1500 square feet UFA  Private clubs and lodges1two (2) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, state, fire, health, or building codes   Private tennis club, swim club, golf club or other similar uses1two (2) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, state, fire, health, or building codes, plus amount required for accessory uses  Senior independent living units2living unit  Senior "interim care" units, homes for the aged, retirement community housing, etc.1bed  Stadiums and sports arenas with fixed seating1four (4) seats  Theaters, auditoriums, and assembly halls1four (4) seats based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly thereinCommercial   Animal hospitals and kennels1400 square feet GFA  Barber shops2chair  Beauty shops3chair  Bed and breakfast1room rented, provided on-site, plus2for operator's dwelling unit  Bowling lanes5bowling lane, plusamount required for accessory uses  Convenience stores1200 square feet UFA  Furniture, appliances, and household equipment repair shops, hardware stores, and other similar uses 1800 square feet of UFA  Laundromats, coin operated dry cleaning establishment1two (2) washing or dry cleaning machines  Miniature or "Par 3" golf courses3hole, plusamount required for accessory uses  Mortuary establishments, funeral homes, undertaking parlors1200 square feet of GFA, plusforty (40) spaces  Motels, hotels, tourist homes3two (2) guest bedrooms plusamount required for accessory uses  Open air businesses (not otherwise provided for herein)1800 square feet of lot area used for said business  Personal service establishment (not otherwise provided for herein)1300 square feet of UFA  Restaurants and other establishments (other than drive-in restaurants) in which is conducted the sale and consumption on the premises of food, beverages, or refreshments 1two (2) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, state, fire, health, or building code OR 100 square feet UFA (whichever is greater)  Restaurants (drive-in) or similar drive-in uses for the sale of food, beverages, or refreshments 175 square feet GFA  Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein1each 200 square feet of GFA  Vehicle repair shops, including body shops, and other similar uses1800 square feet GFA, plus3stall or service area  Vehicle salesrooms, machinery sales and other similar uses1200 square feet for accessory usesamount required for accessory uses  Vehicle service stations3service stall1service vehicle, plusamount required for convenience store, car wash, or other applicable accessory use  Vehicle wash establishment5unit which represents the establishment's maximum capacity as computed by dividing the length of the mechanical wash/dry area by twenty (20) feet   Wholesale stores1200 square feet of GFAOffices   Banks (drive-in)4drive-in window, plus requirement for bank  Banks (other than drive-through banks), post offices1200 square feet UFA, plus  Business and professional offices1300 square feet GFA  Medical clinic and dental clinic3examining roomIndustrial   Industrial or manufacturing establishing, research establishments12,000 square feet GFA, plus amount required for accessory uses, with a minimum of five (5) spaces   Warehouses and storage buildings12,000 square feet GFA, with a minimum of four (4) spaces 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 19.08. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department store, wholesale, market, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, or others similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, material, or merchandise there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with street or parking areas. 
A.	Such loading and unloading space, unless completely and adequately provided for within a building, shall be a minimum area of twelve (12) feet by forty (40) feet, with fourteen (14) foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule. 
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)Loading and Unloading Spaces Required0-2,000None2,000-20,000One (1) space20,000-100,000One (1) space plus one (1) space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,000 square feet 100,000-500,000Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,000 square feet Over 500,000Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) space for each 80,000 square feet in excess of 500,000 square feet  
B.	Off-street loading space areas shall not be construed as, or counted towards, the area required as off-street parking space area. 
C.	Unless fully enclosed, a required loading space shall not face, or be visible from the frontage street, and shall not be located in a required front yard, or a side or rear yard adjoining a residential district. 
D.	All maneuvering areas for loading spaces shall be located off-street and shall be designed such that no vehicle maneuvering takes place on any public street. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 20. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, adopted August 5, 2013, repealed former ch. 20, §§ 20.01-20.11, and enacted a new ch. 20 as set out herein. Former ch. 20, §§ 20.01-20.11, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-06, adopted December 27, 1995; Ord. No. 97-1, adopted October 20, 1997; Ord. No. 02-5, adopted October 21, 2002; Ord. No. 05-3, adopted May 16, 2005; Ord. No. 06-02, adopted May 15, 2006; Ord. No. 07-09, adopted October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 08-02, adopted April 7, 2008; and Ord. No. 11-01, adopted January 3, 2011.

Section 20.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the size, number, location and manner of construction and display of signs in the city. This chapter is further intended to protect all zoning districts from visual chaos and clutter, eliminate distractions hazardous to motorists, protect uses from excessive signage, provide the ability for the public to identify premises and establishments, encourage the preservation of the city's historic and small-town character through sign design and enhance the aesthetics of the community. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.02. - Scope. 
A.	Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, or maintain a sign in the city except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.	Permit required. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs shall require permits and payment of fees as determined from time to time by the city council. No permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on painted, printed, or changeable copy signs. A building permit application shall be submitted along with the supplementary material noted below. 
C.	Plan required. When a site plan is required pursuant to appendix A, chapter 18, proposed signage shall be illustrated on the site plan showing the sign area, sign height, clearance between the ground and the bottom of the sign, sign illumination, sign location and setbacks from property lines, and other applicable information to enable the city to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. When a site plan is not required, a scaled drawing clearly depicting this information shall accompany the building permit application. The zoning enforcement officer may require that additional information be illustrated on a plan or drawing to determine compliance with this chapter. 
D.	Additional provisions. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, provisions of section 11.5-6 of chapter 11.5 of appendix A shall apply to signs located in a historic district. Sponsorship signs are permitted and governed by article IV of chapter 14 of the Code. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.03. - Definitions. 
    The following words shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
A.	Changeable copy sign: A sign that consists, in whole or in part, of a message or image that can be changed periodically, whether manually or by automatic or technical means. 
B.	Construction sign: A sign which identifies the owners, financiers, contractors, architects, and engineers as well as the name of a project under construction. 
C.	Development sign: A ground sign which identifies the name of a residential development and which is located at an entrance to the development for the purpose of assisting the public in determining the location of the development. 
D.	Directional sign: A sign which gives directions, instructions, identifying logos without text, or facility information related to the use on the property on which the sign is located, such as parking or exit and entrance signs and which sets forth no other advertisement. 
E.	Freestanding sign: A sign supported by one (1) or more up-rights, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground and not attached to any building and having a clear space of at least eight (8) feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign. 
F.	Government sign: A temporary or permanent sign erected by the city, the state or the federal government for the purpose of street direction or traffic control; to designate hours of activity or use of parking lots, recreational areas, governmental buildings or other public space; to recognize a historic landmark; or for other public purposes. 
G.	Ground sign: A sign supported by a foundation or base which is at least half as wide as the sign which it supports when looking at the sign face, with no more than thirty (30) inches clearance from the bottom of the sign to the ground below. 
H.	Human sign: A sign which is held by or attached to a human for the purpose of advertising any goods, services, functions or specific business locations. 
I.	Incidental sign: A sign that, when visible from the street, identifies a street address, entrances and exits, safety precautions, identifying logos, without text, and other such incidental information, and which sets forth no other advertisement. It may also refer to a sign which is not intended to be viewed from the street. 
J.	Marquee: A permanent structure that projects from the exterior wall of a building. 
K.	Marquee sign: A sign attached to a marquee, canopy, or awning projecting from and supported by a building. 
L.	Mean grade: A reference plane representing that arithmetic mean of the lowest and highest grade elevations in an area within five (5) feet of the foundation line of a sign structure, or in the area between the sign structure foundation line and the lot line, in the case where the sign structure foundation line is less than five (5) feet from the lot line. 
M.	Memorial sign: A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or site. 
N.	Mural: A graphic displayed on the exterior of a building, generally for the purposes of decoration or artistic expression, including but not limited to painting, fresco or mosaic, but not including any commercial message or advertising. 
O.	Off-premise sign or billboard: An outdoor sign advertising services, products, activities, persons or events which are not made, produced, assembled, stored, distributed, leased, sold or conducted upon the premises upon which the sign is located. 
P.	Placard: A sign which provides notice of a public nature, such as "No Trespassing" or "No Hunting" signs. 
Q.	Political sign: A temporary sign used in connection with a local, state or federal election, political topic or opinion, or referendum. 
R.	Portable sign: A sign, usually of a temporary nature, not permanently anchored to the ground or to a building or structure, typically containing manually changeable copy, and which obtains some or all of its structural stability with respect to wind or other normally applied forces by means of its geometry or character. 
S.	Projecting sign: A sign which projects from and is supported by the wall of a building. 
T.	Real estate sign: A sign located on premises containing land or buildings for sale, rent or lease, or buildings under construction and intended for sale, rent or lease. 
U.	Roof line: That line which represents the highest portion of any part of the roof structure, excepting gables, chimneys or other incidental architectural features. 
V.	Roof signs: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with its principal support on the roof structure of such building. 
W.	Sandwich board sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground surface, constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or tent-like shape. 
X.	Sign: Any device or structure, part thereof, or device attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, or any material or thing which displays numerals, letters, words, trademarks, or any other representational use for direction or designation of any person, firm, organization, place, product, service, business, establishment, activity or industry, which is located upon any land or building, in or upon a window, or indoors in such a manner as to attract attention from outside the building. 
Y.	Sign area: The entire area within a regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. 
Z.	Street frontage: The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
AA.	Temporary sign: A display, informational sign, banner or other advertising device with or without a structural frame and intended for a limited period of display. 
BB.	Vehicle sign: A sign shall be considered a vehicle sign when the vehicle or trailer upon which the sign is painted or attached is parked or placed primarily for advertising purposes. Currently licensed commercial vehicles in general daily off-site use are not included as part of this definition. 
CC.	Wall sign: A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall and which does not extend more than eighteen (18) inches therefrom with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall. 
DD.	Window sign: A sign attached to, or in close proximity to, the window surface so as to be clearly and comprehensively visible from the outside. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.04. - Signs prohibited. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts: 
A.	Abandoned signs, or signs in disrepair.
B.	Air-filled or gas-filled balloon signs.
C.	Signs with moving parts, audible signs, and/or flashing signs (except traffic control devices). 
D.	Roof signs.
E.	Signs or illumination imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals. 
F.	Vehicle signs.
G.	Off-premise signs or billboards.
H.	Other signs not expressly permitted or which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.05. - General sign provisions. 
A.	Sign placement. 
1.	Unless otherwise permitted, all signs shall be located on the same parcel for which the sign is intended to serve. The provisions of this article are not intended to conflict with provisions controlling signs regulated under the authority of the Highway Advertising Act of 1972, Act 106 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended, MCL 252.301, et seq. 
2.	No sign shall be located closer than two (2) feet to a public road right-of-way or property line; provided that the zoning enforcement officer or planning commission may approve a lesser setback upon finding that the proposed sign will not interfere with motorist or pedestrian visibility and safety. No sign shall overhang a public street right-of-way except as otherwise permitted; and all signs, including wall signs, shall have a minimum ground clearance of eight (8) feet above a sidewalk or walkway. 
3.	The requirements of appendix A, section 4.06 apply and no sign shall be placed within a clear vision area as defined therein. No exterior sign shall be located or erected in such a manner as to interfere with traffic visibility. 
4.	A wall sign shall not extend beyond the edge of the wall to which it is affixed. A wall, marquee or projecting sign shall not extend above the roof line of the building to which it is attached. 
5.	No light pole, utility pole, or other supporting member thereof shall be used for the placement of any sign unless specifically designed and approved for such use. 
B.	Sign illumination. 
1.	Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all signs may be illuminated, except temporary signs and signs for home occupations. 
2.	Illumination shall not be flashing, blinking, intermittent, oscillating, or an on-and-off type of lighting. No sign shall utilize a revolving beacon light. 
3.	Illumination shall be arranged so that light is deflected away from adjacent properties and no direct sources of light shall be visible to any motorist or pedestrian located in the public right-of-way or from any adjacent property. Any external lighting of signs shall be facing downward or otherwise directed to illuminate only the sign face. 
4.	No sign illumination shall be so placed or designed to be confused with, or appear similar to, a highway sign or traffic safety device. 
5.	All lighting on the underside of a vehicle service station canopy shall be fully recessed. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of each canopy façade area may be internally illuminated. No portion of any canopy façade may be externally illuminated. 
6.	Internally lighted signs, electronic message boards, back-lit changeable copy signs and signs incorporating light emitting diode (LED), liquid crystal, video or other types of internally lighted systems shall be designed, shielded and oriented so as not to interfere with adjacent public rights-of-way or private property and such signs shall not emit light exceeding either ten (10) foot candles measured four (4) feet perpendicular to the sign face or one-half (1/2) foot candle measured at the property line of the adjoining privately-owned property. 
C.	Sign area and height. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two (2) such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two (2) feet apart from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one (1) face if the two (2) faces are of equal area, or the area of the larger face if the two (2) faces are of unequal area. In the case of a circle or sphere, the total area of the circle or sphere is divided by two (2) for purposes of determining the maximum permitted sign area. Framed and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area; provided, that the base of a ground sign cannot exceed two (2) feet in height and the base and structural members of a freestanding sign cannot exceed fifty (50) percent of the total area of the sign face. 

The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the highest point of the sign to the grade of the adjacent street or the mean grade of the ground immediately beneath the sign, whichever is less. 
D.	Most restrictive sign requirements. Where a proposed sign appears to meet the definition of more than one (1) sign, the most restrictive requirements and limitations of the defined sign types shall apply, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
E.	Multiple tenant building. For buildings with multiple tenants, sign areas for wall signs, projecting signs, and marquee signs shall be determined by taking that portion of the front wall of the building applicable to each tenant and computing sign limits for that portion of the total wall. Where a wall sign, projecting sign or marquee sign is permitted in a multi-tenant building or site, each individual establishment is permitted one (1) such sign subject to standards applying in the applicable zone district, in which case, wall surface applies to the wall surface of the individual establishment. 
F.	Maintenance of signs. All signs shall be maintained in a safe condition with proper bracing, anchorage and foundation and be subject to inspection by the building inspector or other person designated by the city. A sign which no longer serves the purpose for which it is intended or is abandoned or is not maintained in accordance with applicable regulations shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.06. - Signs not requiring permits. 
A.	Signs shall not be erected without the issuance of a building permit, except for the following signs, provided that such signs comply with the provisions of this chapter: 
1.	Government signs.
2.	Signs erected by an essential public service establishment denoting utility lines, railroad lines, hazards, and precautions, including portable flashing signs. 
3.	Real estate signs advertising premises for sale, rent, or lease when not more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height for a commercial or industrial zoned property, or six (6) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height for other zoned properties. A real estate sign shall be located on the property that is for sale, rent, or lease. One (1) sign per property street frontage shall be permitted. 
4.	For non-residential projects, a construction sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area and having a height not greater than eight (8) feet. There shall be only one (1) construction sign for a development or project. Construction signs shall not be erected until a building permit has been issued and the sign shall be removed immediately upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy. For residential projects, a construction sign not exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in area and having a height not greater than six (6) feet, shall only be erected upon city approval of the project and shall be removed within one (1) year of issuance of the first building permit for a dwelling or structure, or upon the erection of a development sign, whichever occurs first. 
5.	Memorial signs not larger than twelve (12) square feet in area which are either (a) cut into the face of a masonry surface or (b) constructed of bronze or other incombustible material when located flat on the face of a building. 
6.	Holiday lights, murals, works of art, and decorations with no commercial message.
7.	Placards not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
8.	Incidental signs or directional signs up to six (6) square feet in area. If intended to be viewed from the street, only those signs which, in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, are necessary to indicate entrances, exits, safety precautions, street addresses, including identifying logos without text, and other such incidental language shall be permitted. Incidental signs and directional signs shall not contain a commercial message. 
9.	A temporary sign used to advertise a garage sale or estate sale on residential property, graduation party or similar temporary event, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area. Such sign shall be removed immediately after the completion of the event. Such sign shall be placed within the property line of the premises on which said sale or event is conducted and shall be removed immediately after the completion of the sale or event. 
10.	Political signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and there shall be no limit to the number of signs, provided that the cumulative square footage of signage shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per lot in nonresidential districts and twelve (12) square feet per lot in residential districts. Political signs shall not be greater than six (6) feet in height in nonresidential zoning districts, or greater than four (4) feet in height in residential zoning districts, and signs shall not be located in a manner which may obstruct vision of vehicular or non-motorized traffic on any street. Political signs erected in connection with an election or referendum shall not be erected more than ninety (90) days prior to such event and must be removed within ten (10) days following such event. 
11.	A home occupation shall be permitted one (1) two (2) square foot wall sign.
12.	Window signs, provided that window signs shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the windows on any building wall. 
13.	Flags or insignia of any nation, state, county, city, community organization, or educational institution, no larger than five (5) feet by eight (8) feet; provided that no more than one (1) such flag shall be permitted on each lot or parcel of land for every twenty (20) linear feet of street frontage. Flags shall not contain a commercial message. The maximum sign height of flagpoles shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
14.	Notwithstanding any other conflicting provisions contained in this chapter, sandwich board signs shall be permitted, and only permitted, in C-2 - Central Business District zone districts. A sandwich board sign area shall not exceed (a) twelve (12) square feet per side, (b) a height of four (4) feet and (c) a width of three (3) feet and shall not in any way be illuminated. A sandwich board sign shall not be permanently moored or anchored to any other object or structure, but shall be designed or weighted to prevent instability or movement by wind or other natural forces. A sandwich board sign may only be placed in front of the façade of the building front of the business or establishment whose information the sign pertains during the hours the business or establishment is open to customers, patrons or the public. Only one (1) sandwich board sign shall be permitted for each business or establishment. All sandwich board signs shall be placed in alignment with city light poles and tree grates and so as not to block neighboring sandwich board signs or unreasonably interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
15.	One (1) human sign is permitted per lot at any given time, provided that the human sign does not block the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.07. - Supplementary signs. 
    In addition to the signs permitted and regulated in this chapter, the signs listed below shall be permitted in accordance with the following standards: 
A.	Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted on land zoned C-1 - Neighborhood Business District, C-2 - Central Business District, C-3 - General Business District, PF - Public Facilities District, I-L - Light Industrial District and I - Industrial District, as follows: 
1.	Only one (1) temporary sign shall be permitted for each separate establishment located on a parcel of land. 
2.	A temporary sign shall be displayed for not more than sixty (60) days (whether or not consecutive) in a calendar year. 
3.	A temporary sign shall not be larger than thirty-five (35) square feet and shall not be illuminated. 
4.	A temporary sign shall include any other or subsequent temporary sign of generally similar appearance, nature and purpose, as compared to the temporary sign initially permitted under the terms of this section 20.07. Accordingly, an applicant shall not seek to extend the time limitation of the display of a temporary sign by the attempted display of a different, though similar, temporary sign following the maximum permitted period of display of a permitted temporary sign. 
5.	A permit for a temporary sign shall be required. An application for the permit, including an application fee as set by the city council from time to time, shall be submitted and include the following: 
(a)	An accurate sketch indicating the exact dimensions of the sign, its height, the structure upon which it will be placed, its location in relation to buildings, property lines, driveways and off-street parking areas, and such other information as may be required by the zoning enforcement officer in order to assure that the temporary sign shall comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	A statement signed by the applicant listing specifically the days or the span of consecutive days during which the sign will be displayed and the date or dates on which the sign will be removed and, if applicable, the subsequent date or dates on which the sign will be re-installed and again removed, during the calendar year. 
(c)	A listing and description of the other temporary signs, if any, located on the property at the time of the application. 
B.	Portable signs. In the C-3 - General Business District, I-L - Light Industrial District, I - Industrial District, and PF - Public Facilities District, one (1) portable sign may be erected in lieu of a temporary sign, subject to the provisions in subsection A above, provided, that only one (1) is permitted per lot at any given time, and, provided, further, that the portable sign shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet in area. In addition, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A above, a portable sign shall not be displayed for more than seven (7) consecutive days and not more than three (3) times in any calendar year. 
C.	Changeable copy signs. All or a portion of a ground or freestanding sign may be a changeable copy sign in compliance with all of the following requirements, provided, that a changeable copy sign is not permitted in any residential zoning district except when used to advertise a city, county, state or public school facility: 
1.	The area of a changeable copy sign shall be included in the applicable maximum ground or freestanding sign area limitation and the area of a changeable copy sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the applicable maximum permitted ground or freestanding sign area. 
2.	A changeable copy sign shall not change its message, image or other graphic material with such frequency as to be flashing or oscillating, whether in whole or in part. For purposes hereof, a flashing or oscillating sign shall include not only a sign having a message or image that changes with high rapidity, but shall also include a sign having a message or image that changes with a frequency such as to serve as a means of attracting attention to the sign or the land use, rather than for the purpose of providing identification or information. The message, image or other graphic material of a changeable copy sign shall change no more frequently than six (6) seconds and each change shall occur in one (1) second or less. 
3.	The message, image or other graphic material of a changeable copy sign shall, when changing, appear only in its entirety or shall appear in successive letters, words or other graphic elements from left to right only. The message, image or other graphic material shall not appear to flash, move from the center of the sign outward, move from the corners of the sign inward or demonstrate any other unusual movement, oscillation or method of appearance. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.08. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
A.	The following sign types shall be permitted in accord with the following regulations, in the SR - Suburban Residential District, R-1 - Residential District, R-2 - Residential District, R-3 - Residential District, and MHP - Manufactured Home Park District: 
1.	The following sign is permitted identifying the name of a permitted residential development:
TypeMaximum NumberMaximum Sign AreaHeightDevelopment1 per lot or parcel20 square feet6 feet 
2.	The following sign is permitted identifying the name of a permitted non-residential use: 
TypeMaximum NumberMaximum Sign AreaHeightGround1 per lot or parcel20 square feet6 feet 
B.	The following sign types shall be permitted in accord with the following regulations, in the C-1 - Neighborhood Business District, and PF - Public Facilities District: 
TypeMaximum NumberMaximum Sign AreaHeightGround1 per lot or parcel32 square feet6 feetWall or Marquee1 per building wall facing a parking lot or public street15% of the wall surface or 30% of marquee face, as applicable, or 50 square feet, whichever is less See section
20.05. A. 4.  
C.	The following sign types shall be permitted in accord with the following regulations in the C-2 - Central Business District and the MU - Mixed Use District. 
TypeMaximum NumberMaximum
Sign AreaHeightLocationProjecting1 per building wall facing a parking lot or public street20 square feetSee section
20.05. A, 4 Cannot extend more than 5 feet from building wallWall or Marquee1 per building wall facing a parking lot or public street20% of the wall surface or 30% of marquee face, as applicable, or 50 square feet, whichever is less See section
20.05. A, 4  
D.	The following sign types shall be permitted in accord with the following regulations, in the C-3 - General Business District: 
TypeMaximum NumberMaximum Sign AreaHeightGround or
Freestanding1 per street frontage; provided, that a double-frontage lot is permitted only 1 freestanding sign 48 square feet, or 32 square feet if the lot has a street frontage of 66 feet or less6 feet for a ground sign and 20 feet for a freestanding signWall or Marquee1 per building wall facing a parking lot or public street20% of the wall surface or 30% of marquee face, as applicable, or 50 square feet, whichever is less See section
20.05. A. 4.  
1.	Each individual establishment in a multi-tenant commercial building or development is not permitted a separate ground or freestanding sign; one (1) collective ground or freestanding sign may be used subject to the standards above, provided that a collective ground or freestanding sign shall be permitted a maximum sign area of seventy-two (72) square feet. 
E.	The following sign types shall be permitted in accord with the following regulations, in the I - Industrial District: 
TypeMaximum NumberMaximum Sign AreaHeightGround1 per lot or parcel32 square feet6 feetWall 1 per building wall facing a public street5% of the wall surface or 50 square feet, whichever is lessSee section
20.05. A. 4.  
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 15-01, § 9, 2-17-15) 
Section 20.09. - Construction and maintenance. 
A.	All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the latest version BOCA National Building Code adopted by the city. 
B.	Signs shall be maintained free of peeling paint or paper, fading, staining, rust, or other conditions which impair legibility. 
C.	All signs, sign supports, frames, braces, wiring, guys and anchors shall not be maintained in such a manner which, in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, has the potential to create a hazard for pedestrians and vehicles. 
D.	Signs shall not become unsightly through disrepair or action of the elements. Internal framing, light fixtures and bulbs, and wiring shall not be exposed to the elements. 
E.	All signs shall be designed to ensure a dead load and wind pressure in any direction of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of area. All signs shall be securely anchored or otherwise made immobile. Temporary signs, portable signs, or signs made of cloth, fabric, lightweight plastic, or other easily combustible material, or which are produced or originally constructed to flutter in the wind, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, shall not be placed or left as permanent signs. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.10. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.	Signs lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this chapter or applicable amendment thereto which do not meet the standards of this chapter and any applicable amendment thereto may be continued, except as hereinafter provided. No nonconforming sign shall: 
1.	Have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign, unless the sign is specifically designed for periodic change of message; 
2.	Be structurally altered so as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign; or 
3.	Be reestablished or continued after the activity, business, or use to which it applied has been discontinued for at least ninety (90) days. 
B.	Signs lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this chapter or applicable amendment thereto which do not meet the size limitations of this chapter and any applicable amendment thereto may be changed to another nonconforming sign, provided that the sign replacing the original nonconforming sign is at least thirty-three (33) percent smaller in area than the original nonconforming sign. 
C.	No sign shall be required to be removed which was erected in compliance with this chapter if such sign becomes nonconforming due to a change occurring after the adoption of this chapter or applicable amendment thereto in the location of a building, streets, or other signs, and which change is beyond the control of the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. 
D.	If the owner of the premises on which a sign is located changes the use of the building, or changes the location of any property line or sign, so that any sign is rendered nonconforming, such sign must be removed or made to conform to this chapter and any applicable amendment thereto. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
Section 20.11. - Discontinuance or abandonment. 
    Whenever the activity, business or use of a primary premises to which a sign is attached or related has been discontinued for a period of at least ninety (90) days, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the sign attached or related thereto. At the end of this period of abandonment, the sign shall either be removed or altered to conform with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable amendment thereto. All costs of removal shall be at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. 13-03, § 1, 8-5-13) 
CHAPTER 21. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Section 21.01. - Membership and meetings. 
A.	Composition and terms. The city council shall act as the board of zoning appeals, composed of five (5) members. 
B.	Alternate members.
1.	Up to two (2) alternate members may be appointed by the city council for three (3) year terms. If two (2) alternate members have been appointed, they may be called on a rotating basis, as they are available to sit as regular members of the board of zoning appeals in the absence of a regular member which may exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. 
2.	The alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the board of zoning appeals. 
C.	Any vacancies in the board of zoning appeals shall be filled by appointment by the council in the same manner as prescribed for filling council member vacancies. 
D.	The board of zoning appeals shall annually elect its own chairman, vice chairman, and secretary. 
E.	Meetings.
1.	All meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as such board of zoning appeals may determine. All hearings conducted by the board of zoning appeals shall be open to the public. 
2.	The zoning enforcement officer or his representatives, shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. 
3.	Four (4) members of the board of zoning appeals shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. 
4.	The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
F.	Hearings. The board of zoning appeals shall make no decision regarding any application except after a public hearing is conducted by the board of zoning appeals. Notification of hearings shall be the same as those required for special land uses. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 21.02. - Jurisdiction and powers. 
A.	The board of zoning appeals shall not have the power to make any change in the terms of this ordinance, but does have power to act on those matters where this ordinance provides for an administrative review, interpretation, and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and the laws of the State of Michigan. 
B.	The powers of the board of zoning appeals include:
1.	Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the building inspector or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Variances: A variance from the strict requirements of the zoning ordinance may be granted by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the standards, requirements and procedures of this chapter. 
3.	Zoning ordinance interpretation: The board of zoning appeals may interpret the provisions of this ordinance to carry out the intent and purposes of the zoning ordinance where the meaning of the provisions is uncertain. 
4.	Any other matters referred to them or upon which they are required to consider under the terms of this ordinance. 
C.	The board of zoning appeals shall not be permitted to consider any request which would permit a use of land not otherwise permitted within the district in which the property in question is located. 
D.	The board of appeals shall not be permitted to consider any requests for variances from the requirements and conditions of planned unit developments, as noted in Chapter 15. 
E.	Variances to the site design standards of special land uses.
1.	The board of zoning appeals may grant a variance from the strict adherence to the requirements set forth for the site design standards for special land uses, in section 17.04 of this ordinance, provided the board of zoning appeals finds that the request meets all of the standards noted in section 21.04. 
2.	However, this is not intended to permit the board of zoning appeals to hear appeals from the final decision made with respect to the special land use. 
3.	Decisions by the board of zoning appeals on such requests shall be made prior to the planning commission's consideration of the special land use. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 21.03. - Application and review procedures. 
A.	Applications.
1.	An application for an appeal may be submitted by a person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, or board of the city. Such application shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of the action being appealed. The application shall be filed with the board of zoning appeals and shall specify the grounds for the appeal. 
2.	Variances, and other actions requiring a decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be submitted to the city on a form provided for that purpose and shall include a fee, as may be determined by the city council from time to time. 
3.	Applications shall immediately be transmitted to the board of zoning appeals, along with all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken, and a hearing scheduled in accordance with the procedures of this chapter. 
4.	Applications shall not be accepted unless all of the following information is included, unless deemed unnecessary by the zoning enforcement officer. 
a.	Application form (provided by the city).
b.	An accurate, scaled site plan with enough information to clearly indicate the nature of the issue being considered. The zoning enforcement officer shall determine the completeness of such plans. 
c.	An application fee.
d.	A written explanation of how the application meets the standards of section 21.04. 
B.	An application for an appeal or variance, or any other action requiring board approval shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the matter to which the application applies unless the zoning enforcement officer certifies to the board of zoning appeals, after the application of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts present a stay would, in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order. This restraining order may be granted by the board of zoning appeals or circuit court on application and with due cause shown. 
C.	The board of zoning appeals shall render its decision within a reasonable time period.
D.	The concurring vote of a majority of the entire membership of the board of zoning appeals (three (3) votes) shall be necessary to decide in favor of the applicant for a matter upon which the board is required to pass. 
E.	All decisions of the board of zoning appeals shall become final five (5) days after the date of entry of an order, unless the board of zoning appeals shall find, and so certify on the record, that it is necessary to cause such order to have immediate effect, in order to preserve property or personal rights. 
F.	No variance request which has been decided by the board of zoning appeals shall be submitted for reconsideration within a one (1) year period from the date of the original application unless the board of zoning appeals finds that at least one (1) of the following conditions exist: 
1.	That the conditions involving all of the reasons for the original denial have been significantly altered; or 
2.	That new conditions or circumstances exist which change the nature of the original request. 
G.	For each decision of the board of zoning appeals, a record shall be prepared. Such record shall include, at a minimum, the following items: 
1.	Description of the applicant's request.
2.	The board of zoning appeals' motion and vote, including written justification for the decision, in accordance with the standards of section 21.04. 
3.	A summary or transcription of all competent material and evidence presented at hearing; and, 
4.	Any conditions attached to an affirmative decision.
H.	The decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be final. However, a person having an interest affected by the decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal to the circuit court. Upon appeal, the circuit court shall review the record in accordance with the requirements of the City Or Village Zoning Act. The court may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the board of zoning appeals, or may remand the decision to the board of zoning appeals for further hearings or action. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 21.04. - Variance review standards. 
A.	The board of zoning appeals, after public hearing, shall have the power to grant requests for variances from the provisions of this ordinance where it is proved by the applicant that there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance relating to the construction, equipment, or alteration of buildings or structures so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
B.	A non-use variance may be allowed by the board of zoning appeals only in cases where there is reasonable evidence of practical difficulty in the official record of the hearing and that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.	That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district; 
Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances include: exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this chapter, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure or by reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question, the literal enforcement of the requirements of this ordinance would involve practical difficulties; 
2.	That the condition or situation of the specific piece of property for which the variance is sought is not of so general or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practical the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions or situations. 
3.	That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a variance. 
4.	The variance will not be significantly detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.	The variance will not impair the intent and purpose of this ordinance.
6.	That the immediate practical difficulty causing the need for the variance request was not created by any action of the applicant. 
C.	Period of validity. No variance granted by the board of zoning appeals shall be valid for a period longer than three (3) months, from the date of its issuance. However the applicant may, upon request, request, at no cost, up to one (1) three (3) month extension of said variance from the board of zoning appeals. The board may grant such extension provided that the original circumstances authorizing the variance have not materially changed and that the circumstances creating the need for the extension were beyond the control of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 21.05. - Conditions of approval. 
A.	The board of zoning appeals may impose reasonable conditions in conjunction with approval of an appeal, variance, or any other decision which they are required to make. 
B.	Conditions shall be imposed in a manner in accordance with the Zoning Act and related to the standards by which the decision is reached. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 21.06. - Fees and costs. 
    The city council may prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the board of zoning appeals. The fee shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the application for the appeal or variance is filed. Any extraordinary costs, such as stenographer's fees or other similar costs, shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 22. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 22.01. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
A.	Authority. Except where herein otherwise stated, the provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the zoning enforcement officer, or such other official or officials as may be designated by the city council. The zoning enforcement officer shall have the power to: 
1.	Issue certificates of occupancy;
2.	Make inspections of buildings and premises necessary to carry out the duties of administration and enforcement of this ordinance; 
3.	Issue and serve appearance tickets on any person with respect to any violation of this ordinance where there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed such an offense; 
4.	Maintain and safely keep copies of all plans other than for single-family dwellings and fees submitted with such application, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be available to the council and all other officials of the city. 
5.	Perform such other functions necessary and proper to enforce and administer the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 22.02. - Permits. 
A.	Building permits. 
1.	No building, structure, or commercial sign shall be erected, altered, moved, or substantially repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. 
2.	No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration, or use of any building or structure or for the use of any land which is not in accordance with all provisions of this ordinance. 
3.	The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any building or structure shall notify the building inspector immediately upon completion of the work authorized by the permit for a final inspection. 
B.	Certificate of occupancy. 
1.	No vacant land shall be used and no existing use of land shall be changed to a different class of use unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
2.	No building or structure which is hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
3.	Certificates of occupancy, as required by the currently adopted Building Code for the City of Lowell, shall also constitute certification of compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
4.	A record of all certificates of occupancy issued shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning enforcement officer and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person owning or renting the property which is the subject of the Certificate. 
5.	Applications for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building inspector on a form furnished by the City of Lowell. Certificates shall be issued within ten (10) days after receipt of such application if the building or structure or use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the other applicable ordinances of the City of Lowell. 
C.	Fees for the inspection and issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy, or copies required or issued under the provisions of this ordinance, may be collected by the city in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 22.03. - Enforcement. 
A.	Violations. 
1.	A violation of this ordinance shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be imposed for repeated violations that occur within a six (6) month period. The civil fine for a first offense is fifty dollars ($50.00). The civil fine for the first repeat offense is two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). The civil fine for the second repeat offense is five hundred dollars ($500.00). The city shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violation and to such other relief as may be available to the city pursuant to chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan Revised Judicature Act, as amended. 
2.	Each day on which any violation of this ordinance occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.	Any building or structure which is erected, altered, or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this ordinance and is in violation of any of the provisions thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
C.	Performance guarantees. 
1.	As a condition of approval of a site plan review, special land use, or planned unit development, the planning commission or zoning enforcement officer, whichever is designated as the approving authority, may require a financial guarantee of sufficient sum to assure the installation of those features or components of the approved activity or construction which are considered necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and of users or inhabitants of the proposed development. Such features or components, hereafter referred to as "improvements," may include, but shall not be limited to, streets, curbing, landscaping, fencing, walls, screening, lighting, drainage facilities, sidewalks, driveways, utilities, and similar items. 
2.	Performance guarantees shall be processed in the following manner:
a.	Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall submit an itemized estimate of the cost of the required improvements which are subject to the performance guarantee, which shall then be reviewed by the zoning enforcement officer. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be one hundred (100) percent of the cost of purchasing of materials and installation of the required improvements, plus the cost of necessary engineering and a reasonable amount for contingencies. 
b.	The required performance guarantee may be in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city. 
c.	Upon receipt of the required performance guarantee, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue a building permit for the subject development or activity, provided it is in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
d.	The zoning enforcement officer, upon the written request of the obliger, shall rebate portions of the performance guarantee upon determination that the improvements for which the rebate has been requested have been satisfactorily completed. The portion of the performance guarantee to be rebated shall be in the same amount as stated in the itemized cost estimate for the applicable improvements. 
e.	When all of the required improvements have been completed, the obliger shall send written notice to the zoning enforcement officer of completion of said improvements. Thereupon, the zoning enforcement officer shall inspect all of the improvements and approve, partially approve, or reject the improvements with a statement of the reasons for any rejections. If partial approval is granted, the cost of the improvement rejected shall be set forth. Where partial approval is granted, the obliger shall be released from liability pursuant to relevant portions of the performance guarantee, except for that portion sufficient to secure completion of the improvements not yet approved. 
f.	A record of authorized performance guarantees shall be maintained by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 22.04. - Adoption and amendments. 
A.	Procedure.
1.	Written applications for the adoption of a zoning change or amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by: 
a.	Any public agency;
b.	Any interested person;
c.	The planning commission; or
d.	The city council.
2.	If said application is for a zoning change, an "interested person" shall either be the owner of the property which will be considered for the zoning change, or, if not the owner of the property, the applicant shall submit a written statement from the property owner indicating his or her permission to submit such application. 
3.	Application for a zoning change shall consist of:
a.	A written statement from the property owner indicating his or her permission to submit such application, if applicable. 
b.	Payment of a fee, as established from time to time by the city council.
c.	A map clearly showing the property to be considered for the zoning change, including all properties within one quarter (1/4) mile of the subject property and the current zoning of all such properties. 
d.	A legal description of the property to be considered for the zoning change.
4.	The planning commission, after public hearing conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Act shall forward said application, with its recommendation and report, to the City Council for its consideration. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 22.05. - Effective date. 
    Public hearing having been held hereon, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby adopted, and this ordinance shall take effect on the 26th day of January, 1996. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
Section 22.06. - Repeal of prior ordinance. 
    The zoning ordinance adopted by the City of Lowell, known as Ordinance No. 87, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. The repeal does not affect any act done or offense committed, or any liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment acquired thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 12-27-95)
CHAPTER 23. - ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS; DESCRIPTIONS OF REZONED PROPERTIES 

Section 23.01. - Changes of zone district classification. 
(a)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real properties legally described from C-3 General Business District to R-2 Residential District: 
PART SE 1/4 COM 100.05 FT ELY ALG N LINE OF FULTON ST (100 FT WIDE) FROM N&S 1/4 LINE, TH N PARALLEL TO THE W N&S 1/4 LINE TO S LINE OF SIBLEY ST EXT W FOR PT OF BEGINNING, TH E TO NW COR OF LOT 205, VALLEY VISTA NO. 7, TH S ALG WLY LINE OF SD LOT EXT SLY A DISTANCE OF 388 FT, TH WLY TO E LINE OF W 100.05 FT OF SEC 3, THEN NLY TO PT OF BEGINNING CONSISTING OF APPROXIMATELY 2.465 ACRES, 
and R-3 Residential District: 
PART SE 1/4 COM 100.05 FT ELY ALG N LINE OF FULTON ST (100 FT WIDE) FROM N&S 1/4 LINE, TH N PARALLEL TO THE W N&S 1/4 LINE TO S LINE OF SIBLEY ST EXT W, TH E TO NW COR OF LOT 205, VALLEY VISTA NO. 7, TH S TO SW COR OF SD LOT FOR PT OF BEGINNING, TH E ALG S LINE OF SD PLAT 155.35 FT, TH S PERP TO S LINE OF SD PLAT 253 FT, TH W 155.35 FT, TH N TO BEG CONSISTING OF APPROXIMATELY 0.9 ACRES. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, § 1, 8-5-96)
(b)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 133 S. West Street legally described from R-2 Residential District to C-3 General Business District: 
Lot 44 of Sweet and Smith's Addition. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 1, 9-3-96)
(c)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 1425 West Main Street legally described from R-3 Residential District to C-3 General Business District: 
PART SE 1/4 COM AT SE COR OF LOT 85 OF VALLEY VISTA NO. 4 TH S ALONG W LINE OF VALLEY VISTA DR /60 FT WIDE/ TO N LINE OF FULTON ST /STL M-21 100 FT WIDE/ TH WLY ALONG N LINE OF SD HWY 500.10 FT TH N OD 15M E 302.62 FT TO S LINE OF DEBORAH DR /60 FT WIDE/ EXT WLY THE ELY ALONG SD EXT S LINE TO NW COR OF LOT 86 OF SD PLAT TH S TO SW COR OF SD LOT 86 TH E TO BEG* SEC 3 T6N R9W 2.84 A. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § 1, 12-2-96)
(d)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of the following real properties located at and legally described from R-3 Residential District to PF Public Facilities District: 
192 N. Broadway: Lots 18 and 19, Block 4 of Richard's and Wickham's Plat, 
123 N. Hudson Street: Lots 16 and 17, Block 4 of Richard's and Wickham's Plat, 
and from C-3 General Business District to C-2 Central Business District: 
105 N. Broadway: Lot 12 excluding the west 22 feet of Block 4 of Richard's and Wickham's Plat, 
301 W. Main Street: East 45 feet of Lot 13, Block 4 of Richard's and Wickham's Plat, 
303 W. Main Street: West 61 feet of East 106 feet of Lot 13, Block 4 of Richard's and Wickham's Plat, 
315 W. Main Street: West 22 feet of Lot 12 also West 26 feet of Lot 13 also East 1/2 of Lot 14, Block 4 of Richard's and Wickham's Plat, 
and from C-3 General Business District to PF Public Facilities District: 
325 W. Main Street: Lot 15 and the West 1/2 of Lot 14, Block 4 Richard's and Wickham's Plat. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 3-16-98)
(e)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property legally described from R-2 Residential District to R-3 Residential District: 
PART SE 1/4 COM 100.05 FT ELY ALG N LINE OF FULTON ST (100 FT WIDE) FROM N&S 1/4 LINE, TH N PARALLEL TO THE W N&S 1/4 LINE TO S LINE OF SIBLEY ST EXT W FOR PT OF BEGINNING, TH E TO NW COR OF LOT 205, VALLEY VISTA NO. 7, TH S ALG WLY LINE OF SD LOT EXT SLY A DISTANCE OF 388 FT, TH WLY TO E LINE OF W 100.05 FT OF SEC 3, THEN NLY TO PT OF BEGINNING CONSISTING OF APPROXIMATELY 2.465 ACRES. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, § 1, 7-20-98)
(f)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 1395 Bowes Road legally described from C-3 General Business District to LI Light Industrial District: 
W 134 FT OF E 1081 FT OF THAT PART OF SE 1/4 LYING S OF S LINE OF FULTON ST /STL M21 100 FT WIDE/ EX N 400 FT & EX COM 1041 FT W & 33 FT N FROM SE COR OF SEC TH W 40 FT TH N 40 FT TH SELY TO BEG * CONSISTING OF 1.06 ACRES. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, § 1, 9-2-98)
(g)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 703 Godfrey legally described from R-1 Residential District to R-2 Residential District: 
PART NW 1/4 COM 730 FT E ALONG N SEC LINE FROM NW COR OF SEC TH S PERP TO N SEC LINE TO A PT 50 FT N FROM N LINE OF BIRCHWOOD MANOR NO. 1 TH W PAR WITH SD N LINE TO E LINE OF W 425.28 FT OF NW 1/4 TH N ALONG SD E LINE TO N SEC LINE TH E TO BEG* 
SEC 2 T6N R9W 2.49 A. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 11-16-98)
(h)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 1351 Bowes Road legally described from C-3 General Business District to LI Light Industrial District: 
W 66 FT OF E 947 FT OF THAT PART OF SE 1/4 LYING S OF S LINE OF FULTON ST /100 FT WIDE/ EX N 400 FT ALSO W 29.91 FT OF E 881 FT OF THAT PART OF SE 1/4 LYING S OF S LINE OF FULTON ST /100 FT WIDE/ EX N 330 FT ALSO W 53.09 FT OF E 851.09 FT OF THAT PART OF SE 1/4 LYING S OF S LINE OF FULTON ST /100 FT WIDE/ EX N 300 FT * 
SEC 3 T7N R9W 1.38 A. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 1, 6-21-99)
(i)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 136 South Center Street legally described from R-2 Residential District to C-3 General Business: 
The South 6 feet of Lot 54 also Lot 55 of Sweet & Smith's Addition. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 1, 8-16-99)
(j)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located in part at 1115 East Main Street legally described from SR Suburban Residential District to Planned Unit Development (PUD)/Residential (R-1) District: 
The Southeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 of section 1, Town 6 North, Range 9 West, Lowell Township, Kent County, Michigan, except that piece of land described as: Commencing 20 rods East of the Southwest corner of said Southeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 thence North 20 rods; thence East 30 rods; thence North 21 1/2 rods; thence East 30 rods; thence South to the Southeast corner of said Southeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 thence West 60 rods to beginning. 
(Ord. No. 02-6, § 1, 11-18-02)
(k)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in section 3.02 of Article III of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the the zone district of the following legally described property to Planned Unit Development Single Family Residential District, R-1: 
That part of the NW fractional 1/4 of Section 1, Town 6 North, Range 9 West, Lowell Township, Kent County, Michigan, described as: Commencing at the North 1/4 corner of said Section 1; thence S00°05'43"E 1386.32 feet along the East line of the NW fractional 1/4, to the North line of the SE 1/4 of the NW fractional 1/4 of said Section 1, and the point of beginning of this description; thence S89°40'23"W 1339.05 feet, along the North line of the SE 1/4 of the NW fractional 1/4, to the West line of the SE 1/4, NW fractional 1/4; thence S00°14'39"E 1045.44 feet, along said West line of the SE 1/4, of the NW fractional 1/4 of Section 1; thence Northeasterly 89.61 feet along a 133.0 foot radius curve to the left, the chord of which bears N62°48'38"E 88.08 feet; thence N43°30'21"E 134.92 feet; thence Easterly 54.37 feet along a 67.00 foot radius curve to the right, the chord of which bears N66°45'10"E 52.89 feet; thence N90°00'00"E 126.38 feet; thence S00°05'43"E 98.31 feet; thence N89°48'13"E 495.00 feet, parallel with the South line of the NW fractional 1/4; thence N00°05'43"W 354.75 feet, parallel with the East line of the NW fractional 1/4, to the North line of the South 684.75 feet of said NW fractional 1/4; thence N89°48'13"E 495.00 feet, along the North line of the South 684.75 feet of said NW fractional 1/4; thence N00°05'43"W 634.31 feet, along the East line of the NW fractional 1/4, to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 03-4, § 1, 8-4-03)
(l)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in Section 3.02 of Article III 3 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located in part at 1450 West Main Street legally described from C-3 General Business District to R-3 Residential District: 
PARCEL "A": The South 438.03 feet (as measured along the West right-of-way of Valley Vista Drive and the Southerly extension thereof) of the West 270 feet of the east 1351 feet of that part of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 3, T6N, R9W, lying South of the South line of Fulton Street (State Trunk line M-21), City of Lowell, County of Kent, State of Michigan, less the property taken by the City of Lowell for expansion of the adjoining Street. Containing 2.21 acres. Subject to highway right-of-way for Bowes Street over the South 33.00n feet thereof. 
Containing 2.21 Acres, more or less 
(Ord. No. 03-7, § 1, 12-15-03)
(m)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in Section 3.02 of Chapter 3 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located in part of 119 Lincoln Lake Avenue legally described as Lots 5 and 6, Block 18, Richards and Wickham's Plat from PF Public Facilities District and R-3 Residential District to C-1 Neighborhood Business District. 
(Ord. No. 05-2, § 1, 3-21-05)
(n)	That the "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in Section 3.02 of Chapter 3 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 211-225 South Washington Street legally described as Lots 8, 9 and 10, Block 17 of Avery's Plat and 330 South Washington Street legally described as Lot 1, Block 21 of Avery's Plat from R-3 Residential District to L-I Light Industrial District. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 5-7-07)
(o)	That the "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in Section 3.02 of Chapter 3 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 119 Lincoln Lake Avenue legally described as the south one B half of Lots 5 and 6, Block 18 of Richards & Wickhams Plat from PF Public 
Facilities District and at 424 Chatham Street legally described as the north one-half of Lots 5 and 6, Block 18 of Richards & Wickhams Plat from R-3 Residential District to C-3 General Business District. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 9-7-10)
(p)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in Section 3.02 of Chapter 3 of the Zoning Ordiance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real property located at 312 East Main Street, Permanent Parcel Number 41-20-02-430-011, and 318 East Main Street, Permanent Parcel Number 41-20-430-012, from I Industrial District to C-2 Central Business District. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, § 1, 12-15-14) 
(q)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in Section 3.02 of Chapter 3 of the Zoning Ordiance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real properties identified below from their existing classification to MU Mixed Use District. 
Street AddressPermanent Parcel No.Current Zone District ClassificationNew Zone District Classification300 High Street S.E.41-20-02-260-001PF Public FacilitiesMU Mixed Use238 High Street S.E.41-20-02-404-003PF Public FacilitiesMU Mixed Use307 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-407-007C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use309 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-407-008C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use311 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-407-022C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use317 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-407-027C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use319 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-407-028C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use321 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-407-029C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use140 North Washington Street S.E.41-20-02-407-021C-3 General 
CommercialMU Mixed Use411 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-427-010C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use413 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-427-011C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use404 Avery Street S.E.41-20-02-427-001C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use427 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-427-008C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use112 North Jefferson Street S.E.41-20-02-427-007C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use426 Avery Street S.E.41-20-02-427-003C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use503 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-428-014C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use111 North Jefferson Street S.E.41-20-02-428-003C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use513 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-428-015C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use517 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-428-009C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use519 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-428-010C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use312 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-430-014C-2 Central BusinessMU Mixed Use318 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-430-012C-2 Central BusinessMU Mixed Use414 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-431-014C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use422 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-431-003C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use430 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-431-004C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use116 South Jefferson Street S.E.41-20-02-431-005C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use504 South Main Street S.E.41-20-02-432-008C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use121 South Jefferson Street S.E.41-20-02-432-007C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use512 East Main Street S.E.41-20-02-432-002C-3 General
CommercialMU Mixed Use 
(Ord. No. 15-02, § 1, 2-17-15) 
(r)	The "Official Zoning Map" as referenced in Section 3.02 of Chapter 3 of the Zoning Ordiance of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lowell is amended to change the zone district classification of real properties identified below from their current zone district classifications to their new zone district classifications. 
Street AddressPermanent Parcel No.Current Zone District ClassificationNew Zone District Classification725 Bowes Road41-20-01-382-011R-2/R-3 ResidentialR-3 Residential199 South Pleasant Street41-20-02-356-011R-2 ResidentialR-3 Residential203 South Pleasant Street41-20-02-356-012R-2 ResidentialR-3 Residential205 South Pleasant Street41-20-02-356-013R-2 ResidentialR-3 Residential1111 Bowes Road41-20-03-478-045C-3 General
CommercialR-2 Residential 
(Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 6-15-15) 
CHAPTER 24. - OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, adopted Feb. 18, 2003, set out provisions intended for use as Appendix A, Chapter 23. Inasmuch as Chapter 23 already exists and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 24.

Section 24.01. - Purpose. 
    Act 179 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2001 ("Act 179) an amendment to the City and Village Zoning Act, Act 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921, as amended, requires that a city who has adopted a zoning ordinance having a population of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) or more and having undeveloped land zoned for residential development at a certain density must adopt provisions in its zoning ordinance known as "open space preservation" provisions which permit land satisfying specified criteria to be developed, at the option of the landowner, with the same number of dwellings on a portion of the land specified in the zoning ordinance, but not more than eighty (80) percent, that, as determined by the city, could otherwise be developed, under existing ordinances, laws and rules, on the entire land area. The purpose of this chapter is to adopt open space preservation provisions consistent with the requirements of Act 179. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.02. - Qualifying conditions. 
A.	Land may be developed under the provisions of this chapter only if each of the following conditions is satisfied: 
1.	The zoning district in which the land is located shall permit development at a density equivalent to two or fewer dwelling units per acre, if the land is not served by a public sewer system, or shall permit development at a density equivalent to three or fewer dwelling units per acre, if the land is served by a public sanitary sewer system; 
2.	The development of land under this chapter shall not depend upon the extension of a public sanitary sewer or a public water supply system to the land, unless the development of the land without the exercise of the clustering option provided by this chapter would also depend on such extension; 
3.	The clustering option provided pursuant to this chapter shall not have previously been exercised with respect to the same land; and 
4.	The undeveloped twenty (20) percent (or more) portion of the land must remain in a perpetually undeveloped state by way of a binding legal restriction. 
B.	If all of the preceding conditions are satisfied, the land may be developed, at the option of the landowner, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.03. - Permitted uses. 
    Only those land uses permitted by the zoning district in which the land is located shall be permitted on land developed or used pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.04. - Application and review procedure. 
A.	The application requirements and review procedures for land proposed to be developed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be those stated in chapter 18 of this appendix, governing site plans, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
B.	In addition to the application materials required by chapter 18 of this appendix, an application for the development of land under the provisions of this chapter shall include the following: 
1.	An existing, zoning plan prepared for the purpose of demonstrating the number of dwelling units that could be developed on the land under its existing zoning if the clustering option provided by this chapter were not exercised. The existing zoning plan may be conceptual in nature but shall include at least the following information: 
a.	Date, north arrow and scale, which shall not be more than 1" = 100', and, in all cases, the scale shall be the same as that utilized for the site plan illustrating proposed development using the clustering option permitted by this chapter. 
b.	Location of streets and driveways.
c.	Location of all lots, illustrating lot area and width and depth of each lot to demonstrate compliance with the minimum requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
d.	Location of all utilities that would be necessary to serve a development under the existing zoning plan and which would not be located within any public road right-of-way or private street easement, or on buildable lots. Such utilities include, but are not limited to, storm water retention or detention basins, public sewage treatment systems and public water supply facilities. 
e.	If development under the existing zoning plan would require the use of septic tanks and drain fields, the existing zoning plan shall illustrate the location of all septic tanks and drain fields. The applicant shall submit proof that the proposed septic tank and drain field location for each lot would be approved, or has been approved, by the Kent County Health Department. 
f.	The existing zoning plan shall illustrate all unbuildable land, which shall include slopes of twenty (20) percent or greater, regulated and unregulated wetlands, public utility easements, flood plains, and other similar features which limit or prevent construction of buildings or roads. Each lot shown on the existing zoning plan shall contain at least 75% of the minimum requirement of the minimum lot area of the applicable district. 
2.	A copy of the conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant or other legal instrument that would run with the land, and that would have the legal effect of preserving in perpetuity the open space required by this chapter in an undeveloped state. Such legal instrument shall be reviewed by the city attorney prior to recording, and shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney, consistent with the terms of this chapter. The legal instrument shall: 
a.	Indicate the proposed permitted use(s) of the undeveloped open space.
b.	Require that the open space be maintained in perpetuity in an undeveloped condition, without buildings, structures or other improvements, except such drainage improvements, utility lines, riding trails, hiking trails, picnic areas, park or play ground equipment, agricultural structures or similar improvements that are approved by the planning commission. 
c.	Require that the undeveloped open space be maintained by the parties who have an ownership interest in the undeveloped open space. 
d.	Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the undeveloped open space, including necessary pruning and harvesting of trees and new plantings. 
3.	The site plan for the clustering option permitted by this chapter shall include the following minimum information, in addition to that required by chapter 18 of this ordinance: 
a.	Date, north arrow and scale which shall not be more than 1" = 100', and, in all cases, the scale shall be the same as that utilized for the existing zoning plan. 
b.	The site plan shall clearly illustrate the portions of the land that are proposed to remain in a perpetually undeveloped state and the portions of the land that will be used for clustered development. 
c.	The site plan shall indicate the total number of acres of land that are proposed to remain in a perpetually undeveloped state, the total number of acres of land that are proposed to be used for clustered development, and the percentage of each, as compared to the total site acreage. 
d.	The site plan shall illustrate the location of all proposed lots and proposed building envelopes and shall indicate the lot area and width of each lot, and the proposed front, side and rear yard building setbacks. The number of proposed dwelling lots on the site plan shall not exceed the number of lots on the existing zoning plan, as approved by the planning commission, and reduced to accommodate non-dwelling structures, if necessary, as described in section 5.L. hereof. 
e.	The site plan shall illustrate the location and type of all proposed structures or improvements that are not dwellings. 
f.	If the clustered development will include septic tanks and drain fields, the site plan shall illustrate the location of all septic tanks and drain fields. The applicant shall submit proof that the proposed septic tank and drain field location for each lot has been approved by the Kent County Health Department. 
4.	If the development is to be served by public or private streets, proof that the city has approved the design, layout and construction of the streets. 
C.	When reviewing an application submitted pursuant to this chapter, the planning commission shall determine whether the existing zoning plan accurately reflects the number of dwelling units that could be developed on the land under its existing zoning if the clustering option provided by this chapter were not exercised. If the planning commission determines that the number of dwellings illustrated on the existing zoning plan exceeds the number of dwellings that could be permitted on the land if it were developed under its existing zoning, if the clustering option provided by this chapter were not exercised, the applicant shall submit a revised site plan for the clustering option reflecting the permitted number of dwellings, as determined by the planning commission. 
D.	If a site plan satisfies all requirements of this ordinance, all requirements of this chapter and all conditions of approval imposed by the planning commission, the planning commission shall approve the site plan. If the cluster option permitted by this chapter is proposed as a platted subdivision or a site condominium development, the applicant shall also demonstrate compliance with all requirements of the Land Division Act, Act 283 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended, before the panning commission may approve the development. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.05. - Development requirements. 
A.	Required Open Space. At least twenty (20) percent, but no more than forty (40) percent of the land proposed for development under the provisions of this chapter shall remain in a perpetually undeveloped state (i.e., "open space") by means of a conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant or other legal instrument that runs with the land, as approved by the city attorney. The following areas shall not constitute open space: 
1.	The area within all public street rights-of-way.
2.	The area within all private street easements.
3.	Any easement for overhead utility lines, unless adjacent to open space.
4.	The area within a platted lot, site condominium unit or metes and bounds parcel occupied by a structure not permitted to be located in open space. 
5.	Off street parking and/or loading areas.
6.	Detention and retention ponds.
7.	Community drain fields.
8.	Wetlands, creeks, streams, ponds, lakes, or other bodies of water.
9.	Floodplains and steep slopes (twenty (20) percent or over).
B.	Standards for Open Space. The following standards shall apply to the open space required pursuant to this chapter: 
1.	The open space shall not include a golf course.
2.	The open space may include a recreational trail, picnic area, children's play area, greenway, linear park, an agricultural use or other use which, as determined by the planning commission, is substantially similar to these uses. 
3.	The open space shall be available for all residents of the development, subject to reasonable rules and regulations. The open space may be, but is not required to be, dedicated to the use of the public. 
4.	If the land contains a lake, stream or other body of water, the planning commission may require that a portion of the open space abut the body of water. 
5.	A portion of the open space shall be located along the public street frontage abutting the land. The depth of this area shall be at least 50 feet, not including public right-of-way, and this area shall be left in its natural condition or be landscaped to help reduce the view of houses on the land from the adjacent roadway and to preserve the rural view. 
6.	A portion of the open space shall be reasonably useable by the residents of the land for passive recreational uses such as hiking or picnicking. 
7.	Open space shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible to the residents of the clustered development. Safe and convenient pedestrian access points to the open space from the interior of the clustered development shall be provided. 
8.	Open space shall be located so as to preserve significant natural resources, natural features, scenic or wooded conditions, bodies of water, wetlands or agricultural land. If these type of land features are not present on the land, then the open space shall be centrally located, along the road frontage. 
9.	Open space shall be linked with any adjacent open spaces, public parks, bicycle paths or pedestrian paths, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
C.	Use of Open Space. All dwelling units and other structures and improvements shall be located outside that portion of the land designated as open space. However, the planning commission, in its discretion, may permit structures or improvements to be located in the open space if the structures and/or improvements would be consistent with the designated purpose of the open space. By way of example only, park or playground equipment could be permitted on open space designated for recreational use, or agricultural structures could be permitted on open space designated for agricultural use. 
D.	Compliance With Zoning District. The development of land under this chapter shall comply with all requirements of this ordinance applicable to the zoning district in which the land is located, except those setback and yard size requirements that must be adjusted to allow the clustering option permitted under this chapter. 
E.	General Design Standards. 
1.	All lots within a clustered development shall be provided access by an interior public or private street. No individual lot shall have direct access to any street other than those constructed to serve the clustered development. 
2.	Areas in which natural vegetation and terrain is left undisturbed shall be provided along existing public roads and adjacent property lines of sufficient width to screen buildings from adjacent roadways and properties. 
3.	Lots shall be located toward the interior of the development, or shall be located behind existing natural features so as to screen dwellings from existing public roads and adjacent properties. 
4.	The entrance or entrances to the development shall be no wider than necessary to accommodate any necessary acceleration lanes and provide adequate sight distance. Boulevards, landscaping, planters, fences and other amenities designed to call attention to the development may be permitted with the approval of the planning commission. 
5.	The development shall be designed so as to minimize additional runoff from roads, roofs, driveways and other improvements. Further, the development shall be designed, to the maximum extent possible, to minimize runoff from improvements into lakes, streams and wetlands. 
6.	The planning commission may require the preservation of existing desirable vegetation within lots, except as necessary for the construction of buildings, drain fields and driveways. 
7.	The planning commission may require that individual lots have shared driveways to minimize the removal of vegetation or the alteration of existing slopes. 
F.	Uniform Lot Size. Lots for dwellings in the clustered portion of the development shall be as uniform in area as is reasonably practicable, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
G.	Building Envelopes. The location and area of building envelopes, as proposed by the applicant, shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. Building envelopes shall not be located on top of prominent hilltops, ridges or steep slopes, or in proximity to wetlands or other sensitive areas. 
H.	Required Frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of frontage measured at the street right of way line. 
I.	Lot Width. Each lot shall have a minimum width equal to no less than sixty (60) percent of the minimum lot width specified for the zoning district in which the land is located, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
J.	Maximum Number of Lots. The clustered portion of the development shall contain no more than the maximum number of dwelling lots, as determined from the existing zoning plan approved by the planning commission, and as reduced to reflect the inclusion of non-dwelling unit structures, if any, as described in subsection L. below. 
K.	Non-Dwelling Unit Structures. Lots containing non-dwelling structures such as a clubhouse and its related amenities or an accessory building, shall be subject to all requirements of this chapter applicable to lots containing dwellings and shall further be subject to all other requirements of this ordinance and other city ordinances applicable to the type of structure proposed. However, the planning commission may, in its discretion, permit the enlargement of a lot containing a non-dwelling structure so as to reasonably accommodate it. 
L.	Reduction in Lots for Non-Dwelling Structures. If structures other than dwellings, such as a clubhouse, are constructed on a lot in the clustered portion of the land, the number of dwelling lots permitted in the clustered portion of the land shall be reduced as follows: 
1.	The area of a lot or lots occupied by non-dwelling structures, shall be calculated and then divided by the average area of a dwelling lot that could be situated in the clustered development if the non-dwelling structures were not included in the clustered development, as determined from the approved existing zoning plan. If this number is a fraction, it shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
2.	The number calculated under 1. above shall be subtracted from the number of dwelling lots that could be permitted in the clustered development in the absence of the non-dwelling structures, as determined from the approved existing zoning plan, in order to determine the maximum number of dwelling lots permitted to be included in the clustered portion of the development with the non-dwelling structures included. 
M.	Perimeter Lots. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the planning commission may require that the clustered development be designed and constructed with lot sizes and setbacks on the perimeter that will be reasonably consistent with the lot sizes and setbacks of adjacent planned or existing uses. 
N.	Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed in the clustered portion of the development extending to the public right-of-way. 
O.	Grading. Grading within the clustered development shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.	To preserve the natural appearance of the land, all graded areas, cuts and fills shall be kept to a minimum. Specific requirements may be placed on the area of land to be graded or to be used for building, and on the size, height, and angles of cut-and-fill slopes and the shape thereof. Retaining walls may be required. 
2.	All areas indicated as open space on the approved development plan shall be undisturbed by grading, excavating, structures or otherwise, except as permitted by the Planning Commission. Drainage improvements, utility lines, riding trails, hiking trails, picnic areas and similar recreational improvements and amenities may be placed in open space areas if approved by the planning commission. 
3.	Grading within the clustered development shall be planned and carried out so as to avoid erosion, pollution, flooding or other adverse effects upon the land, and so as to have only such minimal effect upon the environmental characteristics of the land as may be reasonably feasible. 
P.	Streets. Private streets within a clustered development shall conform to the private street requirements of the city. The planning commission may, however, following consultation with the fire chief and other public safety officials as appropriate, allow a reduction in the minimum right-of-way and roadbed width requirements for all or a portion of the street to minimize the removal of vegetation or alteration of natural slopes. The Planning Commission may require that portions of private streets with reduced widths be designated as one-way only. 
Q.	Other Laws. The development of land under this chapter is subject to all other applicable city ordinances, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, rules relating to suitability of groundwater for on-site water supply for land not served by a public water system, and rules relating to the suitability of soils for on-site sewage disposal for land not served by public sanitary sewers. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.06. - Amendments to an approved site plan. 
A.	An approved clustered site plan and any conditions imposed upon its approval shall not be changed except upon the mutual consent of the planning commission and the applicant, except as otherwise stated below with respect to a minor change. 
B.	A minor change which does not substantially alter the basic design or conditions of the site plan approved by the planning commission may be approved by the city manager who shall notify the planning commission of such change. 
C.	The following items shall be considered minor changes:
1.	Reduction of the size of any building, building envelope or sign.
2.	Movement of buildings or signs by no more than ten feet.
3.	Plantings approved in the landscaping plan replaced with by similar types of plantings.
4.	Changes requested by the city for safety reasons.
5.	Changes which will preserve natural features of the land without changing the basic site layout. 
6.	Other similar changes of a minor nature proposed to be made to the configuration, design, layout or topography of the site plan which are deemed by the city manager to be not material or significant in relation to the entire site and which the city manager determines would not have any significant adverse effect on the development or on adjacent or nearby lands or the public health, safety and welfare. 
D.	The city manager may refer any decision regarding any proposed change in an approved site plan to the planning commission for review and approval (regardless of whether the change may qualify as a minor change). In making a determination on whether to refer a change to the planning commission for review and approval, the city manager may consult with the chairperson of the planning commission. 
E.	If the city manager determines that a requested change in the approved site plan is not minor, re-submission to the planning commission for an amendment shall be required, and the consideration thereof shall take place in the same manner as for an original application. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.07. - Performance guarantees. 
    The planning commission, in its discretion, may require reasonable performance guarantees or assurance deemed satisfactory to it under the circumstances of a particular development. Such arrangements shall be conditioned upon faithful compliance with all of the provisions and requirements of the approved clustered site plan, including any conditions thereto, and construction and placement of all the improvements required thereby. In its discretion, the planning commission may rebate, refund or permit the reduction of a proportionate share of the amount specified in a performance bond, letter of credit, or other written assurance, based upon the percent of improvements completed, as verified by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.08. - Time limitations of development. 
    Each development permitted pursuant to this chapter shall be under construction within one year after the date of approval of the site plan by the planning commission. If this requirement is not met, the planning commission may, in its discretion, grant an extension not exceeding one year, provided that the applicant submits reasonable documentation that unforeseen difficulties or special circumstances have been encountered causing delay in the commencement of the development. If construction of the development has not begun within the one-year stated time period, or within any authorized extension thereof, any building permits issued for the development or any part thereof shall terminate and the applicant shall be required to obtain a new approval from the planning commission under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
Section 24.09. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases used in this chapter, if defined in Act 179, shall have the same meaning as provided in Act 179. 
(Ord. No. 03-2, § 3, 2-18-03)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1971 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1971 Code, as updated through 1976, which are included herein. Sections of the 1971 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1971 Code
SectionSection 
this Code2-1, 2-2 2-1, 2-2 2-52-3 2-302-72 3-113-41 5-1, 5-2 5-1, 5-2 5-205-30 5-21 5-32 5-23, 5-24 5-28, 5-29 6-1, 6-2 6-21, 6-22 6-4, 6-56-1, 6-2 6-76-23 8-2-8-49-1-9-3 10-1 10-1 10-2-10-5 10-21-10-24 10-710-2 11-1-11-5 11-1-11-5 11-1023-46 11-1111-7 11-1311-8 11-30, 11-31 11-26, 11-27 12-15-12-2015-46-15-51 12-23, 12-2415-52, 15-53 15-12-15-2718-1-18-16 18-3 13-108 18-2113-4 18-2513-87 18-2613-86 18-2713-63 18-2913-43 18-3113-21 18-3213-65 18-3813-111 18-3913-22 18-40, 18-4113-42 18-4313-198 18-46, 18-4713-62 19-11-19-1516-26-16-30 19-18-19-2016-31-16-33 21-2, 21-317-1, 17-2 22-1 13-106 22-619-3 22-16-22-1823-26-23-28 24-11, 24-1224-26, 24-27 24-33, 24-3424-46, 24-47 24-3624-48  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1971 Code, as updated through 1976, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1971 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance
Number DateSection Section
this Code 3-10-7717-1321-46 17-2021-47 17-30-17-3221-66-21-68 17-3521-69 17-41-17-4621-86-21-91  7-16-7912.5-115-71, 15-72 12.5-2-12.5-415-91-15-93 12.6-515-94 12- 5-7916-27 12- 3-847-46  2-24-854.19 App. A, § 4.19  4- 6-87121-111 26-2-26-721-112-21-117 26-1021-118  9-21-87115-1-15-3 215-54 15-111, 15-112 15-131-15-140 10- 5-8715-21 5-23-5-28 5-31 1, 25-22 81-1 5- 4-81113-61 13-64 13-131, 13-132 2, 313-109, 13-110 513-1 613-44 713-23 85-3 1113-68 1213-196 1313-5 1413-197 1513-2 86 8-17-81121-26 86-110-20-86I-III19-46-19-48 IV, V19-49 VI19-50 87 3- 1-82Arts. I-XXIIIApp. A87-1 3- 2-872-6(a)-2-6(d)2-21-2-24 2-6(e, f, g)2-25 2-6(h, i, j)2-26 2-6(k)2-27 88 5-17-821, 28-26, 8-2738-464-68-66-8-6878-2888-6998-47108-7088-1 1- 4-881(26-1)-1(26-13)3-26-3-38 88-2 2- 1-88App. A, § 8.02, App. A, § 8.03 App. A, § 15.12App. A, § 16.01 App. A, § 16.04 88-4 2-16-881(27-1)-1(27-11)14-26-14-36 88-5 3- 7-88119-1 19-21-19-28 88-7 4- 4-8817-26-7-28 88-8 4- 4-88App. A, § 6.10 88-11 5-16-881a10-41 1b10-42 1c10-43 88-12 5-16-88113-66, 13-67 89-2 7-24-89App. A, § 8.02 2App. A, § 8.0989-311-20-8915-51-5-58 90-1 1- 4-90111-46-11-48 90-2 5- 7-9021-1 91-1 4- 1-911-7Adopting ordinance, p. vii91-2 4-15-91114-1 91-3 5- 6-9118-4691-5 7- 1-9117-50-7-55 91-6 9-16-91116-30(b) 91-712- 2-911App. A, § 23.01 91-812- 2-91114-50-14-68 91-912-16-9112-71 92-1 7-20-921App. A, § 23.01(b) 92-2 9- 8-921App. A, § 16.01 2     AddedApp. A, § 16.04 L. 92-311-16-92125-200-25-217, 25-225-25-232, 25-250-25-267, 25-275-25-278, 25-300, 25-325-25-347 2     Rpld25-46, 25-79-25-11593-1 2-16-93110-1-10-4      Rnbd10-2      as10-5 93-2 3-15-93125-493-4 5- 3-931     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(c) 93-6 6- 7-931     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(d) 93-7 7- 6-9315-34 93-8 8- 2-931     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(e) 94-311-24-941-313-211-13-213 95-1 2- 6-95125-205(a) 95-2 3- 6-951     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(f) 95-3 5- 1-951     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(g) 95-4 6-19-9513-28 95-5 9- 5-951     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(h) 95-0612-27-951App. A, §§ 1.01-1.04 App. A, §§ 2.01-2.24 App. A, §§ 3.01-3.04 App. A, §§ 4.01-4.20 App. A, §§ 5.01-5.04 App. A, §§ 6.01-6.04 App. A, §§ 7.01-7.04 App. A, §§ 8.01-8.04 App. A, §§ 9.01-9.09 App. A, §§ 10.01-10.04 App. A, §§ 11.01-11.04 App. A, §§ 12.01-12.04 App. A, §§ 13.01-13.04 App. A, §§ 14.01-14.08 App. A, §§ 15.01-15.07 App. A, §§ 16.01-16.04 App. A, §§ 17.01-17.04 App. A, §§ 18.01-18.10 App. A, §§ 19.01-19.08 App. A, §§ 20.01-20.11 App. A, §§ 21.01-21.06 App. A, §§ 22.01-22.06 96-1 4- 1-96110-51-10-59 96-2 5- 6-96120-1-20-4 220-11, 20-12, 320-21-20-25 96-3 7- 1-9618-4696-4 8- 5-96123.01(a) 96-5 9- 3-96123.01(b) 96-610-21-961App. A, § 17.04 N. 1., 8. 96-711- 4-96111.5-1-11.5-16 96-812- 2-96123.01(c) 96-912- 2-96113-190, 13-191 97-110-20-97111.5-6(1) 2App. A, § 20.01, App. A, § 20.04 I., K., N., O. App. A, § 20.05 J., K. App. A, § 20.07 E. App. A, § 20.08 97-211-17-971App. A, § 2.02 2App. A, § 2.04 3App. A, § 2.06 4App. A, § 2.135App. A, § 2.14 6App. A, § 2.15 7App. A, § 2.16 8App. A, § 2.17 9App. A, § 2.19 10App. A, § 12.03 11App. A, § 13.03 12App. A, § 17.04(AA) 13App. A, § 17A.01-17A.29 98-1 2- 2-981     Added5-35 98-2 2-17-981App. A, § 3.01 2     AddedApp. A, §§ 12A.01-12A.04 98-3 3-16-98123.01(d) 98-4 4- 6-981     Added13-214 98-5 4-20-98121-1(4) 98-6 4-20-98125-205(a) 98-7 6-15-981App. A, § 10.04(B) 2App. A, § 12A.04(C) 3App. A, § 13.04(C) 98-8 7-20-98123.01(e) 98-9 9- 2-98123.01(f) 98-1011-16-98123.01(g) 99-1 2-16-99115-1 2     RpldArt. IV, Ch. 152     Added15-111, 15-112 2     Added15-131-15-138 99-2 6-21-99123.01(h) 99-3 6-21-99113-214 99-4 8-16-99123.01(i) 99-5 8-16-991App. A, § 10.04B2App. A, § 12.04B3App. A, § 12A.04C4App. A, § 13.04C99-6 8-16-991App. A, § 4.08H99-8 9-20-9918-4699-911-15-991     AddedApp.A, § 11.05 99-1012-20-991App. A, § 2.03 2App. A, § 12.03 99-1112-20-991App. A, § 2.03 2App. A, § 2.20 3App. A, § 12.03 00-1 3-20-0017-26 00-2 4-24-001, 2App. A, § 10.02 3, 4App. A, § 11.02 5App. A, § 11.05 6, 7App. A, § 12.02 8     AddedApp. A, § 12.05 00-3 7-17-001App. A, § 7.03 2App. A, § 8.03 00-4 9-18-001App. A, § 2.04 2App. A, § 2.06 3App. A, § 12A.03 4App. A, § 13.03 5App. A, § 16.03 6App. A, § 17.04 7     AddedApp. A, § 4.21 8     AddedApp. A, § 4.22 00-610-16-001App. A, § 12A.03 2App. A, § 13.02 00-712-18-001App. A, § 19.04F01-1 8-20-011     Added7-60-7-76 01-2 8-20-011     Added2-80, 2-81 01-3 8-20-01118.06D01-410-15-011App. A, § 4.1301-510-15-011     Added2-82 02-1 3-18-021App. A, § 2.1302-3 7-16-021App. A, § 4.1602-510-21-021App. A, § 20.02 2     AddedApp. A, § 20.04P02-611-18-021App. A, § 23.01 02-711-18-02120.5-31-20.5-48 03-1 1- 6-031     Added25-400 03-2 2-18-031     AddedApp. A, § 5.02H2App. A, § 15.04A.2.3App. A, § 24.01-24.09 03-3 2-18-031App. A, § 5.04 2App. A, § 6.04 03-4 8- 4-031App. A, § 23.01 03-5 8-18-031App. A, § 2.07 2App. A, § 5.04 3App. A, § 6.04 4App. A, § 7.04 5App. A, § 8.04 03-610- 6-031-410-1-10-4 03-712-15-031App. A, § 23.01 04-1 3-15-041App. A, § 2.07 2App. A, § 2.17 3App. A, § 2.21 4App. A, § 4.07 5App. A, § 4.08 6App. A, § 19.03 04-2 3-15-04111.5-4 04-3 7-19-041App. A, § 4.20F04-4 9- 7-04113-107 04-511-15-041App. A, § 2.20 2App. A, § 12.03 3App. A, § 13.02 05-1 2- 7-05111.5-3, 11.5-5 05-2 3-21-051App. A, § 23.01 05-3 5-16-051App. A, § 20.05I2App. A, § 20.08 05-4 7- 5-051App. A, § 12.05 06-01 2-21-061App. A, § 2.02 2App. A, § 2.04 3     AddedApp. A, § 4.23 06-02 5-15-061App. A, § 20.08 06-03 9-18-061     Added7-80-7-82 07-01 1- 2-071App. A, § 8.04 07-02 3- 5-071, 216-27, 16-28 07-03 4- 2-071     AddedApp. A, § 4.13A 07-04 5- 7-07     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(n) 07-05 5- 7-071     Added7-100-7-102 07-06 5-21-071     Added23-66-23-77 07-07 5-21-071     Rpld8-26-8-288-46, 8-478-66-8-7007-08 6- 4-071App. A, § 4.19C07-0910- 1-071     Added14-80-14-84 2App. A, § 20.03 07-1011- 5-071     AddedApp. A, § 2.19A 2     AddedApp. A, § 4.08A 08-01 1-22-081, 223-68, 23-69 08-02 4- 7-081App. A, § 20.07B.22App. A, § 20.07E08-03 4- 7-081App. A, § 5.01 2App. A, § 6.01 3App. A, § 7.01 4App. A, § 8.01 08-0411- 3-081     Added23-91-23-102 08-0512- 1-08121-26      Added21-27 08-0612-15-081     Rpld23-46      Added23-46-23-52 09-01 1-20-9911-13(a) 2     AddedCh. 27, §§ 27-1-27-9 09-02 4- 6-091App. A, § 8.01 2App. A, § 9.01 3App. A, § 12.01 4App. A, § 16.01 09-03 7- 6-09113-107 2     Added13-112 09-0410- 5-09125-17 2     Added25-31-25-37 09-0510- 5-091App. A, § 7.03 2App. A, § 8.03 09-0610- 5-091App. A, § 5.03 10-02 8-16-101Ch. 11, Art. II, §§ 11-26-11-39 10-03 9- 7-101     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(o) 10-04 9- 7-101     AddedCh. 19, Art. III, §§ 19-60-19-74 11-01 1- 3-111App. A, § 2.07 2     AddedApp. A, § 4.24 3     Added20.04Q11-02 1- 3-111App. A, § 4.08I2     RnbdApp. A, § 4.08J     asApp. A, § 4.08L3, 4     AddedApp. A, § 4.08J, K5     AddedApp. A, § 12A.03H6     AddedApp. A, § 13.03F11-03 2-22-111     AddedCh. 22, §§ 22-1, 22-2 11-05 4-18-111App. A, § 2.16 2     AddedApp. A, § 4.25 11-06 5- 2-111     AddedCh. 19, Art. IV, § 19-86 12-03 6- 4-121App. A, § 2.20 2App. A, § 12.03 3App. A, § 13.02 4     AddedApp. A, § 17.04CC12-04 10-15-121-410-1-10-4 12-05 11-19-1212-71 22-72 13-01  3- 4-1312-2 22-3 3     Rpld2-82 13-02  7- 1-13 119-1 219-2 319-3(a), (d) 419-23 519-27(a) 619-46(a) 719-71 13-03  8- 5-131     RpldApp. A, §§ 20.1-20.11     AddedApp. A, §§ 20.1-20.1114-01  6- 2-141     Added10.60-10.7214-02 11-17-141App. A, § 4.08G14-03 12-15-141     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(p) 15-01  2-17-151App. A, § 2.03 2App. A, § 2.14 3App. A, § 3.01 4App. A, § 4.13C5App. A, § 4.13E6     AddedApp. A, §§ 16A.01-16A.04 7     AddedApp. A, § 18.02A.98App. A, § 19.02B, C9App. A, § 20.08C15-02  2-17-151     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(q) 15-03  6-15-151App. A, § 18.03 15-05  6-15-151     AddedApp. A, § 23.01(r) 15-06  9-21-151App. A, § 17.04BB 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCLSection 
this Code15.231 et seq.20.5-34 15.261 et seq.1-14 3-33 14-33 23-74 24.201 et seq.21-26 46.401 et seq.Char., Ch. 14117.1 et seq.Char. Reso.27-1 117.5c2-21 123.161 et seq.Char., § 15.4 125.31 et seq.16-26 16-33 125.581 et seq.27-1 125.1107Char., § 3.1 125.1501 et seq.7-26, 7-27 168.24a et seq.Char., § 12.12 168.30a et seq.Char., § 12.12 168.546Char., § 12.10 211.53Char., § 10.5 257.1 et seq.21-27 257.682c19-71 257.698a19-71 257.951 et seq.21-26 324.11501 et seq.11-38 436.1 et seq.4-21 484.2102 et seq.20.5-33 484.2251 et seq.20.5-34 484.3101 et seq.20.5-33 600.1 et seq.27-1 600.5813Char., § 10.5 600.830227-9 600.839521-86 600.8715(3)(b)27-1 600.8715(4)27-1 600.871927-1 600.872127-1 600.872927-9 600.873127-9 600.873327-9 600.8733(2)27-9 600.9921Char., § 4.1 Char., Ch. 11712A.1 et seq.13-197  
