Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Secs. 1.05, 1.08 and 1.09, of the 1978 General
Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
§ 1-2. Violations and penalties.
A. Terms used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, have the
meanings prescribed by the statutes of the State of Michigan for the
same terms.
B. Terms used in this Code shall have the following meanings:
CITY — The City of Lapeer, Michigan.
CITY COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The City Commission of the
City of Lapeer.
COUNTY — County of Lapeer.
ORDINANCES — The ordinances of the City of Lapeer and all
amendments thereto.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association,
or corporation. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section
of this Code prescribing penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships
or associations, the word includes the partners or members thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the word includes officers, agents, or
employees thereof who are responsible for any violations of the section.
The singular includes the plural. The masculine gender includes the
feminine and neuter genders.
THIS CODE — The General Ordinances of the City of Lapeer.
A. Any person violating any provision of this Code for which a penalty is
not otherwise specified shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500, or to imprisonment in the
county jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or to both such fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
B. Provisions of this Code prescribing any penalty shall not apply to the
failure of any City officer or employee to perform an official duty.
C. Reference to any section of this Code includes the penalty section
relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
D. The penalty provided in this section shall relate to amendments and
additions to this Code, whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance
or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed or amended therein.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-3. Separate offenses.
Each day a violation of any provision of any ordinance of the City continues
is a separate offense.
§ 1-3 LAPEER CODE § 1-3
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[An ordinance adopting the Code of the City of Lapeer and making certain
substantive changes to existing ordinances of the City is presently proposed
before the City Commission. Upon final adoption, it will be included here as
Article II of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-3 LAPEER CODE § 1-3
1:6
ARTICLE I
Park Board
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Sec. 2.02, of the 1978 General Ordinances;
amended 7-26-1995]
§ 2-1. Creation; membership; terms of office; compensation.
There is hereby created a Park Board consisting of seven members
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Commission for a threeyear
term. No member shall receive compensation as such.
§ 2-2. Chairperson; recording secretary; records of proceedings.
The Park Board shall elect one of its members as chairperson and may
elect other officers as it deems appropriate. The Park Board may use a
nonmember as a recording secretary. The Park Board shall keep a correct
record of its proceedings and shall meet at such times as it may determine.
§ 2-3. Responsibilities. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Park Board, through its Director of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery
(hereinafter referred to as "Director"), shall have such responsibilities for
supervision of City parks and parks and recreation programs as shall be
determined, from time to time, by the City Commission. The Park Board
shall otherwise serve in an advisory capacity to the City Commission.
§ 2-4. Funding.
The City Commission will include in its annual budget a sum of money
reasonably sufficient for park purposes.
§ 2-5. Annual report. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Park Board, through its Director, shall make, at the end of each year, a
report to the City Commission, stating the various sums of money received
from all sources, its expenditures and for what purposes, and such other
information and recommendations as the Park Board members may deem
necessary.
§ 2-6. Donations.
All donations of money or property, including money or property received
by will or devise, made for City parks or parks and recreation programs,
shall be exclusively expended and applied for parks or parks and recreation
programs.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7
1:7
§ 2-7. Hiring and salaries of parks and parks and recreation
employees.
The City Manager shall hire and set the salary of all parks and parks
and recreation employees unless the City Commission delegates such
responsibility to the Park Board.
§ 2-7 LAPEER CODE § 2-7
1:8
ARTICLE II
Planning Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Sec. 2.03, of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 2-8. Creation; powers and duties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A City Planning Commission shall be organized under the provisions of
Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Act No. 33 of 2008 as amended, MCLA
§ 125.3801 et seq., and shall have the powers and duties therein specified.
§ 2-9. Adoption by reference of statutory provisions.
Sections 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15, of Act 285 of the Public
Acts of 1931, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference, it being the
intent of this article to adopt only those provision which pertain and apply
to cities, it being understood that the word "council" as referred to in the
statute means the "Lapeer City Commission," and the word "commission" as
referred to in the statute means the "City Planning Commission."
§ 2-10. Membership; appointments; terms; removal from office.
The City Planning Commission shall consist of the Mayor, one of the
administrative officials of the municipality selected by the Mayor, one
member of the Lapeer City Commission selected by it as a member ex
officio, and six persons who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
approval by a majority vote of the members elect of the Lapeer City
Commission. All members of the City Planning Commission shall serve as
such without compensation, and the six persons appointed by the Mayor
shall hold no other municipal office, except that one of such appointed
members may be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The terms of ex
officio members shall correspond to their respective official tenures, except
that the term of the administrative official selected by the Mayor shall
terminate with the term of the Mayor selecting him. The term of each of
the six appointed members shall be three years or until his successor takes
office. The six members appointed by the Mayor shall represent, insofar
as possible, different professions and occupations. Members other than the
members selected by the Lapeer City Commission may, after public hearing,
be removed by the Mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in
office. The Lapeer City Commission may for like cause remove the members
selected by it. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of
term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor in case of members
selected or appointed by him, and by the Lapeer City Commission in the
case of the Lapeer City Commission member.
§ 2-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10
1:9

ARTICLE III
District Library Board
[A Lapeer District Library was established, and recognized by the Library
of Michigan effective January 1, 2003, under the provisions of the District
Library Establishment Act, Act No. 24 of 1989, MCLA § 397.171 et seq.,
with powers and duties as set forth by the Lapeer District Library
Agreement.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10
1:11

ARTICLE IV
Health Officer
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Sec. 2.05, of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 2-11. Creation of office; appointment; qualifications; term.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
The office of Health Officer is hereby created and the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the City Commission, may appoint from time to time a Health
Officer who shall be subject to the same qualifications and regulations as all
other appointed officers and be a duly qualified physician whose term shall
be for one year.
§ 2-12. Powers and duties.
The said Health Officer shall have such powers and perform such duties as
are conferred upon or that may hereafter be conferred upon or required of
Health Officers of cities and townships appointed under the general laws of
the state and the regulations of the State Board of Health, and shall perform
such other duties pertaining to his office as may be required by resolution
of the City Commission of the City of Lapeer.
§ 2-13. Appointment of deputies or assistants.
The Health Officer may appoint such deputies or assistants as he may deem
necessary to carry out his duties.
§ 2-14. Compensation.
The compensation and duties of the Health Officer shall be set annually by
resolution of the Commission 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal
year.
§ 2-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-14
1:13

ARTICLE V
Cemetery Board
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Sec. 2.06, of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 2-15. Creation of Board of Cemetery Trustees.
There is hereby established a departmental activity in the City organization
to be known as Mount Hope Cemetery, to be managed by the Board of
Cemetery Trustees hereby created, subject to the directions and ordinances
of the City.
§ 2-16. Membership; qualifications; terms of office; removal from
office; compensation.
There is hereby created a Board of Cemetery Trustees consisting of five
trustees, who shall be freeholders and electors in the City, to be appointed
by the Mayor and with the consent of the Commission. Said Trustees shall
hold office for the term of five years, except that at the first appointment,
one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years,
one for a term of three years, one for a term of four years, and one for at
term of five years, from the first Monday in May of the year when appointed,
and annually thereafter, one Trustee shall be appointed; provided that the
first year of their term shall end on the first Monday in May following their
appointment. Any trustee so appointed may be removed for inattention to
his duties, want of proper judgment, skill or taste for the proper discharge
of the duties required of him, or other good cause. Said trustee shall serve
without compensation.
§ 2-17. Officers; powers and duties of Board. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Board of Cemetery Trustees shall appoint one of their number as a
Chairman, and may elect other officers as it deems appropriate. The Board
of Cemetery Trustees may use a nonmember as a recording secretary
and shall keep a correct record of its proceedings and shall meet at such
times as it may be determined. The said Board is hereby invested with
such powers authority as may be necessary for the care, management and
preservation of such cemetery and grounds, the tombs and monuments
therein, and the appurtenances thereof, and in addition to the duties herein
mentioned, the said Board shall perform such other duties as the
Commission may prescribe.
§ 2-18. Sexton and other employees; care and maintenance of
cemetery.
The said Board of Trustees shall appoint, with approval of the Commission,
a sexton and such other employees as may be necessary for the care and
maintenance of said cemetery, and shall have the care and management
of said cemetery and shall direct the improvements and embellishments
of the grounds; and shall enforce the ordinances of the City made for
§ 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18
1:15
the management and care thereof, and make such regulations for the
burial of the dead, the care and protection of the grounds, monuments
and appurtenances of the cemetery, and the orderly conduct of the persons
visiting the grounds as may be consistent with the ordinances of the City
and the laws of the state.
§ 2-19. Pricing and sales of burial lots. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Said Board of Trustees, through its Director of Parks, Recreation and
Cemetery (hereinafter referred to as "Director"), shall fix the price of lots
and make sales thereof. The conveyances of such cemetery lots, half-lots or
grave spaces, shall be for burial rights of human bodies only and shall be
issued and executed on behalf of the City by the City Clerk and sealed with
the seal of the City of Lapeer, and shall be in such form as the said Board of
Trustees, with the approval of the Commission, shall prescribe.
§ 2-20. Sexton; appointment; authority.
The Sexton, who shall be appointed by the said Trustees, shall have police
authority in enforcing all regulations of the Board of Trustees and the
ordinances of the City in preserving order and proper conduct within such
cemetery and grounds.
§ 2-21. Free burial ground.
The said Board of Trustees may set off so much of said cemetery as in their
judgment may be necessary for a free burial ground.
§ 2-22. Power to receive and hold certain property.
The said Board of Trustees shall also have power, in its discretion, to take,
receive and hold any property, real or personal, by devise or otherwise,
which may be granted, transferred or devised to such Board in trust for the
purpose of caring for and keeping in good order and repair any lot or lots or
portions thereof specified in any such trust.
§ 2-23. Mount Hope Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund.
The memorial and perpetual care fund transferred by Mount Hope
Cemetery Association to the City, in connection with its transfer to the City
of the Mount Hope Cemetery, and all rights and assets of said association,
shall be deposited with the City Treasury and shall be denominated as the
Mount Hope Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund.
§ 2-24. Cemetery Fund.
All monies raised for such cemetery authorized by this article and all monies
received from the sale of lots, half-lots or grave spaces therein, shall be paid
to the City Treasury and shall constitute a fund to be denominated "The
§ 2-18 LAPEER CODE § 2-24
1:16
Cemetery Fund." Said fund shall not be devoted or applied to any other
purpose except the purposes of such cemetery.
§ 2-25. Annual assessments for perpetual care. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Cemetery Board, through its Director, may assess against every lot or
portion of lot (burial rights for which have been sold, but not in perpetual
care) such sum per year as the Board may determine, for perpetual care;
said assessment to be paid on or before the first day of May for the care of
such lots for the ensuing year.
§ 2-26. Consequences of unpaid perpetual care assessments.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Whenever assessments for care of any lot or part lot shall remain unpaid for
a period of five years, then the Cemetery Board, through its Director, shall,
after notice by registered letter or publication in a newspaper circulating in
the county, have the right to cancel burial rights in the unused portion of
said lots and to resell the burial rights. Proceeds of such sale to be used for
putting as much of said lots in perpetual care as receipts from such sale will
permit.
§ 2-27. Rules and regulations.
The said Board of Trustees may make such rules and regulations in
connection with the Board's care and management of said Cemetery, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, as said Board may deem
advisable, with the approval of the Commission; in the meantime, and until
such rules and regulations and the provisions of this article can be put
into effect, the regulations of the Mount Hope Cemetery Association shall
govern as nearly as can be.
§ 2-28. Caring for lots or burial spaces by individuals.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit individuals from
caring for lots or burial spaces, but no such care shall be considered in lieu
of assessments thereon, and provided that such care by individuals shall not
be inconsistent with the regulations of the said Board of Trustees.
§ 2-29. Annual report. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The said Board of Trustees, through its Director, shall report to the
Commission at the end of each year, the amount of all monies held, received
into and owing to the Cemetery Fund, and from what source and from
whom, and the date, amount, items and purpose of all expenditures and
liabilities incurred, and to whom paid and to whom incurred, and such other
matters as the Commission shall require to be reported, which report shall
be certified by the oath of the Clerk of the Board.
§ 2-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:17

ARTICLE VI
Housing Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 25 of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 2-30. Establishment; statutory authorization.
Pursuant to Act 18 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended (Michigan
Statutes Annotated § 5.8011 et seq.1), there is hereby established a Housing
Commission, hereinafter called the "Lapeer Housing Commission," with
authority to purchase, acquire, construct, maintain, operate, improve,
extend or repair housing facilities within the City of Lapeer and to eliminate
housing conditions which are detrimental to the public peace, health, safety,
morals or welfare of the said City.
§ 2-31. Membership; appointments; terms of office; compensation;
vacancies.
§ 2-32. Meetings; notices; records; quorum; duties; officers;
Director. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
The Commission shall meet at regular intervals after public notice of the
time and place of such meeting and all meetings of the Commission shall
be open to the public. The Commission shall adopt bylaws and its own
rules of procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of Act 18 or of
this article, and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Three members
of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its
business, and a Chairman and a Vice Chairman shall be elected by the
Commission. The said Commission may appoint a Director, who may also
serve as Secretary, and such other employees or officers as shall be
necessary. The Commission shall, with the approval of the Lapeer City
Commission, prescribe the duties of all its officers and employees and fix
their compensation. The Commission may, from time to time, and with
the approval of the Lapeer City Commission, employ engineers, architects
A. The said Commission shall consist of five members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the City of Lapeer. The term of office of the
members of the first Commission appointed hereunder shall be
appointed for terms of one year for one member, two years for one
member, three years for one member, four years for one member, and
five years for one member. Annually thereafter, one member shall be
appointed for a term of five years.
B. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation and may
be removed from office by the Mayor. Any vacancy in office shall be
filled by appointment by the Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
1. Editor's Note: See now MCLA § 125.651 et seq.
§ 2-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-32
1:19
and consultants as necessary to accomplish the purposes for which it is
established.
§ 2-33. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have those powers and duties enumerated in Section
7 of said Act 182 and in addition, shall have such other powers relating to
housing project facilities as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of
the City Commission of the City of Lapeer or as may be necessary to carry
out the purposes of this article, providing, however, that all contracts, deed,
leases or purchases entered into by the Commission shall be in the name
of the City of Lapeer and shall be subject to approval by the Commission of
said City.
§ 2-34. Effective date.
This article shall become effective at 12:01 a.m., Tuesday, May 25, 1971, as
an emergency ordinance pursuant to § C-7.3 of the Charter of the City of
Lapeer, as revised.
2. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.657.
§ 2-32 LAPEER CODE § 2-34
1:20
ARTICLE VII
Local Officers Compensation Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 26 of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 2-35. Creation; composition, population; qualification; terms of
office; time of appointment; vacancies; eligibility restriction.
§ 2-36. Determination of salaries; rejection by legislative
resolution; effective date; existing salary; expenses.
The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall determine salaries of all
such local elected officials, which determination shall be the salaries, unless
the City Commission, by resolution adopted by 2/3 of the members elected
to and serving on the City Commission, reject them. The determinations
of the Local Officers Compensation Commission shall be effective 30 days
following their filing with the City Clerk unless rejected by the City
Commission. In case of rejection, the existing salaries shall prevail. Any
expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition
to salary shall be expenses incurred in the course of City business and
accounted for to the City.
§ 2-37. Meetings and time of determination; quorum; Chairman;
session days; compensation and expenses. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall meet for no more than
15 days in 1975 and every odd-numbered year thereafter and shall make
its determinations within 45 days of its first meeting. A majority of the
members of the Local Officers Compensation Commission constitute a
quorum for conducting the business of the Commission. The Local Officers
Compensation Commission shall take no action or make determinations
without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving
on the Commission. The Local Officers Compensation shall elect a Chairman
A. There shall be established a Local Officers Compensation Commission,
which shall determine the salaries of all local elected officials. The
Local Officers Compensation Commission shall consist of five members
who are registered electors of the City of Lapeer, to be appointed by the
Mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and
serving on the City Commission. The terms of office shall be five years,
except that of the member(s) first appointed, one shall be appointed for
a term of one, two, three, four, and five years. All members shall be
appointed within 30 days after the effective date of this article.
B. Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1, of the year of
appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial, or
executive branch of any level of government or any members of the
immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a
member of the Commission.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37
1:21
from among its members. "Session days" means any calendar day on which
the Local Officers Compensation Commission meets and a quorum is
present. The members of the Local Officers Compensation Commission shall
receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 2-38. Implementation by resolution; change of procedure, time
and method.
The City Commission shall implement this provision by resolution. After
one year following the date the article goes into effect, the procedure
for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by
charter amendment or revision.
§ 2-39. Referendum or other petitions; signatures of electors;
conduct of election; effectiveness of determination.
Within 60 days after the effective date of the article, a petition or a
referendum on the article may be filed in accordance with the procedure
provided in the Charter or otherwise by filing a petition with the City Clerk
containing the signatures of at least 5% of the registered electors of such
City on the effective date of the article, in which case, the election shall be
conducted in the same manner as an election on a Charter amendment. If
a petition for referendum is filed, any determination of the Local Officers
Compensation Commission shall not be effective until the article has been
approved by the electors.
§ 2-40. Superseding effect of ordinance.
This article shall supersede and take precedence over all existing Charter
provisions and other ordinances of the City relating to either the fixing of
salaries of elected officials or establishing a procedure for the fixing of said
salaries, this article having been adopted pursuant to Act 8 of the Public
Acts of 1972, being MCLA § 117.5c.
§ 2-41. Severability.
This article and each section provision and part thereof are hereby declared
to be severable and should any portion thereof be judged invalid or
unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall
not affect the remaining provisions of this article.
§ 2-42. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on November 30, 1974.
§ 2-37 LAPEER CODE § 2-42
1:22
ARTICLE VIII
Youth Council
[Adopted 8-21-2017 (Ch. 67 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 2-43. Establishment and purpose.
There is established a Youth Council, whose mission is to serve as a conduit
between the local governments and their younger constituents and help
create a network for the exchange of ideas between City government and
youth in our community. Voice will be given to the members of the Youth
Council to bring all issues, great and small, to the forefront. Conversely,
the Youth Council will bring the government's voice to the youth, showing
all the opportunities to enrich the youth of the City of Lapeer. Bringing
youth and the government together gives both more power to better the
community.
§ 2-44. Membership.
The Youth Council created herein shall consist of the following members:
§ 2-45. Meetings.
The schedule of meetings shall be established by the majority of the
membership and stated within its Bylaws, Rules and Procedures, but no less
than one meeting per month.
§ 2-46. Bylaws, rules and procedures.
The Youth Council, with assistance of the Mayor or City Commission
member, will prepare Bylaws, Rules and Procedures for presentation to the
City Commission for approval.
§ 2-47. Objectives and purposes.
The objectives and purposes of the Youth Council responsibilities may
include any or all of the following:
A. One nonvoting, either the Mayor or a City Commissioner, shall be
appointed to the Youth Council by the Mayor and approved by the City
Commission for the purpose of providing guidance and direction to the
Youth Council and its functions.
B. A minimum of seven but no more than 11 members. Members shall be
residents of the City, all of whom shall be at the time of their
appointment enrolled in a secondary school and be in either their 9th,
10th or 11th grade school years and be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Commission. The number of members shall be
determined by the Youth Council and stated within its Bylaws, Rules of
Procedure.
§ 2-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47
1:23
§ 2-48. Budget and finance.
The Youth Council shall formulate, make recommendations for, and present
to the Mayor and City Commission on an annual basis for consideration
by the City Commission an estimate of the costs and expenses necessary
to carry on the work of the Youth Council by January 1 of each year. The
Youth Council may also accept contributions and donations from individuals,
firms, corporations or other sources.
§ 2-49. Consultation with other agencies.
The Youth Council may solicit the help of other public agencies and higher
educational institutions, as well as private organizations and agencies,
concerned with the educational, recreational, social and cultural needs of
the youth of the City in its efforts to fulfill its duties as described herein.
A. Charged with the authority and responsibility of making
recommendations to the City concerning the needs and concerns of
youth in the community and the appropriate means by which public and
private agencies in cooperation with volunteer efforts may address such
needs and concerns.
B. All programs and activities will be sent to the City Commission for
approval.
C. Advise the Mayor and City Commission on policy issues relating to
youth and families.
D. Advise the Mayor and Commission on all youth matters referred to it by
the Commission.
E. Represent youth at the regular, special or workshop meetings of the
City Commission.
F. Represent the City of Lapeer at the Michigan Municipal League
sponsoring events.
§ 2-47 LAPEER CODE § 2-49
1:24
Chapter 3
FOOD AND HEALTH
§ 3-1. Signs or notices regarding public health.
§ 3-2. Noxious weeds. [Amended 4-10-1996; 7-23-2009]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove,
deface or conceal any sign or notice posted upon any building, structure
or premises by an officer or employee of the City of Lapeer, relating to
any public health, safety regulations or precautions.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, or other person lawfully
in possession of such building, structure or premises to maintain and
preserve such posted signs and notices, and upon proof of the removal,
defacement, or concealments of such posted signs or notices, the
owner, lessee, tenant or other person lawfully in possession shall be
presumed to have removed, defaced or concealed said signs or notices,
as the case may be, provided, that nothing shall preclude the rebuttal of
said presumption upon presentation of sufficient evidence.
A. Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or
other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the
City are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone having control of property in the City of
Lapeer, whether as owner, owner's agent, or occupant, to permit poison
ivy, poison sumac, poison oak, or other plants injurious to health, to
grow where they may cause injury or discomfort to any person or to
permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or
other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding eight inches
anywhere in the City; any such plants or weeds exceeding such height
are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
C. It shall be the duty of any persons having control of property in the City
of Lapeer, whether as owner, owner's agent, or occupant, within 200
feet of streets, public rights-of-way or improved property, public or
private, to cause to be cut or destroyed all noxious weeds or other
weeds, grass, brush, or uncontrolled tree growth which are the height
of eight inches or more in such manner as shall effectually prevent such
weeds from bearing seeds or spreading to adjoining property, as often
as may be necessary from May 1 through October 31 each year.
D. No person, after having been notified by the Code Enforcement Officer,
shall permit or cause to be maintained upon his or her premises a public
nuisance as defined in Subsection A of this section.
E. It shall be the duty of the owner, owner's agent or occupant in charge of
any land in the City of Lapeer to remove from that land any plant
§ 2-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:25
material specifically listed in Subsection B above or weeds of eight or
more inches in height within seven days, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, after notice to do so.
F. Whenever there are upon any defined lands within the municipality, the
plant material specifically listed in Subsection B above or weeds of
eight or more inches in height, and no person can be found in the City of
Lapeer who either is or claims to represent the owner, the City Manager
shall give notice by publication once in one newspaper of general
circulation in the City, requiring the removal of the weeds. The notice
shall specify the land from which weeds are to be removed, the
character of the work to be done and the time allowed for doing the
same.
G. If the plant material specifically listed in Subsection B above or weeds
are not removed as provided and within the time so specified by the
notice required by Subsection F of this section, it shall be the duty of
the City Manager to cause their removal, and the owner of the property
shall be held liable to the municipality for the cost incurred for the
removal of the plant material or weeds, including the cost of
advertising.
H. If any such person, firm, or corporation shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this section, the City may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense
shall be presented to the City Treasurer with a minimum of one hour
per lot or parcel, plus the actual cost of inspection, scheduling, and any
other associated cost.
I. The City Treasurer shall add to all said accounts, 20% of the amount of
all such expenditures to cover the administrative costs of the Treasurer,
and said total charges shall immediately constitute a lien and tax upon
the land upon which work was performed. The City Treasurer shall
forward a statement of the total charges assessed on each parcel of
property to the owner as shown by the last current assessment or tax
roll and said assessment shall be payable within 30 days without
additional cost. If said assessments are not paid within 30 days, a
penalty of 10% shall be added, and the total amount of the assessments
and penalty will be transferred or reassessed upon the next City tax
roll. The City Treasurer shall, on or before the 31st day of May of said
year, prepare a report of all parcels of property upon which said
assessments have been placed upon the City tax roll and which shall be
collected and paid in all respects as provided for the collection of
county taxes. When these assessments are collected, they shall be paid
into the City Treasury to reimburse the outlay therefrom as
hereinbefore provided.
J. The City Clerk shall, on or before the 30th day of April of each year, give
notice of the requirements and provisions of this chapter by causing
notice thereof published once a week for two successive weeks in a
§ 3-2 LAPEER CODE § 3-2
1:26
§ 3-3. Display of fruits and vegetables.
§ 3-4. Milk products.
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Lapeer. The foregoing
notice shall be in substantially the following form:
CITY OF LAPEER
NOTICE OF PROVISIONS OF
NOXIOUS WEED ORDINANCE
TO ALL OWNERS, OWNER'S AGENTS, OR OCCUPANTS OF
PROPERTY:
Notice is hereby given that, in accordance with § 3-2 of the Code of
the City of Lapeer, all noxious weeds, or other weeds, grass, brush or
uncontrolled tree growth which are a height of eight inches or more
growing upon any property in the City, shall be cut down, destroyed, or
removed as the case may be, as often as may be necessary from May 1
through October 31 each year.
In case any owner, owner's agent, or occupant shall fail or refuse to
comply with the above-mentioned Code section, the City may cause
said weeds, grass, brush, or uncontrolled tree growth, to be cut down,
destroyed or removed. All expenses incurred by the City will be
charged against the property and will be collected in the manner
provided in said section.
CITY CLERK
K. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be responsible for a civil infraction and/or a civil action for
abatement of nuisance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to display for the
purpose of public sale, upon the streets or sidewalk in the City of
Lapeer, any fruits or vegetables, unless said fruits or vegetables, so
displayed, are placed upon stands, benches or other containers
reaching to height of not less than two feet above the sidewalk or
ground upon which same is located, and extending not more than three
feet from the front of the store or building from which said display is
made.
B. If said fruits or vegetables are contained in waterproof containers, then
the above provisions relative to height shall not be effective.
A. No person shall, within the City of Lapeer, deliver, sell, offer or expose
for sale, or have in his possession with intent to sell for direct
consumption, any milk or milk product which is, or has been, produced,
stored, handled, processed or transported in any unclean or unsanitary
manner, or which is adulterated or misbranded, or produced, stored,
handled, processed or transported in violation of the laws of this state
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:27
§ 3-5. Tavern regulation.
or rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Agriculture
of the State of Michigan pertaining thereto.
B. No person shall sell or deliver or offer for sale or delivery within the
City any milk from any source other than a source approved by the
Health Officer. The Health Officer shall inspect any farm or plant
supplying milk for sale or deliver in the City, but may accept the
certification of inspection of any officer of the State Board of Health or
Agriculture or that of any duly qualified officer of any state or
municipality enforcing equivalent standards.3
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Includes any spirituous, vinous, malt or
fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated,
proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing 1/2 of
1% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage
purposes.
APPLICANT — Any person who seeks approval from the City of Lapeer
to sell alcoholic beverages.
CITY COMMISSION — The City Commission of the City of Lapeer,
Michigan.
CLUB — An association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, the
majority of whose members shall be citizens for the promotion of some
common object (not including associations organized for any
commercial or business purpose, the object of which is money profit),
owning, hiring or leasing a building, or space in a building, of such
extent and character as in the judgement of the City Commission may
be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodations of its members and their guests, and which shall have
been in existence for a period of not less than two years prior to
application for license under the provisions of this act.
HOTEL — A building which, in the judgement of the City Commission,
has been regularly used and kept open as such in a bona fide manner
for the feeding and lodging of guests, where all who conduct
themselves properly and who are able and ready to pay for such
services are received if there be accommodations for them.
LICENSEE — Any person who has been granted a license to sell
alcoholic beverages in the City of Lapeer by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
3. Editor's Note: Former § 3.05, Restaurant regulations, of the 1978 General Ordinances,
which previously followed this section, was repealed.
§ 3-4 LAPEER CODE § 3-5
1:28
SALE — Includes exchange, barter or traffic, furnishing or giving away
any alcoholic liquor.
SPIRITS — Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by
distillation, mixed with potable water and other substances in solution
and includes, among other things, wine containing an alcoholic content
of over 16% by volume.
B. Qualifications of applicants.
(1) No application to sell alcoholic beverages by the glass shall be
approved unless the applicant or transferee is a citizen of the State
of Michigan and of the United States.
(2) No application to sell alcoholic beverages by the glass shall be
approved if the applicant has been convicted of three or more
liquor violations or a felony in this state in any court or before the
Liquor Control Commission within a period of five years preceding
the receipt of the application, provided that this requirement may
be waived by an affirmative vote of the majority of the elected
members of the City Commission.
C. Standards required of premises.
(1) Sanitation.
(a) All licensees, and his agents and servants and employees, shall
wear clean clothing and be clean about their person. No person
who has an infectious disease in a communicable form, or who
is a carrier of such an infectious disease, shall be employed
where food or beverages are prepared, handled, stored or
served.
(b) All licensed establishments shall be equipped with two tanks
and one power spray or three tanks for the purpose of washing,
rinsing, disinfecting and sterilizing all bar and table service.
(c) All dishes, glasses, mugs, steins, cups and table service used in
the serving of food or beverages shall be effectively washed
and cleansed in clean hot water of not less than 110° F. Such
wash water shall contain an effective detergent or cleansing
agent. Immediately after washing and before using, the dishes,
glasses and utensils shall be effectively sanitized. Effectively
washed and cleansed dishes, glasses, and silverware or
utensils shall be interpreted to be that the dish, glass,
silverware or utensils is free of film and foreign material
including lipstick, lip marks and fingerprints on the food and
lip contact areas.
(d) Following sanitization, all dishes, glasses, silverware and
utensils shall be drained in an inverted position on sanitary
drain racks, trays or boards, with protection from flies, dust
and other contamination during storage.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:29
(e) All bars, tables, counters, coolers, extra beer tap rods,
refrigerators and all other fixtures or equipment and all
basements, rooms or other places used to serve or store beer,
wine or liquor, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner at
all times.
(f) All open windows, doors, and other openings to the outside
shall be screened and protected against flies.
(g) All licensed establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages
shall provide properly designated flush toilets for each sex.
Such toilets shall be so constructed as to assure complete
privacy as to segregation of the sexes.
(h) Toilets shall be easily accessible with no entrance through a
kitchen, or other room where food is prepared.
(i) Each toilet shall have outside ventilation provided by an
exterior window at least three square feet in area, fully
operable, or a vertical duct not less than 48 square inches in
area, leading to the exterior of the building.
(j) The minimum floor space of each toilet shall be five feet by
seven feet or 35 square feet.
(k) Such toilet rooms shall have close-fitting, tight doors and shall
have a nonabsorbent interior finish on floors, walls and
ceilings. All floors shall be equipped with a drain.
(l) Toilets for men shall have the following equipment: one wash
bowl with running water (hot and cold); one intermittent or
flush-type wall urinal (minimum length three feet); one flush
stool complete with cover (same to be segregated from urinal
by a partition and door) for each 100 patrons based on seating
capacity of the establishment; individual sanitary towels;
plenty of soap, sanitary toilet paper; and a metal receptacle for
accumulated wastes.
(m) Toilets for women shall have the same equipment as for men
except urinal, the amount of equipment to be determined the
same as for men.
(n) All toilets and wash rooms, including walls, floors, ceilings and
fixtures shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition; walls
and ceilings shall be light-colored. All such toilets and
washrooms shall be adequately lighted.
(o) All licensed establishments shall be equipped with hot and cold
running water from a source approved by the City of Lapeer.
(p) All licensed establishments shall be connected with a public
sewerage system, or to sanitary sewerage facilities approved
by the City of Lapeer.
§ 3-5 LAPEER CODE § 3-5
1:30
(2) Safety.
(a) All licensed establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages
shall have not less than two exits which in no way shall be
obstructed. Exit doors shall open outward. During the period of
occupancy, no exit door shall be locked, bolted or otherwise
fastened so that the door cannot be opened from the inside by
use of an ordinary door latch or knob or by pressure on the
door or on a panic release device. Every exit doorway from an
area with an occupant load of more than 100 persons shall be
marked with an exit sign. Exit sign letters shall be at least five
inches in height. Exits shall be illuminated at all times with
light having an intensity of not less than one footcandle at floor
level.
(b) The number of persons permitted in any building or portion
thereof used for dispensing alcoholic beverages shall not
exceed an occupancy density of one person per 15 square feet
of floor area. The maximum number of persons permitted shall
be conspicuously posted by the owner of the building by means
of a durable metal sign in each room where fixed seats are not
installed, and it shall be unlawful to remove or deface such
notice or to permit more than this legal number of persons
within such space.
(c) In each room where chairs, or tables and chairs, are used, the
arrangement shall be such as will provide for ready access by
aisles to each exit doorway. Aisles leading directly to exit
doorways shall have not less than 36 inches clear width which
shall not be obstructed by chairs, tables or other objects. Aisles
shall be located so that there will be not more than six
intervening seats between any seat and the nearest aisle.
(d) No decorative materials shall be used which will ignite and
allow flames to spread over the surface when exposed to a
match flame test applied to a piece removed from the material.
Testing shall be done in a safe place with the following
procedure: The piece of material shall be exposed to a flame
from a common match held in a horizontal position, 1/2 inch
underneath the piece, and at a constant location for a minimum
of 15 seconds; if the material ignites, it shall not be used as
decoration. Treatments used to accomplish this flameproofing
shall be renewed as often as may be necessary to maintain the
flameproof effect.
(e) It shall be the duty of the owner and the occupant of each
licensed establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages to
provide and maintain in good working condition suitable firedetecting
devices or extinguishing appliances as may be
specified by the City of Lapeer. Such devices or appliances may
consist of automatic fire alarm system, automatic sprinkler or
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:31
water spray system, stand pipe and hose, fixed or portable fire
extinguisher of a type suitable for the probable class of fire,
or suitable asbestos blankets, manual or automatic covers, or
carbon dioxide or other inert gas extinguishing systems. Any
of the foregoing devices or appliances installed in compliance
with any requirement of the City of Lapeer shall be maintained
in operative condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful
for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the
protection so required. It shall be the duty of the owner and
occupant of each building, or part of building, to properly train
sufficient regular employees in the use of fire appliances so
that such appliances can be quickly put in operation.
(3) Illumination. The minimum intensity of illumination prevailing in all
parts of licensed establishments at tabletop level shall be one
footcandle.
(4) Ventilation. All buildings or portions of buildings customarily used
for dispensing or consuming alcoholic beverages shall be provided
with light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an
area not less than 1/8 of the total floor area or shall be provided
with artificial lights and a mechanically operated ventilating
system. At least four changes of air per hour must be provided.
(5) General.
(a) No licensee shall erect or maintain any artificial blinds, screen,
shades or other obstructions which prevent a reasonable clear
view of the premises wherein alcoholic beverages are served.
(b) Every establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be
maintained in good, safe repair. All buildings or structures
which are structurally unsafe or are not provided with
adequate egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life, or constitute a hazard to
safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, shall not
be approved as a licensed establishment.
D. Conduct on the premises.
(1) Licensees.
(a) Prohibitions. No licensee, his agents, servants, or employees
shall:
[1] Sell, give or furnish any alcoholic liquor to a person under
21 years of age.
[2] Sell, give or furnish any alcoholic liquor to any person in
an intoxicated condition.
§ 3-5 LAPEER CODE § 3-5
1:32
[3] Be in an intoxicated condition upon the licensed premises
or allow an intoxicated person to frequent, loiter or be
employed upon the licensed premises.
[4] Engage in any illegal occupation or illegal act on or beyond
his licensed premises.
[5] Refuse, fail or neglect to cooperate with any law
enforcement officer in the performance of such officer's
duties.
[6] Allow in or upon his licensed premises any improper
conduct, disturbances, lewdness, immoral activities,
indecent, profane or obscene language, songs,
entertainment, literature, pictures or advertising material,
or cause to have printed or distributed and lewd, immoral,
indecent, or obscene literature, pictures or advertising
material.
[7] Suffer or allow in or upon his licensed premises the
annoying or molesting of patrons or employees by other
patrons or employees, or any accosting and/or soliciting
for immoral purposes.
[8] Permit his licensed premises to be frequented by or
become the meeting place, hangout or rendezvous for
persons known to engage in the use, sale or distribution of
narcotics or any other illegal occupation or business.
[9] Allow upon his licensed premises, slot machines, punch or
pull boards, dice games, or any gambling devices,
machines or apparatus whatsoever, or any other
mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device, or in any way contrary to the laws of the
State of Michigan. The presence of any such device,
machine, apparatus, or mechanism upon the premises of
any licensed establishment shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this subsection. Except for the Michigan
State Lottery, no gambling or gaming of any kind shall be
permitted on the premises of any licensed establishment.
[Amended 12-1-1978]
[10] Serve to or permit any patron to consume alcoholic liquor
unless such patron is either seated or standing at a bar or
seated at a table or counter.
[11] Have or maintain any rooms in connection with the
licensed premises, excepting rooms used for toilets and
kitchens; provided, however, that this sentence shall not
apply to premises operated as a hotel or club. No licensee
shall have or permit any inside connection, entrance,
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:33
doorway or aperture between his licensed premises and
the premises of another person.
[12] Permit any person engaged in the serving of food or
alcoholic beverages in this establishment to eat, drink, or
mingle with the patrons.
[13] Give away any alcoholic liquor, in connection with the
licensee's business, except in those limited circumstances
permitted by the Michigan Liquor Control Act.4
[14] Permit the sale of alcoholic beverages upon any portion of
his premises for which he may have leased, sold or
transferred the right of possession to another person not
licensed.
(b) Requirements. Every licensee shall have posted in a
conspicuous place on his licensed premises a plainly visible
printed list or menu showing the various types and prices of
alcoholic drinks which he offers for sale.
(2) Persons under the age of 21 years. Any person under the age of 21
years purchasing or offering to purchase beer or wine, or any
alcoholic beverage, who represents himself falsely to be over the
age of 21 years, or who makes false statement or gives false
information regarding his age to any police officer or licensee or his
agent, servant or employee in charge of any place where beer and
wine and other alcoholic beverages are sold or any other person
who makes false representation in order to procure the sale or
furnishing of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage to a person
under the age of 18 years, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to the penalties provided in this chapter.
E. Enforcement and inspection.
(1) Enforcement of this chapter and inspections thereunder shall be
conducted by the City Manager and or other enforcement officers,
assistants, or employees that may be designated by the City
Manager from time to time to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The premises of any licensee shall be open at all reasonable times
for inspection by City enforcement officers and no licensee shall
fail, refuse or neglect to obey any order of such officer issued
relative to the operation of his establishment.
F. Suspension or revocation of approval.
(1) The City Commission shall have the right at any time by resolution
to suspend the sale, furnishing, gift or delivery of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises throughout the entire
4. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 436.1101 et seq.
§ 3-5 LAPEER CODE § 3-5
1:34
§ 3-6. Nuisances.
City of Lapeer or any part thereof, whenever the Commission
deems such action necessary by reasons of any public emergency.
(2) Violations either of this chapter, the rules and regulations of the
Liquor Control Commission, or of any law or ordinance relative to
the use of the premises or the conduct of any licensee, may be used
as the basis for a request to the Liquor Control Commission to
revoke or suspend such licenses issued by that organization. The
City Commission shall in matters involving revocation, by
resolution direct that a hearing be had before the City Commission
upon the giving of not less than three days' notice to the approved
applicant involved. Service of such notice may be made personally
upon the approved applicant or by posting a copy of this resolution
at the premises where his sales of alcoholic beverages are
conducted or at his usual place of abode. A majority vote of the
elected members of the City Commission is necessary to carry any
proposition to request revocation of such license.
G. Authority of City Commission. This section shall not operate in
limitation of any power of authority vested in the City of Lapeer or the
City Commission by virtue of any existing constitutional or statutory
provisions, and shall be considered to be only supplementary to the
exercise or use of such vested authority and not in derogation thereof.
H. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any other
provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted, and upon
conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, together with the costs of
prosecution for each violation.
A. No person having control or management of any dwelling, building,
structure, excavation, business pursuit, matter or thing, shall allow any
public nuisance to be created or to exist on the premises of which such
person is the owner or exercises control or management thereof; nor
shall any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any public or
private street, alleyway or any premises whatever, or having control, or
management thereof, within the City of Lapeer, create or maintain a
nuisance therein.
B. No person shall himself or by another throw, place or deposit in any
street, highway, lane, alley, or public place or square, or in any private
place or premises, any glass bottles; tin cans; glass, broken or
unbroken; any metal, earthenware, tacks, cinders or other substance of
a nature likely to cause injury to travelers or pedestrians, or to bicycles
or motor vehicles, or which might injure, cut or puncture any pneumatic
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:35
§ 3-7. Animals and pets.
tire; nor shall any person, firm or corporation, himself or by another
throw, place, deposit, permit to remain or leave on any street, highway,
alley, lane, public place or square, or in any private place or premises,
any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, dirt or rubbish,
garbage, excrement, filth, rot, unclean or nauseous water, liquid or
gaseous fluids or any other substance whatever injurious to the health
and comfort and public welfare. In the case of any alley or private
premises where any substance above named shall exist or be or has
been deposited, it shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any
lot or premises within 24 hours after having been notified by the City
Health Officer or Chief of Police to remove from the half of said alley
adjoining said lot or from said private premises all such substances.
C. No person shall permit on his, or her or its premises within the
boundaries of the City, of which he, she or it may be the occupants or
occupant, agent or agents, having charge thereof, the exercise of any
unwholesome or offensive trade of calling, or suffer any building, sewer
or other thing whatsoever to remain on such premises until in any
manner the same shall become offensive, hurtful, dangerous or
unwholesome to the neighborhood or travelers.
D. Whenever any dwelling, building, structure, excavation, business
pursuit, matter or thing, or the lot upon which it is situated, or the
plumbing, sewerage, lighting or ventilation thereof is, in the opinion of
the City Health Officer or Chief of Police, in condition or in effect
dangerous or detrimental to the life, safety or health or is likely to cause
any unwholesome, noisome or offensive smell, which, in the opinion of
such City Health Officer or Chief of Police, may declare the same to the
extent he may testify is a public nuisance and may order the same to be
remedied, removed, abated, suspended, altered or otherwise improved
or purified as the order may specify. If any order of the City Health
Officer or Chief of Police issued under the authority of this section is not
complied with or so far complied with as they may regard as
reasonable, within such time as said order may designate, then such
order may be executed by said City Health Officer of Chief or Police,
their officers, agents, employees, or contractors.
A. Dog Law adopted. The Lapeer County Dog Wardens are authorized to
operate inside the incorporated limits of the City of Lapeer for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of Act 339 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1919, as amended, which act is known as the Michigan Dog
Law.5
B. Animals or fowl at large. No person shall permit any fowl or animal to
run at large in the City.
5. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 287.261 et seq.
§ 3-6 LAPEER CODE § 3-7
1:36
Chapter 4
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 4-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULKY WASTE — Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines,
furniture and other household waste of this nature.
BUNDLE — Tree, shrub and brush trimmings, newspapers and/or
magazines securely tied together forming an easily handled package, not to
exceed four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight.
C. Keeping of animals. No person shall keep or confine horses, ponies,
hogs, cattle, sheep or any other animals in such manner that they
become offensive to those residing near or to the public health.
D. Keeping poultry. No person shall keep chickens or other fowl in any
house or yard within 50 feet of the dwelling house of any other person
except by permission of such other person.
E. Cruelty to animals. No person shall not wantonly or cruelly ill-treat or
injure any dog or other domestic animal. No person shall cause dogs to
fight with each other or with other animals.
F. Carcass removal and burial. When any beast, bird or animal dies within
the City the owner or person in possession of it shall within 12 hours
thereafter cause the carcass to be removed beyond the City limits or
bury the same so that the entire carcass shall be covered with earth no
less than three feet in depth above such carcass. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
G. Vicious dogs. The owner of any vicious dog shall keep such dog in a
securely enclosed area or on a leash and muzzled at all times.
[Amended 6-24-1987; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
H. Limitation on number of dogs. No person shall keep or allow to remain
on premises they own, occupy, or control, more than three dogs.
Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to: [Amended
4-25-1990]
(1) Commercial kennels operated in accordance with Chapter 7,
Zoning, in zoning districts providing for commercial kennels.
(2) A female dog with her puppies, up to the first 90 days from the date
of birth of the puppies, so long as the puppies are not being bred or
raised for remuneration or as a business operation.
§ 3-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1
1:37
COMMERCIAL REFUSE — The miscellaneous waste material, such as
garbage, rubbish and ashes, resulting from the operation of business
enterprises and institutions. Such term includes construction waste but
excludes industrial trade waste.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste from building construction, alteration,
demolition or repair and dirt from excavations.
CONTAINER — A receptacle with a capacity of 20 gallons or greater,
constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having a tight-fitting lid, being
watertight and verminproof. No container shall have ragged or sharp edges
or any other defect liable to hamper or injure any person depositing refuse
is or collecting the contents thereof.
CURBSIDE — That portion of a right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled
City roadways.
CURBSIDE UNLIMITED — A residential premises refuse collection service
option which allows the customer to place an unlimited amount of
residential refuse generated at such residential premises at the curb for
pickup once a week.
GARBAGE — Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetables.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste, or a combination of waste and other
discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, which, because of its quality, concentration or physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or serious
incapacitating, but reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment, if improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. "Hazardous waste"
does not include material which is sold for recycling or treatment or stored
for one year or less, solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage
discharge, solid or dissolved material in an irrigation return flow discharge,
authorized industrial discharge to a municipal treatment system or
industrial discharge which is a point source subject to permits under
Section 402 of the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. § 1342, or is a source,
special nuclear or by-product material, as defined by the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2011 to 2282. (See MCLA § 324.11101 et seq.,
Hazardous Waste Management, PA 1994, No. 451, as amended.)[Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — All trade wastes peculiar to industrial
manufacturing or processing plants, including hazardous refuse, but not
including commercial refuse.
LICENSEE — A person who has been issued a license by the City to collect,
transport or dispose of refuse.
§ 4-1 LAPEER CODE § 4-1
1:38
MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — A parcel of land containing five or
more residential units.
NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES — Commercial, industrial or other
institutional premises.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into ambient air. Open burning does not
include road flares, smudge pots and similar devices associated with safety
or occupational uses.[Amended 1-11-2007]
PLASTIC BAG — A polyethylene or similar plastic bag of not less than 1
1/2 mils thickness, designed to store refuse and secure in a manner to
prevent spillage, leakage or other release of its contents by the use of
wire, string or ties appropriate for this purpose. The total weight of a bag
and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds and not be used for compost
materials.[Amended 9-13-2007]
PREMISES — A parcel of land including any building, improvement or
appurtenance thereon, which, by legal construction or by actuality, forms
on enclosure with it.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Glass (brown, green and clear), plastic No. 2
(milk jugs, etc.), tin (Campbell soup cans, etc.), and aluminum (e.g., cat food
cans), and such other material capable of being recycled as may be specified
in the regulations promulgated pursuant to § 4-3.
REFUSE — Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator
residue, small dead animals, bulky waste, and solid construction, hazardous
industrial and market wastes.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — A parcel of land containing four or fewer
residential units.
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE — Refuse generated from normal household use.
"Residential refuse" does not include commercial refuse, construction
waste, hazardous waste, industrial waste or small dead animals exceeding
10 pounds in weight.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal
containers, yard clippings, tree trimmings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery,
demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment
to the public health and safety.
SMALL DEAD ANIMALS — Carcasses of small animals, fish and fowl not
exceeding 10 pounds in weight.
STORAGE — The accumulation of materials which are awaiting collection,
transportation, and disposal.[Amended 9-25-1991]
§ 4-2. Responsibility of owners and occupants.
Every owner, occupant, or person in possession of a residential or
nonresidential premises in the City is required to have accumulations of
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:39
refuse removed and disposed of in accordance with this chapter and in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter.
§ 4-3. Rules and regulations.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations
as from time to time appear to him or her to be necessary to carry out
the intent of this chapter, provided that such rules are not in conflict with
this or any other law of the City or other appropriate governmental unit,
and provided, further, that such rules are approved by the City Commission.
Failure to observe any approved rule or regulation shall be a violation of
this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be published and available for
distribution at the City Clerk's Office.
§ 4-4. Compliance required.
No owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any building, structure, property
or premises in the City shall store, collect, transport or dispose of any
refuse, garbage, rubbish or other rejected, unwanted or discharged waste
materials, except in compliance with this chapter and applicable state,
federal and local laws, rules and regulations.
§ 4-5. Preparation of garbage.
All garbage intended for collection shall be drained of all free liquid. The
garbage shall be wrapped or placed in closed containers.
§ 4-6. Construction waste.
The owner, contractor, occupant or other person responsible for
construction work shall remove from the land, within a reasonable time
after the completion of such construction work, all construction waste. Such
materials shall be removed to an approved disposal area.
§ 4-7. Hazardous waste. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Hazardous waste disposal shall be the responsibility of the person who
produced, used or possessed the same and shall not be disposed of within
the City. MCLA § 324.11101 et seq., Hazardous Waste Management (PA
1994, No. 451)., as amended, shall apply where appropriate.
§ 4-8. Number of containers.
The owner and/or occupant of all premises within the City shall provide
containers of sufficient number and size for the storage of refuse between
collections. All containers shall be kept clean and in good repair.
§ 4-2 LAPEER CODE § 4-9
1:40
§ 4-9. Construction and demolition sites.
All owners or persons in control of construction and demolition sites shall
provide adequate numbers of containers for loose debris, paper, building
material waste, and other trash produced by those working on the site. All
loose refuse shall be containerized at the end of each day, and the site shall
be kept in a reasonably clean and litter-free condition.
§ 4-10. Parking lots.
All owners or persons in control of parking lots, including drive-in
restaurants, tavern, shopping centers, supermarkets and grocery stores,
shall have an adequate number of refuse containers. All persons using
such parking areas shall use such refuse receptacles or containers for the
purposes intended, and no person shall dump, scatter or throw upon any
such parking lot any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind.
§ 4-11. Preparation of refuse and recyclable material for pickup.
[Amended 9-25-1991]
§ 4-12. Storage on residential premises.
A. Garbage shall be wrapped or placed in closed containers. Rubbish shall
be placed in a container so as to prevent scattering or littering, or may
be cut, baled, tied, bundled or packaged so as not to exceed 50 pounds
in weight or four feet in length. Residential refuse that is larger than
that which can be stored according to this section shall be stored in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this
chapter.
B. Recyclable material shall not be wrapped in plastic nor paper bags
when placed in the recyclable bins for the curbside pickup. Only the
recyclable material itself shall be placed in the recyclable material bins.
A. Every owner, occupant or person in possession of residential premises
in the City shall provide for his or her residential unit adequate
numbers of proper containers or receptacles, as provided in this
chapter. Containers must be located in such a manner as to prevent
them from being overturned. Containers shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and free from any substance which will attract or
breed flies, mosquitoes or other insects.
B. Every owner, occupant or person in possession of residential premises
in the City shall keep recyclable material bins and garbage containers
in a clean and sanitary condition and free from any substance which will
attract or breed flies, mosquitoes, or other insects. The bins and
containers must be located in such a manner so as to prevent them from
being overturned.
C. Rubbish and yard waste which cannot be secured in a container may be
secured in bundles or may be deposited in biodegradable paper bags.
§ 4-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:41
§ 4-13. Types of residential collection services. [Amended
6-24-1992]
§ 4-14. Placement of containers and bags for collection; removal of
doors from appliances.
For curbside unlimited collection, all containers, bags, bundles and bulky
wastes shall be place at curbside in a manner to prevent scattering. The
licensee may decline to collect any container, bag, bundle and bulky waste
item not so placed. Doors from refrigerators and freezers must be removed
before being stored for collection.
§ 4-15. Time for depositing refuse and removing contents.
[Amended 9-25-1991]
For residential premises, recyclable material, garbage or refuse shall not be
placed for collection earlier than 1:00 p.m. on the day prior to scheduled
No plastic bags are allowed or will be picked up that contain yard
waste. [Amended 9-13-2007]
D. For bulky waste, containerization is not required. However, such bulky
waste items shall be secured so as to prevent scattering.
E. No person shall use plastic bags for unprotected outdoor storage or
refuse. Plastic bags containing all forms of refuse, with the exception of
compost material (grass, leaves, etc.), may be set out for scheduled
collection in accordance with § 4-15. Storage of plastic bags containing
refuse shall be considered unprotected when not used as liners for
approved containers or not place in an enclosure affording reasonable
protection. [Amended 9-13-2007]
F. No person shall use a refuse container of another.
G. No person shall store refuse or recyclable material in the front of their
premises except in accordance with § 4-15. [Amended 9-25-1991]
A. For residential premises, and for mobile home parks, licensees shall:
(1) Include, with option for solid waste collection, the pickup of
recyclable materials at least once a week.
(2) Provide the option of curbside unlimited collection service (to
include pickup of garbage, refuse, leaves, lawn debris and once a
week pickup of recyclable material).
B. Licensee may offer other options for different types of collection service
to owners and/or occupants of dwelling units, but licensee must include
the pickup of recyclable materials at least once a week with any other
option of collection service offered to owners and/or occupants at
residential premises and to owners and/or occupants of individual
dwelling units in mobile home parks.
§ 4-12 LAPEER CODE § 4-15
1:42
collection. After the collection of refuse and/or recyclable material has been
made, empty bins and containers shall be removed by the customer from
the curb area no later than 9:00 a.m. on the day following collection.
§ 4-16. Nuisances; accumulations of refuse; removal by City.
§ 4-17. Interference with containers, refuse and recyclable
material. [Amended 9-25-1991]
No person other than the owner or person lawfully in control of any
premises or any authorized employee of a person licensed by the City for
the collection or removal of refuse, shall interfere in any manner with a
container or plastic bags used for the accumulation or storage of refuse or
recyclable material or remove any such container from the location where
it shall have been placed by the owner or person lawfully in control of the
premises; nor shall any such person disturb or remove refuse or recyclable
matter placed for collection.
§ 4-18. Unlawful dumping.
No person shall dump, deposit, place or scatter any refuse, ashes or yard
wastes within the City, except at an approved disposal area and in
compliance with applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
§ 4-19. Littering; scattering of refuse.
A. Accumulations or deposits of refuse remaining on premises are hereby
declared to be a nuisance. No owner or occupant of any premises within
the City shall permit the accumulation of refuse upon the premises for a
period of more than 10 days. No person shall permit accumulations or
deposits of refuse to remain upon premises occupied or owned by him
or her, except as permitted by this chapter.
B. The City shall first investigate the existence of an alleged nuisance to
determine whether or not a nuisance exists and to further determine
the person who has created or is committing or maintaining such
nuisance. The City shall then give written notice to the person
responsible for the creation, commission or maintenance of such
nuisance, specifying in particular the nature thereof, the corrective
action to be taken to abate the same and the time limit for the
abatement of such nuisance, which shall be a reasonable time. If, at the
expiration of the time limit in such notice, the person responsible for
the commission, creation or maintenance of the nuisance has not
complied, the City may initiate such cleanup as identified in the notice.
The cost of such cleanup shall be a debt owed the City by the person
responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of such
nuisance, and if the nuisance is attributable to the use, occupancy or
ownership of any land or premises within the City, such cost may be
charged against such premises.
§ 4-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-19
1:43
§ 4-20. Vacant lots.
Any person owning or having a possessory interest in any lot or parcel of
land within the City which is vacant is responsible for securing, collecting
and disposing of refuse which may accumulate thereon by contracting
with a person licensed in accordance with this chapter or by self-removal
through proper collection and storage of refuse, transporting the refuse in a
manner to prevent littering or any other nuisance and depositing the same
at an approved disposal area, in accordance with applicable local, state and
federal laws, rules and regulations.
§ 4-21. Open burning.
A. No person shall cast, spill, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the
City any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other
public place, or onto any other premises within the City.
B. The owner and/or occupant of any premises shall clean up and remove
any scattered refuse resulting from the breakage, opening or handling
of any container, plastic bag or receptacles placed by him or her for
collection from the premises after the same has been scattered.
A. No persons shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such
fire to be kindled or maintained on any premises without having
obtained a permit or other proper authorization therefor from the fire
code official. This restriction shall not apply to the use of charcoal and
similar materials for the purpose of food preparation. Burning of
firewood, lumber, construction waste, furniture, brush, leaves, grass,
garbage, small dead animals, any material made of or coated with
rubber, plastic, leather, petroleum based materials or flammable or
combustible liquids is prohibited.
B. Exceptions.
(1) The fire code official may permit the burning of firewood for
warming purposes only, and only at commercial or special events.
Permits will be issued solely at the discretion of the fire code
official, based on weather and property conditions. [Amended
1-11-2007]
(2) Daily use of the designated pit at the water tower travel trailer park
is permitted between May 1 and October 31 unless a local burning
ban has been imposed by the fire code official. The fire pit is
available for the use of persons staying at the campground and by
City residents by appointment. [Amended 9-18-2008]
§ 4-19 LAPEER CODE § 4-22
1:44
§ 4-22. Scavenging.
No person shall scavenge refuse left for disposal or rifle the same, and
no person shall damage or destroy bags or containers of refuse placed for
storage.
§ 4-23. Collection and disposal as business; license required.
No person shall engage in the business of collection, transportation or
disposal of refuse in the City without first obtaining a license therefor as
provided in this chapter.
§ 4-24. License application.
§ 4-25. Licensee indemnification.
A licensee shall indemnify the City from any and all liability, loss or damage,
including court costs and attorney fees, which the City may suffer from as a
result of claims, demands, settlements, or judgments against it arising from
activities relating to refuse collection and disposal.
A. Application for a license under this chapter shall be made in writing to
the City Clerk's office upon blanks furnished by such office. Each
applicant in such application shall state the following:
(1) Name of individual completing application.
(2) Residence and business address.
(3) The number, year, and style of vehicles to be used and owned by the
applicant.
(4) Place or places where vehicles to be used are parked overnight.
(5) Whether applicant has ever been denied a license similar to the one
being requested for any other municipality.
(6) Whether the applicant has ever had a license revoked for any other
municipality.
(7) How many years the applicant has been in business as a solid waste
hauler under the present business name.
(8) Supply a financial statement of applicant.
(9) Two municipal references.
(10) Customer fee schedule.
B. Such application shall also contain an agreement by the applicant to
comply with all provisions of this chapter and all other laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the conduct of such
business now in force or which may hereafter be adopted.
§ 4-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26
1:45
§ 4-26. Licensee vehicle requirements.
All vehicles of any licensee carrying refuse under this chapter shall have
on both sides thereof a sign containing the name of the licensee, with the
telephone number and the number of the vehicle, all of which shall be
painted thereon in plain and unobscured letters not less than four inches in
height. The number of the vehicle shall be registered in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 4-27. Licensee fee, bonding and insurance requirements.
[Amended 9-19-2011]
Every person who engages in the business of collection, transportation
or disposal of refuse in the City shall meet the bonding and reasonable
insurance requirements established by the City. The license year shall be
from July 1 to the succeeding June 30 and the fee shall be payable in
advance. The licensing fee shall be as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee
Schedule.6
§ 4-28. Compliance of licensee; license revocation.
The City Manager may recommend that the City Commission consider the
revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. The licensee shall
be given an opportunity to appear before the City Commission and present
evidence as to why a license should not be revoked. Ground for revocation
of a license include the following:
A. Making of any false or misleading statements in the application for a
license.
B. Operating the licensed vehicles in a manner causing or likely to cause
damage to persons or property.
C. Conviction of a licensee or any employee of licensee of any criminal
offense reasonably related to the issue of whether the licensee is
suitable to continue as a licensee.
D. Violations by the licensee or any employees of the licensee of any of the
terms and provisions of this chapter.
E. The licensee or any employees of any licensee using abusive language
to City residents or City employees, creating a disturbance in the
performance of the work under this license, damaging property during
the performance of the work under this license, or creating or
maintaining a traffic hazard during the performance of the work under
this license.
6. Editor's Note: The current Fee Schedule is on file in the City offices.
§ 4-26 LAPEER CODE § 4-29
1:46
§ 4-29. Licensee vehicle maintenance.
Vehicles used in the transportation of refuse shall be kept clean and in good
repair. The hauling body shall be watertight and completely enclosed on
all sides. Vehicles shall be maintained and operated so that no portion of
their contents is spilled or allowed to remain on any public highway. All
vehicles shall be cleaned at intervals frequent enough to maintain the unit
in a sanitary condition as free from disagreeable odor as possible to prevent
nuisance or vermin attraction. A vehicle that fails to meet the requirements
of this chapter shall be removed from service until it complies or its use
shall be discontinued.
§ 4-30. Licensee operation. [Amended 8-12-1987; 9-27-1991]
A. The openings of each vehicle shall be closed and doors or covers shall
be secured by an adequate latch or restraining mechanism to keep
them closed while transporting refuse. The driver and licensee shall see
that the available cover is in the proper position. A special covering
shall be used where conditions require control of odor, vermin, liquids,
dust or smoke.
B. It shall be the duty of licensee to transfer the contents of all containers
for which they have contracted for collection with a customer into
vehicles licenses under this chapter, using care to avoid spilling. It shall
be the duty of the licensee or his or her designated agent to clean up all
garbage or rubbish spilled during collection and completely empty the
containers and replace the lids thereon.
C. Each vehicle shall be loaded in a manner to minimize the spilling of
materials.
D. The operator of a refuse transporting unit shall be responsible for
immediately cleaning up any spillage which might occur.
E. No vehicle shall be parked in a residential area longer than necessary
to collect refuse unless it is parked not less than 500 feet from adjacent
residences. Vehicles shall not be parked or stored at any location so as
to cause a hazard to health or nuisance.
F. All licensees shall provided a toll-free telephone number to receive
complaints through normal daytime business hours and provide
someone to answer and dispose of such complaints within 24 hours.
G. The licensee shall not damage cans which are owned by customers or
other property while making collections and shall return cans to their
designated place of collection.
H. A complaint log shall be maintained by the licensee indicating the time
and date complaints are received and the date and time the responsive
action was taken.
§ 4-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30
1:47
Chapter 5
WATER AND SEWERS
§ 5-1. Purpose; policy; objectives. [Amended 4-24-1985;
10-13-2004]
I. No refuse shall be collected from residential premises in the City except
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
J. Licensee shall not raise the rates or charges for the work performed
under this license during the duration of such license without the prior
approval of the City Commission.
K. Licensee serving residential premises and mobile home parks shall
provide a semiannual report to City which lists the number and
percentage of customers participating in recycling and which describes
how and where the recyclable materials are disbursed. The report shall
include such documentation, records, receipts, and other objective
information as shall be reasonably necessary for the City to determine
that no materials collected in the recycling program were sent to a
landfill, incinerator, or otherwise not properly recycled.
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the
public-owned treatment works (POTW), water distribution system and
collection system of the City of Lapeer (City) and enables the City to
protect public health in conformity with all applicable local, state, and
federal laws relating thereto.
B. The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW and City
collection system which will interfere with the normal operation of
the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW and City
systems which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW and
which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the
atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system.
(4) To improve the opportunity to insure safe drinking water.
C. The chapter provides for the regulation of discharge into the publicowned
treatment works and City collection systems and for the use,
connection and maintenance of the water distribution system. This
chapter does not provide for the recovery of operations, maintenance,
or replacement costs of the public-owned treatment works or the costs
associated with the construction of collection and treatment systems
§ 4-30 LAPEER CODE § 5-1
1:48
§ 5-2. Adoption by reference. [Amended 7-31-2001; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
There is hereby adopted by reference:
§ 5-3. Definitions.
used by industrial discharges, in proportion to their use of the publicowned
treatment works, which are the subject of separate ordinances.
A. The Michigan Plumbing Code as stated within Chapter 8, Buildings and
Building Regulations.
B. City of Lapeer Construction Specifications, as amended from time to
time.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMIT — Limits set by the City in lieu
of the promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, for
integrated facilities in accordance with the combined waste stream
formula as set by the EPA.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
If a user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; or
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 in
second-quarter 1980 dollars, if authority to sign documents
has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.
(b)
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility or their designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3) of this
definition may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
(4)
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:49
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives discharge from drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams form any portion
of a user's treatment facility.[Amended 9-16-1992]
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygenconsuming
capacity of inorganic or organic matter present in water or
wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between
stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily
correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC or DOC,
oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine
added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine
remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any
given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact,
and temperature.
CITY — City of Lapeer, Michigan.
COMBINED SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM — The waste stream at industrial
facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other
wastewaters (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Pollutants which can be effectively
removed by the POTW treatment system to within acceptable levels
for the POTW residuals and receiving stream. Specifically excluded
are heavy metals. PCBs and any pollutants that will likely contribute
or cause operational or sludge disposal problems or unacceptable
discharges to the receiving waters. This includes conventional
pollutants but is not to be interpreted as being equivalent to
conventional pollutants since these have already been defined by EPA
and are very specific.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A collection of individual grab samples
obtained at regular intervals, either on a time-proportional or flowproportional
basis, over a specified period which provides a
responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the
written authorization is submitted to the City.
§ 5-3 LAPEER CODE § 5-3
1:50
representative sample of the average stream during the sampling
period. For categorical process samples, this is required to be a
minimum of four samples per 24 hours.
CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS — The City of Lapeer Construction
Specifications as amended from time to time and made available on the
City's website under the Department of Public Works.[Added at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE — Charges levied to customers of the
wastewater system and which are used to pay principal, interest and
administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the
wastewater system. The debt service charge shall be in addition to the
user charge specified below.
DILUTION — Any thinning or weakening of a wastewater discharge by
mixing it with water or other liquor including any process of mixing
or diluting as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
necessary to achieve compliance with applicable standards and
limitations. Dilution is prohibited unless specifically approved by the
POTW in writing.
DOMESTIC WASTE — Water carried waste of human origin generated
by personal activities (from sources such as kitchens, bathrooms,
lavatories and toilets). This does not include compatible industrial
wastes. This definition does not exempt homeowners from liability as
they may discharge industrial wastes or damage or upset the POTW.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, Administrator or other duly
authorized official.
FEDERAL GRANT — A grant in aid in construction of wastewater
treatment works provided under P.L. 92-500, or the Federal Clean
Water Act.
FOOTING DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which is placed around the
perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits
groundwater.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in
any dimension.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:51
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant which is not a
compatible pollutant.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form
of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of
industry, manufacturing, business trade or research, including the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
INFILTRATION — The portion of groundwater which is unintentionally
admitted to a sewer.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; or is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit
or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits
issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title
II, commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act" (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
LABORATORY DETERMINATION — The measurements tests analysis
of the characteristics of water and wastes shall be performed in
accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition at the time
of any such measurement test or analysis of "Standard Methods of
Examination of Water and Sewage," a joint publication of the American
Public Health Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation,
the methods contained in 40 CFR 136 or in accordance with any other
method prescribed by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
to this section.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY or SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL
USER — Any industrial user of the publicly owned treatment work
that:[Amended 9-16-1992]
(1) Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
Has a flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater per
average workday;
(2)
Has a process wastewater flow equal to or greater than 5% of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW;
(3)
Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
the standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act of 1972; or
(4)
§ 5-3 LAPEER CODE § 5-3
1:52
MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY —
Michigan Environmental Protection Agency, Administrator or other
duly authorized official.[Amended 10-13-2004]
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the EPA which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 507(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Sewage with a concentration of 300
mg/l biochemical oxygen demand or 350 mg/l of suspended solids.
NPDES — The national system for the issuance of permits under
Section 402 of the Act and includes any state or interstate program,
which has been approved by the Administrator, in whole or in part,
pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System prescribed in U.S. Public Law 92-500.
Is found by the permit issuance authority in connection with the
issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment
works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly
or in combination with other contributing industries on that
treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment
works. All major contributing industries shall be monitored.
(5)
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located;
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, facts such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should be
considered.
(3)
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:53
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — All work, materials, equipment,
utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the
wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with
insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in
compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and
federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement.
OWNER — Or owners of record of the freehold of the premises or lease
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lease, or other person, firm or corporation
in control of a building.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or
detrimentally impacts the receiving stream.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by
the context.
pH — The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in
grams per liter of solution: neutral water, of example, has a pH value of
seven and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10.
POLLUTANT — Any of various chemicals, substances, and refuse
materials such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, and
industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes which impair the purity of
the water and soil.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, or process changes other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
§ 5-3 LAPEER CODE § 5-3
1:54
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Includes all national categorical
pretreatment standards, the general and specific prohibitions specified
in 40 CFR 403.5, all state standards as well as the prohibitions or limits
specified in this chapter.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
PUBLIC SYSTEMS AVAILABLE — A public water supply system or a
public sewer system shall be deemed available to premises used for
human occupancy if such premises are within the corporate limits of
the City of Lapeer.[Amended 10-13-2004; 7-24-2008]
PUBLIC WATER — Water systems in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public
authority.[Amended 10-13-2004]
REPLACEMENT — The replacement in whole or in part of any
equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to
insure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with NPDES
permit and other state and federal regulations.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of
a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused
by delays in production.[Amended 9-16-1992]
SEWAGE or WASTEWATER — A combination of the water-carried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such groundwater as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or
PUBLIC-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS — Any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage.[Amended 4-24-1985]
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.[Amended 4-24-1985]
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — The sum applicable of the user charge,
surcharges, and debt service charges.
SHALL; MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATION or SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An
industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one
or more of the following criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limit, defined here as
when 66% or more of all the measurements taken during a six-
(1)
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:55
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of low, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by
the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget, 1972.
STATE — State of Michigan.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, FOG and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer term average) that the Control Authority determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, public welfare, or the
environment, or has resulted in the POTW exercising its emergency
authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and/or reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation or group of violations, which the Control
Authority determines will adversely affecting operation or
implementation of the City's pretreatment program.
(8)
§ 5-3 LAPEER CODE § 5-3
1:56
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Director of Public Works or
designee.[Amended 4-24-1985; 10-13-2004; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
SURCHARGE — An extra charge to cover the cost of tracing, sampling
and testing sewage with strengths in excess of those found in normal
domestic sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean
Water Act and are used interchangeably in this chapter and refer to
Public Law 95-217 in 1977, and any succeeding amendments.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants which
is or can potentially be harmful to public health or environment.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user.
An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance or careless or
improper operation.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the sewage works.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the
cost of operation and maintenance of sewage works pursuant to Section
204(b) of P.L. 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement.
USER CLASS — The kind of user connected to sanitary sewers,
including but not limited to residential, industrial, commercial,
institutional and government.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Any user whose sanitary sewage emanates
from a property primarily used as a domicile, including multiple
dwellings and whose discharges are consistent with domestic
waste characteristics. This definition should be avoided, as it could
exempt someone from the requirements if he/she discharges
industrial waste into the sewer at their home.
(1)
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user that discharges an industrial waste
as defined in this chapter.
(2)
COMMERCIAL USER — An establishment listed in the Office of
Management and Budget's "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual" (1972 Edition) involved in a commercial enterprise,
business or service which, based on a determination by the City,
(3)
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:57
§ 5-4. Use of public water/sewer required.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies of accumulations of
water surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Any establishment listed in the Office
of Management and Budget's "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual" (1972 Edition) involved in a commercial enterprise,
business or service which, based on a determination by the City,
discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
(4)
GOVERNMENTAL USER — Any federal, state or local government
user of the wastewater treatment works.
(5)
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings: [Amended 4-24-1985]
ASTM - American Society for Testing and Materials
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical oxygen demand
CWA - Clean Water Act
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency
l - liter
MDNR - Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality
mg - milligrams
mg/l - milligrams per liter
NPDES - National Pollutants Discharge Elimination System
O&M - Operation and Maintenance
POTW - Public-owned treatment works
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
SS - Suspended solids
USC - United States Code
WPCF - Water Pollution Control Federation
§ 5-3 LAPEER CODE § 5-4
1:58
§ 5-5. Private water/sewer systems.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property
within the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
prohibited waste.
B. It shall be unlawful, when sewer and/or treatment facilities are
available, to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sanitary sewage, industrial
wastes, or other polluted waters, unless specifically permitted by the
State Health Department.
C. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal
of sewage, unless specifically permitted by the Lapeer County Health
Department or as hereinafter provided.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes located within
the corporate limits of the City of Lapeer, and for which a public water
system, sanitary system or combined sewer of the City is available, is
hereby required at his/her expense to install suitable water and sewer
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public water and/or sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and within 90 days of the date the Superintendent gives notice
to do so. [Amended 10-13-2004]
E. Except as specifically permitted or required in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain a potable water supply other than a
public water system within the City. [Amended 10-13-2004]
F. Reference City of Lapeer Fee Schedule for fees associated with
connection onto a public water and sewer system. [Amended
7-24-2008]
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 5-4D, the building water and/or sewer shall be connected to an
approved private potable water system and/or sewage disposal system.
[Amended 10-13-2004]
B. At such times as a public water and/or sewer system becomes available
to a property served by a private water system and/or sewage disposal
system as provided in § 5-4D, a direct connection shall be made to the
public water and/or sewer in compliance with this chapter. Thus, any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be pumped, filled with sand and be abandoned for sanitary use,
and wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the Department of
Environmental Quality regulations under the supervision of the City.
[Amended 10-13-2004]
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:59
§ 5-6. Building water/sewer connections.
C. The owner shall install, operate and maintain any permitted or required
private potable water system and/or sewage disposal facilities in a
sanitary manner at all times in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Lapeer County Health Department and at no expense
to the City. [Amended 10-13-2004]
D. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the State
Health Department.
E. Reference City of Lapeer Fee Schedule for fees associated with the
installation of a private water and sewer system. [Amended
7-24-2008]
A. No persons shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
alter or disturb any public water/sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City. [Amended
10-13-2004]
B. All costs and expense incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building water and/or sewer to the public water
and/or sewer connection shall be borne by the owner. [Amended
10-13-2004]
C. A separate and independent building water and/or sewer connection
shall be provided for every building; provided, however, where the
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no public or
private sewer and/or water is available or able to be installed and
connected to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard,
or driveway, the building water and/or sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear of the building if approved by the
Superintendent. [Amended 10-13-2004]
D. Existing building water and/or sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are approved by the Superintendent and
found to meet all requirements of this chapter. [Amended
10-13-2004]
E. The building sewer shall be constructed in accordance with the City of
Lapeer Construction Specifications, as amended from time to time.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
F. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be in accordance with the
City of Lapeer Construction Specifications, as amended from time to
time. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
G. The building sewer shall be in accordance with the City of Lapeer
Construction Specifications, as amended from time to time. [Amended
§ 5-5 LAPEER CODE § 5-6
1:60
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
H. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be
lifted by artificial means approved by the City and discharged to the
building sewer.
I. All joints and connections shall be made gas tight and watertight. All
joints shall be approved by the City.
J. No building sewer shall be located closer than 10 feet to any water well
or well pit.
K. No sewer connection will be permitted unless there is capacity
available in all downstream sewers lift stations, force mains and the
public-owned treatment works, including capacity for treatment of BOD
and suspended solids. [Amended 4-24-1985]
L. All extensions and alterations of the system of water and/or sewer
mains shall be under the supervision of the City. Each petition from the
extension of water and/or sewer mains shall be addressed to the City,
and the City shall consider the petition and advise the petitioners of its
decision. [Amended 10-13-2004]
M. Any person, being the owner of property within the City proposed to be
dedicated to the City for street or utility right-of-way purposes,
installing water mains and/or sewer mains within the area so proposed
to be dedicated, at his or her own expense, shall first submit plans and
specifications for such work to the City for its approval. After such plans
and specifications have been approved by the City, the work shall be
done under the supervision of the City. The City shall require that such
tests be made as it considers necessary in accordance with the City of
Lapeer Construction Specifications, as amended from time to time. No
water usage or sewage shall be admitted into such mains until the City
accepts the installation. The provisions of this subsection shall also
apply to any installation of water and/or sewer mains outside of the City,
where permission has been granted by the City to connect such mains
to the existing City water and/or sewage system. [Amended
10-13-2004; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
N. Before any connection is made to a City water and/or sewer main,
application for permit therefor must be made in writing to the City by
the owner of the premises to be served, or by his or her authorized
representative. The application shall be made on forms provided by the
City. [Amended 10-13-2004]
O. After the permit for service connection has been granted, and before
the connection is made, the owner shall pay a permit fee for tapping the
public main and installation of the water and/or sewer service from the
public main to the premises. The permit fee shall be determined and
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:61
§ 5-7. Use of public sewers.
paid according to a schedule of fees established by the City. [Amended
10-13-2004]
P. The building's water service shall be in accordance with the City of
Lapeer Construction Specifications, as amended from time to time.
[Amended 10-13-2004; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface, water, groundwater or roof water to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater may be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers. Groundwater, cooling
water and other unpolluted process water shall be discharged only to a
sewer specifically designated as a storm sewer.
B. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutants or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference.
These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW, whether or
not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
[Amended 3-24-1999]
C. Prohibited discharges.
(1) Except as expressly allowed and permitted by the City or otherwise
hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewers: [Amended 9-16-1992]
(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(b) Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.5 or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment.
(c) Solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to
flow in sewer or other interference with the proper operation
of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to: ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, lass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure, or any other solids or
viscous substance.
(d) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW.
§ 5-6 LAPEER CODE § 5-7
1:62
(e) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F. (65°
C.), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment
plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the
treatment plant to exceed 104° (40° C.).
(f) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through.
(g) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(h) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Superintendent.
(i) Any noxious malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance, including pollutants which result in the
presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems. Further, there is no affirmative defense, of any kind,
available for the discharge of pollutants that result in the
presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW that
may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(j) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye, wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts
color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the
City's NPDES permit.
(k) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
(l) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and
unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
Superintendent.
(m) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial waste.
(n) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit.
(o) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plants effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(p) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which
may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:63
(q) Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 620 mg/l.
(2) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could
be discharged to the POTW.
D. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Building Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Building Inspector and shall be located at to be readily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt
and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers
which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
E. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
F. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes by
containing: (a) five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by
weight (or COD greater than 700 parts per million by weight as
alternative basis to five-day BOD); (b) containing more than 350 parts
per million by weight of suspended solids; (c) containing more than 40
parts per million by weight of special Kjeldahl nitrogen; (d) containing
more than 10 parts per million of total phosphorus; (e) containing more
than 100 parts per million by weight of fats, oil and grease; or (f) having
an average deal flow granter than 2% of the average deal flow of the
City, shall be subject to review and approval of the Superintendent.
Where necessary in the opinion of the City, the owner shall provide, at
his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce
the five-day BOD to 300 parts per million by weight (or the COD to 700
parts per million by weight as alternative basis to five-day BOD), or
reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or
reduce the total Kjeldahl nitrogen to 40 parts per million by weight, or
reduce the total phosphorus to 10 parts per million by weight, or reduce
the fates, oils and grease to 100 parts per million by weight, or control
the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be prepared and submitted by a
qualified engineer for the approval of the Superintendent, and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals
are obtained in writing.
G. Additional charge.
§ 5-7 LAPEER CODE § 5-7
1:64
(1) Where the strength of the sewage from industrial, commercial, or
institutional establishment exceeds: (a) 300 parts per million of
five-day BOD by weight (or 700 parts per million of COD as
alternative basis to five-day BOD); (b) 350 parts per million of
suspended solids by weight; (c) 40 parts per million of total
Kjeldahl nitrogen by weight; (d) 10 parts per million of total
phosphorus by weight; or (e) 100 parts per million of fats, oil and
grease by weight, and where such wastes are permitted to be
discharged to the sewer system by the Superintendent, an added
charge, as noted below, will be made against such establishment
according to the strength of such wastes. However, no discharger
will be allowed to discharge wastewater containing concentrations
which exceed the following limits:
Materials
Maximum
Concentration
(mg/l)
Five-day BOD (or COD as alternative
basis to five-day BOD)
2,300 (5,400)
Suspended solids 1,650
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen 260
Total phosphorus 60
Fats, oils and grease 620
(2) The strength of such wastes shall be determined by composite
samples taken over a sufficient period of time to insure a
representative sample. The cost of taking and making the first of
these samples shall be borne by the City. The cost of any
subsequent sampling and testing shall be borne by the industry or
establishment, whether owner or lessee. Tests shall be made at the
City Wastewater Treatment Plant or an independent laboratory.
Added charges shall be determined by the City. These charges shall
be based on the cost of operation, maintenance, administration,
depreciation, amortization plus sufficient coverage for the sewage
works. [Amended 5-24-1995]
H. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained condition in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
I. Whenever the Superintendent cannot reasonably observe, sample and
measure the industrial wastes of any business or industry, either now
existing or later commenced, and he has reasonable cause to believe
that said wastes are in violation of the standards imposed by Subsection
C of this section, he may require the owner of the premises from which
said wastes are discharged to construct and install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to permit the observation, sampling and
measurement of said wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:65
accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so
as to be safe and accessible at all times.
J. Except where expressly authorized to do so by the City or an applicable
pretreatment standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, alternative discharge limits, or in any other pollutant
specific limitation developed by the City or state. Dilution may be an
acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth
in this chapter upon prior written approval of the Superintendents.
[Amended 9-16-1992]
K. Where required, a user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
chapter. The City will, without such protection, be subject to these
requirements. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge or prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be approved by the
Superintendent before construction of the facility. All required users
shall complete such a program within 90 days of notification by the
Superintendent. If required by the Superintendent, a user who
commences contribution to the sewage works after the effective date of
this chapter shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the
system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by
the Superintendent. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not receive the industrial user from the responsibility
to modify the user's faculty as necessary to meet the requirements of
this chapter. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the
sewage location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental
discharge, the user shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures
to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
sewage works, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this section or other applicable law.
Failure to file a report shall be a separate violation of this chapter.
[Amended 9-16-1992; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
L. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which references are made shall be determine in
§ 5-7 LAPEER CODE § 5-7
1:66
accordance with "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and
Wastewaters" and "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the
Analysis of Pollutants." Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, published in
the Federal Register on October 16, 1973, shall be determined at the
control manhole provided for in § 5-7I or upon suitable samples taken
at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
M. To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the City may use
one of the following methods:
(1) The amount of water supplied to the premises by the City or a
private water company as shown upon the water meter if the
premises are metered;
(2) If the premises are supplied with water from private wells or any
other source, the amount of water supplied from such sources as
estimated by the City from the water, gas or electric supply;
(3) If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose
of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be
entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the
amount of sewage discharged into the sewer system made by the
City from the water, gas or electric supply;
(4) The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the sewer system
as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole
installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system
at his own expense in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the permit issued by the Superintendent pursuant to this section;
or
(5) A figure determined by the City by any combination of the
foregoing or by any other equitable method.
N. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City, subject to payment therefor by
the industrial concern.
O. Bypass producing a discharge which violates applicable pretreatment
standard is prohibited, and the City may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for such bypass, unless: the bypass was
unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage; there were no feasible alternatives to the bypass such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime (except
where adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgement to operate during normal
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:67
§ 5-8. Protection from trespass and damage.
§ 5-9. Power and authority of inspectors.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City, acting
as his duly authorized agent, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter upon such properties as may be necessary for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-10. Penalties and fees.
periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance); and the
user submitted required notices. For accidental bypass, notice
requirements are specified in Subsection K herein. If the user knows
in advance of the need for bypass, a prior notice shall be submitted
to the City at least 10 days before the date of the bypass. The City
may approve or disapprove this anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects. [Amended 9-16-1992]
A. No unauthorized person shall enter any building structure, or enter or
climb upon any equipment which is part of the public-owned treatment
works. [Amended 4-24-1985]
B. No person shall willfully damage, destroy, deface, uncover or tamper
with any building, structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part
of the public-owned treatment works. [Amended 4-24-1985]
C. No person shall plug or attempt to plug any sewer line or appurtenance.
A. Violations of § 5-20F or 5-8, including Subsections A, B or C, shall be
punishable by a maximum of 90 days in jail and/or $500 fine, in the
discretion of the court. [Amended 4-24-1985]
B. Any person found to be violating any provision of thischapter except
§ 5-8 or 5-20F shall be served by first-class mail to the address where
the sewer bills are sent, by the City with a written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
correction thereof. Failure to correct the violation within the time
stated shall subject the violator to prosecution for a misdemeanor, with
a maximum penalty of 90 days in jail and/or $500 fine, in the discretion
of the court, for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. [Amended 4-24-1985;
9-16-1992]
C. In addition to any other remedies contained herein, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the City
for any expense, loss, or damage suffered by the City by reason of such
violation.
D. Industrial pretreatment program cost recovery system. The City may
provide for the recovery of cost from major contributing industries for
§ 5-7 LAPEER CODE § 5-10
1:68
§ 5-11. General disclosures.
operating the Industrial pretreatment program. The applicable
surcharge or fees may include cost recovery for: [Amended
9-16-1992]
(1) Administering the program; this includes staff wages, supplies,
consultant fees, etc.
(2) Issuing and maintaining the discharge permits.
(3) Monitoring, inspections, and surveillance.
(4) Laboratory testing of discharged wastewater; where possible,
laboratory charges shall be for the actual cost thereof and will be
determined for each industrial user.
(5) Equipment purchase and replacement.
(6) Applying necessary enforcement action.
(7) Others that the City deems necessary to carry out objectives of the
industrial pretreatment program.
A. All industrial dischargers proposing to connect to or to discharge
sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes to the POTW shall comply
with all terms of this chapter within 120 days after the effective date of
this chapter.
B. Industrial dischargers shall complete the file with the City a disclosure
declaration in the form prescribed by the City. Existing industrial
dischargers shall file disclosure forms within 120 days after the
effective date of this chapter, and proposed new dischargers shall file
disclosure forms at least 90 days prior to connecting to the POTW. The
disclosure to be made by the discharger shall be made on written forms
provided by the City and shall cover:
(1) Name, address and location of the discharger.
(2) SIC number according to the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual," Bureau of Budget, 1972, as amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in this chapter. Sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the United States EPA and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended.
(4) Disclosure of time and duration of dischargers.
(5) Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater
flow rates in gallons per day.
(6) Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:69
manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and planning processes on the
premises including all materials which are or may be discharged to
the sewers or works of the authority and a schematic diagram
indicating point of discharge to the wastewater treatment plant.
[Amended 9-16-1992]
(8) Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants of
materials prohibited by this chapter in the discharge, together with
at statement regarding whether or not compliance is being
achieved with this chapter. New sources shall disclose information
on any pretreatment methods they intend to use and provide
estimates on expected treated discharge flow and pollutant
concentrations. [Amended 9-16-1992]
(9) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
activities will be required to comply with this chapter, the
discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by
which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance
activities.
(a) This schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment
requirements of this chapter which includes all acts necessary
to achieve compliance with this chapter.
(b) Progress reports shall be submitted by the discharger to the
City with increments of progress toward compliance of
discharge standards as outlined in this chapter.
(10) Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production.
(11) Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized
(average and maximum per day).
(12) All disclosure forms shall be signed by a principal executive officer
of the discharger.
(13) Any other information as may be deemed by the Superintendent to
be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage
works.
C. The City will evaluate all completed disclosure forms and reserves the
right to require additional information. The City reserves the right to
amend this chapter in order to assure compliance by the City with
applicable laws and regulations within nine months of the promulgation
of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. This chapter shall be
§ 5-11 LAPEER CODE § 5-11
1:70
§ 5-12. Pretreatment standards.
amended to require dischargers to comply with such standards within
the time frame prescribed by such standards. All National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards adopted after the promulgation of this chapter
shall be adopted by the City as part of this chapter. Where a discharger,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not
previously submitted a disclosure form as required by this chapter, the
discharger shall file a disclosure form with the City within 180 days
after the promulgation of nation categorical pretreatment standard by
the United States EPA. In addition, any discharger operating on the
basis of a previous filing of a disclosure statement shall submit to the
City within 180 days after the promulgation of National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, the information required by Subsection B(5),
(7), (8) and (9) of this section. The City will inform dischargers of any
proposed changes in the chapter at least 30 days prior to effective date
of change. Any changes or new conditions in the chapter shall include
a reasonable time schedule for compliance. [Amended 9-16-1992]
D. The reports required by this section and § 5-14 shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and include the
following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information,
the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief,
true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of
fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
E. If the authorized representative changes because a different individual
or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or
for environmental matters of the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of the term "authorized representative of
industrial users," defined in § 5-3, must be submitted to the City prior to
or together with any reports to be signed by the authorized
representative. [Amended 9-16-1992]
A. Within six months of the promulgation or revision of a pretreatment
standard, all affected users must submit to the Superintendent the
information required by § 5-11B(5), (7), (8) and (9). [Amended
9-16-1992]
B. Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, Alternative Discharge Limits, or other federal or state
limitations, for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment
standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter
for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-12
1:71
§ 5-13. Wastewater discharges.
Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable regulations established by the City. The City
may:
limitations imposed under this chapter and shall be considered part
of this chapter. The City shall notify, by first-class mail to the address
where the sewer bills are sent, all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements.
C. Existing sources subject to new pretreatment standards shall achieve
compliance within three years of the date the standard is promulgated,
unless a shorter compliance schedule is specified in the standard. New
sources subject to pretreatment standards shall install, have in
operating condition, and have started up all pretreatment equipment
required to achieve compliance before beginning to discharge; and
shall meet all applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest
feasible time, but not to exceed 90 days. [Amended 9-16-1992]
A. Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
B. Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make
requirements for flow regulations;
C. Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities;
D. Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
E. Establish compliance schedules;
F. Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
G. Require the maintaining, retaining, and furnishing of plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the City, and affording
City access thereto, and copying thereof;
H. Require notification of the City for any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the
wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater
treatment system;
I. Require notification of slug discharges and accidental spills;
J. Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this chapter;
K. Control through permit, order, or similar means, the contribution to the
public-owned treatment works by each user to ensure compliance with
§ 5-12 LAPEER CODE § 5-13
1:72
§ 5-14. Report concerning pollutants.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage works,
any user subject to Pretreatment standards and Requirements shall submit
to the Superintendent at report indicating the nature and concentration
of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and
maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are
limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall
state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/
or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be
signed by an authorized representative, the industrial user, and certified to
by a qualified representative.
applicable pretreatment standards or pollutant-specific limitations
developed by the City or state. This control mechanism may limit
duration to a maximum of five years, require nontransferability without
appropriate prior notification, set effluent limits, establish monitoring
and reporting requirements, and contain a statement of applicable
penalties for violations. [Amended 9-16-1992]
L. Adjust pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in
the user's intake water in accordance with the net/gross calculation
requirements of Section 403.15 of the Federal Register. [Amended
9-16-1992]
M. Apply the "combined wastestream formula" to account for dilution
effect on categorical process discharges in accordance with Section
403.6(e) of the Federal Register. [Amended 9-16-1992]
A. Any user discharging an industrial waste, or any new industrial source
discharging into the sewage works, shall submit to the City during the
months of June and December, unless required more frequently in
pretreatment standard or by the City, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards or this chapter. In addition, this report shall
include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period
exceeded the average daily flow reported in § 5-11B(3) of this chapter.
At the discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are to be submitted.
B. The City may also impose mass limitations on users which are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or
in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by Subsection A of this
§ 5-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-14
1:73
§ 5-15. Inspections; right of entry.
The City may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the City or its representative, ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying or in the
performance of any of their duties. The City, MDNR and EPA shall have
the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so
section shall also indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
C. If a user subject to reporting requirements required to demonstrate
continued compliance monitors any pollutant more frequently than
required by the City, using approved procedures, the result of this
additional monitoring shall also be included in the reports. If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall
notify the City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
user shall also repeat the sampling and submit the results of re-analysis
to the City within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except
when the City will be performing scheduled surveillance sampling/
analysis within the thirty-day period. [Amended 9-16-1992]
D. All users shall notice the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and the State Hazardous Waste authority in writing of
any discharge into the POTW of the substance which would be a
hazardous waste under Section 261 of the Federal Register if disposed
via other means. Notification details, as well as allowable exemptions,
shall be in accordance with Section 403.12(p) of the Federal Register.
In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must provide
notification of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the
effective date of such regulations. In the case of any notification of
hazardous waste discharges, the user shall further certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
[Amended 9-16-1992]
E. All users shall notify the POTW in writing at least 45 days prior to any
substantial changes in the volume or character of pollutants in their
discharge. These changes would include, but not be limited to,
groundwater purged from remedial action programs and groundwater
containing pollutants that may infiltrate the sewers.
§ 5-14 LAPEER CODE § 5-15
1:74
that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City,
MDNR and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes
of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 5-16. Treatment of wastewater by industrial users; published list
of significant violators.
§ 5-17. Accessibility of report information; confidentiality.
A. Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with
all pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
the Federal Pretreatment Regulations and as required by the City. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
City shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be
approved by the City before construction of the facility. The review of
such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce
an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City prior to the
user's initiation of the changes.
B. As required by Section 403.8(f)(2)(vii) of the Federal Register, the City
shall annually publish in the major local newspaper a list of the users
which were significantly violating any applicable pretreatment
requirements or standards during the 12 previous months. The
notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the user(s) during the same 12 months.
C. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or MDNR upon request.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaire,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically request and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the
user.
B. When requested by the persons furnishing a report, the portion of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Permit, or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the
§ 5-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-17
1:75
§ 5-18. Disposal at wastewater treatment plant. [Amended
9-16-1992]
Waste from industrial sewage disposal systems shall be disposed of at the
wastewater treatment plant or at any other refuse or disposal site approved
by the Superintendent. Unless specifically approved and permitted by the
City, no waters or wastes described in § 5-7C shall be disposed of at the
wastewater treatment plant.
§ 5-19. Judicial enforcement remedies; violations and penalties.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
City wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the City, the
City may commence an action from appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
in the applicable court of this county.
state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the City as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
City until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. Any such
release of information shall be made in accordance with Section 403.14
of the Federal Register.
A. Injunctive relief.
(1) A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, industrial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or
other pretreatment standard or requirement will be liable to
issuance of a preliminary injunction or a permanent injunction, or
both as may be appropriate. This action will be sought to restrain or
compel activities on the part of the affected user.
(2) A petition of injunctive relief shall in no way relieve the affected
user of any and all liability associated with the violation. A petition
for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
any other actions by the City against the affected user.
B. A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, industrial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or other
pretreatment standard or requirement will be liable for a civil penalty
of up to $1,000 per violation. Each day during which the violation
occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct
violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term
average discharge limits, the penalty may be assessed for each day
during the period of the averaging. The affected user will also be liable
for all costs incurred by the City for associated enforcement action,
such as reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, additional sampling and
§ 5-17 LAPEER CODE § 5-19
1:76
monitoring expenses, as well as costs of any environmental damage and
any fines imposed upon the City for NPDES permit violations that result
in whole or in part from the user's violation and expenses associated
with remediation of sites thereby contaminated. The City Attorney may
petition the court to impose, assess and recover sums up to this limit of
liability. In determining the appropriate amount of civil penalty to seek,
the City may take into account all relevant circumstances, including
but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained
by the affected user as a result of the violation, corrective actions
implemented or proposed to be implemented by the affected user, and
history of compliance or noncompliance by the affected user. Civil
prosecution shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other
actions by the City against the user.
C. Criminal prosecution:
(1) Violations generally.
(a) A user who has willfully or negligently violated or continues to
willfully or negligently violate any provision of this chapter,
industrial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or other
pretreatment standard or requirement, will be liable to
criminal prosecution. If convicted, the affected user will be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a monetary
penalty of up to $500 per violation, imprisonment for up to 90
days, or both. Each day during which the violation occurred or
continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation
and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term
average discharge limits, the penalty may be assessed for each
day during the period of averaging.
(b) Criminal prosecution shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, any other actions by the City against the affected user.
(2) Falsifying information. A user who knowingly makes any false
statements, representations, or certifications in any application,
record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter, industrial waste permit or
order issued hereunder, or pretreatment standard or requirement
will be liable to criminal prosecution. If convicted, the affected user
will be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a monetary
penalty of up to $500 per violation, imprisonment for up to 90 days,
or both. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues
to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in the
case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge
limits, the penalty may be assessed for each day during the period
of averaging.
(3) Tampering. A user who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any data device or test method used to monitor
§ 5-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-19
1:77
§ 5-20. Administrative enforcement remedies.
a discharge pursuant to this chapter, industrial waste permit or
order issued hereunder, or pretreatment standard or requirement,
will be liable to criminal prosecution. If convicted, the affected user
will be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a monetary
penalty of up to $500 per violation, imprisonment for up to 90 days,
or both. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues
to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in the
case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge
limits, the penalty may be assessed for each day during the period
of averaging.
A. Suspension of service.
(1) The Superintendent may suspend wastewater treatment service
when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, in order to stop an actual or threaten discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, causes interference to the sewage works or results in
the violation of any condition of the NPDES permit.
(2) The Superintendent may also suspend wastewater service of any
user which:
(a) Fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(b) Fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents
or characteristics; or
(c) Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises by
representatives of the City for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring.
B. The City may utilize one or more of the following enforcement
procedures to identify, document, and respond to instances of
noncompliance:
(1) Whenever the City finds that a user has violated any provision of
this chapter, industrial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent
will issue a notice of violation to formally document the
noncompliance.
(a) This document will specify the nature of the violation, establish
a date by which the violation shall be corrected, and notify the
affected user that failure to correct the violation would
constitute a further violation which may result in additional
enforcement action. A notice of violation will be sent via first-
§ 5-19 LAPEER CODE § 5-20
1:78
class mail or personally served on an authorized representative
of the user.
(b) Receipt, or nonreceipt, of a notice of violation shall in no way
relieve the affected user of any and all liability associated with
the violation. Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by
the City against the affected user.
(2) When the City finds that a user has violated any provision of this
chapter, industrial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent
may issue an administrative order to show cause requiring the
affected user to appear at a hearing to demonstrate why escalated
enforcement action should not be pursued. This document will
specify the nature of the violation, establish the time and place for
the hearing, and notify the affected user that failure to comply
would constitute a violation of this chapter which may result in
additional enforcement action. An order to show cause will be
issued at least 10 days prior to the hearing, and will be sent via
certified mail/return receipt requested or personally served on an
authorized representative of the user.
(3) When the City and the affected user agree to a violation and to the
remedial solution, the Superintendent may issue an order of
consent or similar document to formally establish such agreement.
This document will specify the nature of the violation and required
actions such as compliance schedules, stipulated fines, additional
self-monitoring and improvements to treatment facilities or
management practices designed to control the user's discharge to
the sewer. An order of consent will be sent via certified mail/return
receipt requested, or personally served on an authorized
representative of the user, and will require signatures of
representatives from both the City and the affected user.
(a) An order of consent or similar document shall have the same
force and effect as other administrative orders issued by the
City pursuant to this chapter, shall be judicially enforceable,
and shall not modify the requirements or extend the deadline
for compliance established by a pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(b) Receipt, or nonreceipt, of an order of consent or similar
document shall in no way relieve the affected user of any and
all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a consent
order or similar document shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the City
against the affected user.
(4) When the City and affected user do not agree to the violation or to
the remedial solution, the Superintendent may issue an order to
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:79
achieve compliance. This document will specify the nature of the
violation and include required actions such as compliance
schedules, stipulated fines, additional self-monitoring, and
improvements to treatment facilities or management practices
designed to control the user's discharge to the sewer. An order
to achieve compliance will be issued unilaterally in that terms
need not be agreed to by the affected user, and will be sent via
certified mail/return receipt requested, or personally serviced on
and authorized representative of the user.
(a) An order to achieve compliance shall have the same force and
effect as other administrative orders issued by the City
pursuant to this chapter, shall be judicially enforceable, and
shall not modify the requirements, or extend the deadline for
compliance established by a pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(b) Receipt, or nonreceipt, of an order to achieve compliance shall
in no way relieve the affected user of any and all liability
associated with the violation. Issuance of an order to achieve
compliance shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, any
other enforcement actions by the City against the affected
user.
(5) Cease-and-desist order.
(a) When the City finds that a user has violated and continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, industrial waste permit or
order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent and the City Attorney may
jointly issue a cease-and-desist order requiring the affected
user to eliminate the violation within 24 hours or face
suspension of sewer service. This document will specify the
nature of the violation, and require that the violation cease. If
the violation has not been corrected within 24 hours following
issuance of the order, the City may suspend sewer service
without further notice until such time as the affected user is
able to demonstrate to the City that it can comply with the
discharge requirements. A cease-and-desist order will be
personally served on an authorized representative of the user.
(b) Receipt, or nonreceipt, of a cease-and-desist order shall in no
way relieve the affected user of any and all liability associated
with the violation. Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other
enforcement actions by the City against the affected user.
(6) Emergency cease-and-desist order.
(a) Whenever the City finds that a user's discharge is in violation
of any provision of this chapter or any permit issued hereunder
and that the violation creates or threatens to create an
§ 5-20 LAPEER CODE § 5-20
1:80
emergency situation such as damage to the sanitary sewer
system, pass-through or interference to the wastewater
treatment plant, hazard to the Flint River, endangerment to the
public health and safety, or violation of any condition of the
NPDES permit issued to the City, the Superintendent and the
City Attorney will jointly issue an emergency cease-and-desist
order notifying the affected user to eliminate the violating
discharge immediately or face service severance via a
temporary plug in its sewer connection at any time and without
further warning. This document will specify the nature of the
violation, and require that the violation discharge cease until
such time as the affected user is able to demonstrate to the
City that it can comply with the discharge requirements. This
document will also establish the time and place for the hearing
where the affected user shall present a written statement
regarding the causes of the violation and measures taken to
prevent future occurrences, and further will notify the affected
user of its liability for any costs incurred by the City to conduct
this enforcement action. An emergency cease-and-desist order
will be personally served on an authorized representative of
the user, or may be delivered verbally via telephone to an
authorized representative of the user and then served
personally.
(b) Receipt, or nonreceipt, of an emergency cease-and-desist order
shall in no way relieve the affected user of any and all liability
associated with the violation. Issuance of an emergency ceaseand-
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, any other enforcement actions by the City against the
affected user.
(7) Notice of termination.
(a) Except for emergency situations covered under Subsection
B(6), of this section, whenever the City finds that a user's
continuing violation warrants revocation of its permit or
privilege to discharge into the wastewater system, the
Superintendent and the City Attorney will jointly issue a notice
of termination to warn of the impending suspension of the
sewer service up to and including severance via temporary
plug in the affected user's sewer connection. This document
will specify the date and the time of scheduled service
suspension in order to allow the affected user to either
voluntarily cease the violation discharge or arrange
appropriate actions such as production shutdown or
alternative means of wastewater disposal. This document will
also establish the time and place for a hearing where the
affected user shall present a written statement regarding the
causes of the violation and measures taken to prevent future
occurrences, and further will notify the affected user of its
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:81
liability for any costs incurred by the City to conduct this
enforcement action. A notice of termination will be personally
served on an Authorized representative of the user at least 10
days before the scheduled service suspension.
(b) Receipt, or nonreceipt, of a notice of termination shall in no
way relieve the affected user of any and all liability associated
with the violation. Issuance of a notice of termination shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement
actions by the City against the affected user.
C. In addition to the sanctions, orders, liabilities, and other remedies
prescribed under Subsection B(1) through (7) in this section, a user
shall be liable to the City for any and all fines, penalties, and associated
legal and other costs incurred or expended by the City as the result of
any violation of the City's NPDES permit that is attributable, in whole or
in part, the user's violation of this chapter or a permit issued to the user
hereunder.
D. Right of revision. The City reserves the right to amend this chapter to
provide for more stringent limitations or requirements of discharges to
the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set
forth in § 5-1 of this chapter.
E. Right of appeals. Except for emergency situations covered under
Subsection B(6) of this section, any discharger or other person affected
by an order of the Superintendent, City Manager, or a representative of
the City Manager may request, in writing, an appeal to the full City
Commission. Such requests must be filed within 15 days from the date
of the order appealed from. Such appeal will not stay the order or any
or the enforcement proceedings pending against the discharger or
person making the appeal. Appeal from any final determination of the
City Commission will be governed by applicable state law.
F. Operations upset.
(1) Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which
places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with
this chapter shall inform the City within 24 hours of first awareness
of the commencement to the upset. Where such information is
given orally, a written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the
discharge with the City within five days. The report shall specify:
(a) Description of the upset, the cause of, and the upset's impact
on the discharger's compliance status.
(b) Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time
by which compliance is reasonable expected to occur.
(c) All steps taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of
such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance.
§ 5-20 LAPEER CODE § 5-20
1:82
(2) A documented and verified benefit operating budget shall be an
affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the City
against a discharger for any noncompliance with the chapter which
arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period
of the upset.
G. Records retention. All dischargers subject to this chapter shall retain
and preserve for no less than three years, any records, books,
documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all
summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical
analysis made by or in behalf of a discharger in connection with its
discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of
administrative adjustment by the City pursuant hereto shall be retained
and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement actives have
concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all
appeals have expired.
H. Right of interpretation. Any discharger or interested party shall have
the right to request, in writing, an interpretation or ruling by the City
on any matter covered by this chapter and shall be entitled to a prompt
written reply. A request for an interpretation shall not stay any
enforcement activity, which may be pending or contemplated by the
City.
I. Supplementary limitations:
(1) No discharger shall discharge wastewater containing
concentrations of the following enumerated material, exceeding
the following values: [Amended 6-4-2001]
Material
Minimum
Concentration
(mg/l) Sample Type Test Method
Arsenic 0.420 24-hour
composite
EPA 206.2
Chromium,
hexavalent
0.063 24-hour
composite
Std. Method
3500 CR-D
Chromium,
total
2.400 24-hour
composite
EPA 218.1
Lead 0.560 24-hour
composite
EPA 239.1
Mercury * 24-hour
composite
*
Zinc 1.300 24-hour
composite
EPA 289.1
Polychlorinated
biphenyls
** 24-hour
composite
**
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:83
NOTES:
* Discharge of detectable mercury shall be prohibited except as
follows:
(a) Each discharger of detectable mercury shall have a Cityaccessible
monitoring point for the net "process" effluent. If
the City deems monitoring the net process effluent is not
feasible, the discharger may have a City-accessible monitoring
point for the net overall effluent (i.e., sanitary and process).
All costs for installation of this monitoring point shall be the
discharger's responsibility.
(b) Each discharger of detectable mercury shall routinely selfmonitor
its effluent for mercury using a composite sample
collected over the period of normal discharge, a detection
level of 0.2 ug/L (EPA Method 245.1), with a frequency to be
established by the City. While the discharger may contract
with the City or an outside consultant/laboratory to conduct
this sampling and analytical testing, all associated costs shall
be the discharger's responsibility.
(c) At its discretion, the City may collect additional samples
from each discharger of detectable mercury. If the discharger
uses an outside consultant/laboratory to perform the selfmonitoring,
this annual surveillance requirement will be
waived.
(d) Each discharger of detectable mercury shall develop and
implement a mercury minimization plan. The purpose of this
plan shall be to establish actions and an implementation
schedule to minimize mercury entering the collection system.
The plan, which will be subject to review and approval by the
City, shall address the following:
[1] Treatment system for removal of mercury from the
discharged wastewater;
[2] Written procedures for disposal of mercury-contaminated
wastes;
[3] New employee training, as well as refresher training for
current employees;
[4] Review of purchased materials to ensure they are mercury
free; and
[5] Other activities deemed appropriate by the discharger.
§ 5-20 LAPEER CODE § 5-20
1:84
§ 5-21. Severability. [Amended 4-24-1985]
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any of the provisions,
word, phrases, clauses or terms, or the application thereof to any person,
(e) A discharge containing detectable mercury will not be
accepted unless a mercury minimization plan continues to be
actively administered. The City reserves the right to terminate
sewer service and/or to take enforcement action even if the
user is implementing a mercury minimization plan and has
taken what the City determines are all reasonable and costeffective
actions based on economic, technical and treatability
considerations.
** Discharge of the polychlorinated biphenyls at detectable levels
shall be a specific violation of this chapter. The analytical
method shall be EPA 608 and the minimum detection level
shall be 0.2 ug/l unless a higher level is appropriate because of
sample matrix interferences.
(2) No discharger shall discharge wastewater containing
concentrations in excess of the following enumerated materials,
unless having first applied for a discharge permit via written forms
provided by the City and supplied additional information as
necessary for the City's determination whether a discharge permit
is warranted:
Material
Concentration
(mg/l)
Minimum
Sample Type Test Method
Cadmium 0.001 24-hourr
composite
EPA 213.1
Copper 0.040 24-hourr
composite
EPA 220.1
Cyanides,
total
0.012 Grab EPA 335.2
Nickel 0.009 24-hourr
composite
EPA 249.1
Silver 0.001 24-hourr
composite
EPA 272.1
Phenolics,
total
0.023 Grab EPA 240.1
(3) The City may impose mass limitations on dischargers which are
using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements
of this chapter, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations is deemed appropriate by the City. [Amended
5-24-1995]
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-21
1:85
firm or corporation, or to nay circumstances, shall be held invalid, illegal
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of
findings shall not in any way affect the validity, legality or constitutionality
of any other provision, work phrase, clause or term, which shall continue in
full force and effect.
§ 5-22. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective upon publication, September 29, 1982.
Chapter 6
LAND DIVISION
§ 6-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be designated as the "City of Lapeer
Land Division Ordinance."
§ 6-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and
harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic
circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major
thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve
individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; to secure
adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewage, and
other health requirements; to secure adequate provisions for recreational
areas, school sites and other public facilities; and to provide logical
procedures for the achievement of these purposes.
§ 6-3. Definitions.
A. All terms as defined in the Land Division Act, P.A. 288 of 1967, as
amended,7 shall control in this chapter unless indicated to the contrary
in this section.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases shall
be defined as follows:
ACCESSIBLE — In reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets
one or both of the following requirements:
Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an
existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards
of the state transportation department or county road commission,
and of the City, or has an area where a driveway can provide
vehicular access to an existing road or street and meet all such
applicable location standards.
(1)
7. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 5-21 LAPEER CODE § 6-3
1:86
BLOCK — Property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street
and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or
between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of
development.
CITY COMMISSION — The elected governing body of the City of
Lapeer.
CLERK — The Clerk of the City of Lapeer.
CONCEPTUAL PLAN — A map or graphic representation of the
proposed subdivision submitted for purposes of introduction and initial
feedback.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — Any parcel or lot on which exists or which is
intended for building development other than the following:
DIVISION — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by
the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators,
legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purposes of sale,
or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results
in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that
satisfies the requirements of Sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division
Act.8 A property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the
property taken from one parcel is added to adjacent parcel, does not
count toward the number of divisions allowed under the state Land
Division Act, but shall be subject to the land division review procedures
in §§ 6-4 and 6-5 of this chapter.
EASEMENT — A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the
public, a corporation, or person, for specific uses and purposes, to be
designated as a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature
of the use.
Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access
to an existing road or street and that meets all applicable location
standards of the state transportation department or county road
commission and of the City, or can be served by a proposed
easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing road or
street and that will meet all such applicable location standards.
(2)
Agricultural use involving the production of plants and animals
useful to humans, including forages and sod crops; grains, feed
crops, and field crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry
products; livestock, including breeding and grazing of cattle,
swine, and similar animals; berries; herbs; flowers; seeds; grasses;
nursery stock; fruits; vegetables; Christmas trees; and other
similar uses and activities.
(1)
Forestry use involving the planting, management, or harvesting of
timber.
(2)
8. Editor's Note: See MCLA §§ 560.108 and 560.109, respectively.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:87
ENGINEER — The staff engineer or consulting engineer of the City of
Lapeer.
EXEMPT SPLIT — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of
land that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or
the equivalent.
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, and other additions to the natural
state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability.
LAND DIVISION ACT — The Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act 288
of 1967, as amended.9
LOT — A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is
described or fixed in a recorded plat.
LOT SPLIT — The division of a lot in a recorded subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — The comprehensive land use plan for the
municipality, including graphic and written proposals indicating the
general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public
buildings, zoning districts and all physical developments of the
municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan separately
adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly
adopted by the Planning Commission.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lapeer, Michigan.
PARCEL — A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
described as provided for in the Land Division Act.
PARENT PARCEL (or PARENT TRACT) — A parcel or tract, respectively,
lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997.
PLANNER — The staff planner or consulting planner of the
municipality.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Lapeer, the members of which are appointed by the City Commission.
PLAT — A map or chart of a subdivision of land:
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map showing the salient features of
a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for
purposes of preliminary consideration.
(1)
PRELIMINARY PLAT — TENTATIVE — A map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide
adequate basis for review and to meet the requirements and
procedures set forth hereinafter.
(2)
PRELIMINARY PLAT — FINAL — A map showing the salient
features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving
(3)
9. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 6-3 LAPEER CODE § 6-3
1:88
PROPRIETOR — A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any
ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on
a plat duly filed and recorded in the Office of the County Register of
Deeds. A street includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may consist of pavement, shoulders,
gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and lawns.
authority for purposes of preliminary consideration in determining
compliance with state, county and City requirements.
PLAT — FINAL — A map of all or part of a subdivision providing
substantial conformance to the preliminary plat of the subdivision,
prepared in conformance of the Land Division Act, P.A. 288 of 1967,
as amended,10 and this chapter, and suitable for recording by the
County Register of Deeds.
(4)
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — An arterial street of great continuity
which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the
immediate municipality and region beyond, and may be designated
in the municipality's thoroughfare plan as a major thoroughfare,
parkway, expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets
comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET — A street intended to serve as a major
means of access from minor streets to major thoroughfares which
have considerable continuity within the framework of the
thoroughfare plan.
(2)
MINOR STREET — A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to abutting residential properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street paralleling and
adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
BOULEVARD STREET — A street developed to two-lane, one-way
pavements separated by a median.
(5)
TURNAROUND — A short boulevard street permanently
terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
(6)
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A short minor street having one end
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
(7)
10.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:89
§ 6-4. Land divisions.
SUBDIVISION — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of
land by the proprietor thereof or by the proprietor's heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the
purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building
development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or
the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements
of the Land Division Act.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN — The part of the Master Plan which sets forth
the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets
and thoroughfares.
TRACT — Two or more parcels that share a common property line and
are under the same ownership.
WAIVER — A variation or exception from standards contained in the
City of Lapeer Land Division Ordinance.
ALLEY — A minor service street used primarily to provide
secondary vehicular access to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting upon a street.
(8)
A. Land division requirements.
(1) A division is not subject to the platting requirements of the Land
Division Act.
(2) A proposed division, together with any previous divisions of the
same parent parcel or parent tract, shall result in a number of
parcels not more than the sum of the following, as applicable:
(a) For the first 10 acres or fraction thereof in the parent parcel or
parent tract, four parcels.
(b) For each whole 10 acres in excess of the first 10 acres in the
parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel, for up to a
maximum of 11 additional parcels.
(c) For each whole 40 acres in excess of the first 120 acres in the
parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel.
(3) For a parent parcel or parent tract of not less than 20 acres, the
division may result in a total of two parcels in addition to those
permitted by Subsection A(2) above, if one or both of the following
apply:
(a) Because of the establishment of one or more new roads, no
new driveway accesses to an existing public road for any of the
resulting parcels under Subsection A(2) above or this
subsection are created or required.
§ 6-3 LAPEER CODE § 6-4
1:90
(b) One of the resulting parcels under Subsection A(2) above and
this subsection comprises not less than 60% of the area of the
parent parcel or parent tract.
(4) A parcel of 40 acres or more created by the division of a parent
parcel or parent tract shall not be counted toward the number of
parcels permitted under Subsection A(2) and (3) above.
(5) A parcel or tract created by an exempt split or a division is not a
new parent parcel or parent tract and may be further partitioned or
split without being subject to the platting requirements of this
chapter if all of the following requirements are met:
(a) Not less than 10 years have elapsed since the parcel or tract
was recorded.
(b) The partitioning or splitting results in not more than the
following number of parcels, whichever is less:
[1] Two parcels for the first 10 acres or fraction thereof in the
parcel or tract plus one additional parcel for each whole 10
acres in excess of the first 10 acres in the parcel or tract.
[2] Seven parcels or 10 parcels if one of the resulting parcels
under this subsection comprises not less than 60% of the
area of the parcel or tract being partitioned or split.
(c) The partitioning or splitting satisfies the requirements of
Section 109 of the Land Division Act.11
(6) A parcel or tract created under the provisions of Subsection A(5)
above may not be further partitioned or split without being subject
to the platting requirements of the Land Division Act, as defined in
this chapter, except in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection A(5) above.
B. Land division application. The City Assessor shall be provided with
documented proof that the following requirements have been met
before any land division can be approved:
(1) A land division map (to scale) shall be submitted, which shows:
(a) Area of each land division.
(b) Proposed property lines of each land division.
(c) Public utility easements to each land division.
(d) Road accessibility for each land division.
(2) Compliance with a depth-to-width ratio of not more than 4 to 1 for
each land division.
11.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.109.
§ 6-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:91
§ 6-5. Lot splits. [Amended 9-13-2007]
Lots or outlots in a recorded plat shall not be further partitioned, divided or
altered unless in conformity with Chapter 7, Zoning, and provided further,
that any partitioning dividing or alteration shall not be in conflict with
the Land Division Act, and shall be approved by resolution of the City
Commission. A request for lot split shall include substantially the same
information as required under the land division application and shall also
clearly state the reasons for the requested action. No zoning or building
permit shall be sought nor shall any construction be commenced prior to
approval of the lot split by the City Commission.
(3) Compliance with the minimum lot width requirements of Chapter 7,
Zoning, for each land division.
(4) Compliance with the minimum lot area requirements of Chapter 7,
Zoning, for each land division.
(5) Road accessibility for each land division by:
(a) Public road frontage which meets Chapter 7, Zoning,
standards; or
(b) Frontage on a private road which complies with Chapter 53,
Private Roads.
(6) An accurate legal description and recordable survey of each
proposed land division, including the remaining parcel of land from
which the new divisions are being taken, compatible with the City's
Geographic Information System (GIS) coordinate system.
(7) Proof that the proposed land divisions shall not create more
divisions than the number allowed by the Land Division Act.
(8) County Health Department approval for on-site water (if public
water is not available) for each land division, if the land division is
to be a development site.
(9) County Health Department approval for on-site sewage disposal (if
public sewer is not available) for each land division, if the land
division is to be a development site.
(10) Public utility easements must be in place for the proposed land
division to connect to existing public utility facilities, if the land
division is to be a development site.
C. Land division approval period. The City Assessor shall have a review
period of 45 days after documents verifying compliance with each of the
requirements listed in Subsection B have been submitted to the
Assessor. If all items are in compliance, approval shall be granted
within said forty-five-day review period. Prior to final approval of the
proposed land division, the applicant shall provide the Assessor with a
survey and legal description of each proposed land division.
§ 6-4 LAPEER CODE § 6-6
1:92
§ 6-6. Subdivisions.
A. Initial investigation. It is suggested that the proprietor meet informally
with City staff to investigate the procedures and standards of the City
with reference to this chapter. The proprietor should concern himself/
herself with the following factors:
(1) The proprietor shall secure a copy of Chapter 7, Zoning, the Land
Division Ordinance, infrastructure standards and other similar
ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement
of land so as to make himself/herself aware of the requirements of
the City of Lapeer.
(2) All subdivisions shall be designed and built in compliance with the
City's Design and Infrastructure Standards as adopted by the City
Commission. A subdivision may be further subject to the averaged
lot size or open space plan provisions outlined in Chapter 7,
Zoning.
(3) The area of the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for
the intended use.
(4) The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to the
major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall
be investigated by the proprietor.
(5) Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the
municipality shall be investigated by the proprietor.
B. Step One: Conceptual Plan.
(1) The proprietor may, prior to preliminary plat submittal, present a
conceptual representation of the entire proposed subdivision to the
City for information and feedback. The Planning Commission is not
required to vote to approve or deny, but may give the proprietor
preliminary recommendations on the proposed subdivision.
Recommendations at this stage are meant to provide direction and
shall not infer approval at later stages.
(2) The following items shall be included on a conceptual plan at a
scale of not more than one inch to 200 feet:
(a) Lot sizes and lot dimensions.
(b) Street layout.
(c) Zoning of the property within the enclosed plat.
(d) Proprietor's name and address.
(e) Property boundary.
(f) Adjacent property and land use.
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:93
(g) Location map.
(h) Proposed phases.
(i) Existing natural features (wooded areas, floodplain, wetlands,
open water, streams, etc.).
(j) Existing easements.
(k) General proposed utility information.
(l) Topographic survey plan (show existing ground contour lines)
for the site and 100 feet beyond the property lines. Contour
lines are to be shown every two feet. [Amended 9-14-2006]
(m) All existing driveways and streets within 100 feet of the site.
(n) Plan shall otherwise comply with the City of Lapeer Design
Standards and City Construction Specifications. [Amended
9-14-2006]
(3) The proprietor shall submit 10 copies to the City Zoning
Administrator. The Planning Commission shall consider the prepreliminary
plat at the first Planning Commission meeting that is
held at least 30 days after submission to the City Zoning
Administrator.
C. Step Two: Preliminary Plat for Tentative Approval.
(1) The purpose of this step is to provide the proprietor with City
approval prior to going through the effort of obtaining
jurisdictional agency approvals. All information required for final
preliminary plat shall be provided at this step, with the exception of
the preliminary approvals from other jurisdictional agencies.
(2) Information required on the preliminary plat for tentative approval,
at a scale not more than one inch to 200 feet:
(a) All information required for conceptual plan review, as listed in
§ 6-6B(2).
(b) Survey of property and legal description.
(c) Name of the proposed development.
(d) Name, address, and phone number of proprietor and surveyor
or engineer that prepared the plat.
(e) Location map of subdivision, including section and range.
(f) Utility layout, including connections to existing systems, pipe
sizes, fire hydrant locations, sufficient sanitary and storm
sewer inverts to insure adequate depth, storm detention/
retention areas, storm sewer outlets and any proposed utility
§ 6-6 LAPEER CODE § 6-6
1:94
easements. Drainage calculations are not required at this
stage.
(g) Names of abutting subdivisions.
(h) Street names, rights-of-way, right-of-way widths and typical
road cross sections.
(i) Topographic survey plan (show existing ground contour lines)
for the site and 100 feet beyond the property line. Contour
lines are to be shown every two feet. [Amended 9-14-2006]
(j) Proposed drainage shall be indicated by drainage arrows;
drainage arrows should be sufficient to show preliminary
drainage directions of the entire development. [Amended
9-14-2006]
(k) Provide complete language for any and all deed restrictions or
state that there are not any proposed. [Amended 9-14-2006]
(l) Indicate all one-hundred-year floodplain areas. [Amended
9-14-2006]
(m) Indicate any wetland areas that are regulated by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality. [Amended 9-14-2006]
(n) Required zoning setbacks. [Amended 9-14-2006]
(o) Date and North arrow. [Amended 9-14-2006]
(p) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and
conditions of such dedication. [Amended 9-14-2006]
(q) Plan shall otherwise comply with City of Lapeer Design
Standards and City Construction Specifications. [Amended
9-14-2006]
(3) The proprietor shall submit 15 copies of the preliminary plat to the
City Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the next
Planning Commission meeting. Upon receipt, the City Zoning
Administrator shall submit copies to members of the City Planning
Commission and shall make one copy available to each appropriate
City department, which shall review the preliminary plat and
provide written comments to the Planning Commission at least two
weeks prior to the next meeting.
(4) Planning Commission review of tentative preliminary plat.
(a) Before making a recommendation on the preliminary plat, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, notice of
which shall contain the date, time and place of hearing, and
shall be sent by certified mail to the proprietor and owners of
land immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision, at least
seven days prior to the hearing date.
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:95
(b) The preliminary plat and any required accompanying data shall
be reviewed by the Planning Commission for the purpose of
checking its compliance with the Master Plan, Chapter 7,
Zoning, other applicable City ordinances, and other
specifications of this chapter, all in accord with sound
engineering practice.
(c) The Planning Commission shall submit a written
recommendation on the preliminary plat to the City
Commission. The Planning Commission shall either:
[1] Recommend tentative preliminary plat approval; or
[2] Set forth reasons for not recommending tentative
preliminary plat approval and the requirements for
tentative approval.
(5) City Commission review of tentative preliminary plat.
(a) The preliminary plat and any required accompanying data, and
written comments from reviewers, shall be reviewed by the
City Commission for the purpose of checking its compliance
with the Master Plan, Chapter 7, Zoning, other applicable City
ordinances, and other specifications of this chapter, all in
accord with sound engineering practice.
(b) The City Commission shall make a determination on the
preliminary plat within 90 days of filing of the plat with the City
Zoning Administrator. The City Commission shall either:
[1] Tentatively approve the preliminary plat; or
[2] Deny the preliminary plat, setting forth reasons for not
tentatively approving the preliminary plat and the
requirements for tentative approval.
(c) City Commission approval shall be valid for a period of one
year. The approval may be renewed for an additional one-year
period upon application by the proprietor and approval by the
City Commission.
D. Step Three: Final Preliminary Plat Approval.
(1) This is the final approval stage prior to the proprietor producing
construction drawings and obtaining construction permits. All
items required on the preliminary plat for tentative approval are
required on the final preliminary plat.
(2) Before the final preliminary plat is placed on the City Commission
Agenda, the proprietor must obtain preliminary approvals from:
§ 6-6 LAPEER CODE § 6-6
1:96
(a) Lapeer County Road Commission (if the proposed subdivision
includes or abuts roads under the Road Commission's
jurisdiction).
(b) Lapeer County Drain Commissioner.
(c) Michigan Department of Transportation (if the proposed
subdivision includes or abuts a state highway or includes
streets or roads that connect with a state highway).
(d) Michigan Department of Natural Resources (if the land
proposed to be subdivided abuts a wetland, floodplain, lake or
stream).
(e) The proprietor shall send two copies to the Lapeer County Plat
Board.
(f) The proprietor must notify all public utilities in the City of the
application by certified mail (including the local telephone,
gas, electric and cable company).
(3) City Commission review of final preliminary plat.
(a) The City Commission shall take action on the final preliminary
plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting or within 20 days
of the date of submittal. The City Commission shall either:
[1] Approve the final preliminary plat; or
[2] Set forth reasons for not approving the final preliminary
plat and the requirements for final approval.
(b) Approval of the final preliminary plat by the City Commission
shall be valid for a period of two years. The approval may be
renewed for an additional one-year period upon application by
the proprietor and approval by the City Commission.
E. Final plat.
(1) The proprietor shall file with the City Commission the following, in
compliance with the requirements of the Land Division Act, as
amended, and any other requirements stipulated in this chapter:
(a) A Mylar copy and 10 blueprint copies of the final record plat
(the Mylar copy shall be retained by the City).
(b) Documentary evidence sufficient to allow the City to ascertain
whether all the proper persons have signed the proprietor's
certificate, including a current commitment or policy of title
insurance (or equivalent) written by a company licensed to
issue title insurance policies in Michigan.
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6
1:97
(c) Proof of City Engineer's approval of construction plans. Plans
to be prepared and submitted as directed in § 6-7 of this
chapter.
(d) An agreement with the City containing a restriction upon the
plat whereby the Building Inspector will not be permitted to
issue a building permit for any structure upon any lot within
said subdivision until the improvements as specified herein
have been completed, or satisfactory arrangements have been
made with the City for the completion of said improvements.
These plat restrictions shall be made a part of all deeds or
contracts for any lot within the subdivision.
(e) Plat restrictions, if such are proposed by the proprietor, shall
be submitted, with the final record plat. Such restrictions shall
not be in contradiction to those of the Zoning Ordinance or any
other ordinance of the City. These restrictions shall become a
part of the final record plat and shall be recorded along with
the plat in the Office of the Lapeer County Register of Deeds.
(2) Final plat approval will be granted only under the following
conditions:
(a) That the items listed in § 6-6E(1) have been submitted as
required.
(b) That one of the following has occurred:
[1] That the proprietor has installed all improvements. The
proprietor shall submit as-built engineering drawings, as
required by this chapter, and said drawings shall have
been checked and approved for compliance with
requirements contained in this chapter, in the City of
Lapeer Design Standards and Construction Specifications
or standards adopted by other agencies with authority to
approve subdivision improvements. The City may also
require on-site construction observation by the City or its
representatives, with costs paid for by the proprietor.
[2] The proprietor may, at the City's option, provide a bond,
cash, certified check or bank letter of credit in the amount
of the cost of installation of all improvements as a
performance guarantee. The performance guarantee shall
accrue to the City, and shall be in an amount equal to the
total estimated cost for completing construction of the
specific public improvement, including contingencies,
based on an estimate by the City Engineer. The term
length for which the performance guarantee is in force
shall be for a period to be specified by the City
Commission. If the performance guarantee is in the form
of a bond, it shall be with a surety company authorized to
do business in the State of Michigan and acceptable to the
§ 6-6 LAPEER CODE § 6-6
1:98
§ 6-7. Construction plans.
City Commission. The escrow agreement shall be drawn
and furnished by the City. The performance guarantee
shall not be released to the proprietor until the proprietor
has submitted as-built engineering drawings of the
constructed improvements, as required by this chapter,
and said drawings have been checked and approved for
compliance with requirements contained in this chapter,
in the City of Lapeer Design Standards and Construction
Specifications or standards adopted by other agencies
with authority to approve subdivision improvements. The
City may also require on-site construction observation of
such improvements by the City or its representatives with
costs paid for by the proprietor.
(c) Prior to the final acceptance by the municipality of
improvements, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set
by the City Commission shall be posted by the proprietor.
(3) City Commission review of final plat.
(a) Upon receipt of the final plat and other material, the
Commission shall take action upon said plat in accordance with
the requirements of the Land Division Act, the Municipal
Charter and requirements of this chapter. In case of
disapproval, the reasons for such action shall, by written
communication, be transmitted to the proprietor who shall,
within a reasonable time, resubmit to the City Commission any
changes or alterations stipulated in the Commission's action of
disapproval.
(b) Upon approval of the final plat, the City shall, in accordance
with the Land Division Act and any other applicable
requirements, file said plat, agreements, restrictions and fees
with the Office of the County Register of Deeds.
A. No proprietor proposing to subdivide land within the territorial limits to
which these regulations are applicable, shall enter into any contract for
the sale of, or shall offer to sell said subdivision or any part thereof until
final plat approval has been obtained and the proprietor has completed
construction of all improvements or has posted a performance
guarantee with the City for the cost of the improvements. The
proprietor shall not proceed with any construction work on the
proposed subdivision until the proprietor has obtained from the City the
final approval of the construction plans, and the City has verified that
all outside agency permits have been obtained; except grading, which
may commence upon approval of the proprietor's grading plan. The City
may further require a preconstruction meeting prior to allowing
commencement of site work.
§ 6-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:99
§ 6-8. Topsoil.
Removal of topsoil from areas to be subdivided shall be prohibited except in
those areas to be occupied by buildings, roads or parking areas. A plan for
storage or stockpiling of topsoil shall be submitted by the proprietor with
the final plat and shall be approved prior to receiving approval.
§ 6-9. Completion of improvements.
§ 6-10. Compliance standards.
The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements
B. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of every proposed
subdivision to have prepared by a professional engineer registered in
the State of Michigan, a complete set of construction plans, including
profiles and cross sections of each street with grades; profile of
proposed sanitary and storm sewer with sizes and grades; a plan of
water lines with sizes and appurtenances, and specifications and other
supporting data for the required streets, utilities and other facilities.
Such construction plans shall be based on plans which had received
preliminary approval. Construction plans are subject to approval by the
responsible public agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the standards or specifications contained in the City
Design and Infrastructure Standards and the City Construction
Specifications, and eight sets shall be submitted to the City Planning
Department for review and approval.
C. Upon completion of the construction of all required streets, utilities and
other facilities, as built drawings shall be prepared at the proprietor's
expense by a professional engineer registered in the State of Michigan
and submitted to the City.
A. Prior to the undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor shall
deposit with the Clerk cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter
of credit, whichever the City selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the
City Commission, to insure faithful completion of all improvements
within the time specified. The amount of the deposit shall be set by the
City Commission based on an estimate of the City Engineer. All
improvements shall be constructed and approved by the City before the
final plat is approved. The City Commission shall release funds for the
payment of work as it is completed and approved by the municipality.
B. Prior to the acceptance by the City of improvements, a two-year
maintenance bond in an amount set by the City Commission shall be
posted by the proprietor. Improvements shall be provided by the
proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements
established in this chapter and/or any other such standards and
requirements which may, from time to time, be established by
ordinance or published rules of the City.
§ 6-7 LAPEER CODE § 6-10
1:100
within the City, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and
public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the City. All
subdivision or project improvements within the City installed in public
streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, or public easements, and/or
under the ultimate jurisdiction of the City, shall comply with all of the
provisions and requirements of this or any other related ordinance.
§ 6-11. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and
general welfare of the City. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate,
annul or in any manner interfere with other ordinances or regulations of
the City, nor conflict with any statutes of the State of Michigan or Lapeer
County, except that this chapter shall prevail in cases where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or
regulations.
§ 6-12. Review fees.
The City Commission shall establish a fee schedule for the review of all
applications included in this chapter. This fee schedule may be amended by
the City Commission, as needed.
§ 6-13. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor which is punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a maximum fine of $500, or
both.
§ 6-14. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this Land Division
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this chapter; and the application of those provisions to any
persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 6-15. Repealer.
All ordinances and amendments thereto enacted and/or adopted by the
City Commission inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed, as of the effective date of this chapter. The repeal of the above
ordinances and their amendments does not affect or impair any act done,
offense committed, or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability,
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
§ 6-16. Variations from standards.
§ 6-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-16
1:101
A. In cases where variances from the dimensional standards of Chapter 7,
Zoning, are deemed necessary, said variances shall be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the procedures and standards
outlined in Chapter 7, Zoning.
B. Waivers from standards contained in the City of Lapeer Land Division
Ordinance may be granted by the City Commission following a
recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall consider input from the appropriate public
authority(ies) in making its recommendation.
(1) In making its findings, the Planning Commission shall consider the
nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in
the vicinity, the number of persons proposed to reside or work in
the subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision
upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. The Planning Commission
shall include its findings and the specific reasons therefor in a
report of recommendations to the City Commission and shall also
record its reasons and actions in the minutes.
(2) The Planning Commission shall only recommend waivers that it
deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. No waiver
shall be recommended unless the Planning Commission finds the
following:
(a) That there are such special circumstances or conditions
affecting said property that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would clearly be impractical or
unreasonable. In such cases, the proprietor shall first state his/
her reasons in writing as to the specific provision or
requirement involved and submit them to the Planning
Commission.
(b) That the granting of the specific waiver will not be detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the
immediate area.
(c) That such waiver will not violate the provisions of the Land
Division Act.12
(d) That such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the
interest and purpose of this chapter and the Master Plan of the
City of Lapeer.
C. Application for any waiver or variance shall be submitted in writing by
the proprietor at the time the preliminary plat is filed, stating fully and
clearly all facts relied upon by the proprietor and shall be supplemented
with maps, plans, or other additional data which may aid in the analysis
of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include
12.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 6-16 LAPEER CODE § 6-16
1:102
§ 6-17. Enforcement.
The City Commission hereby appoints the City Manager the enforcing
officer of this chapter, and it shall be his or her duty to enforce the
provisions hereof. The City Manager may delegate these duties to another
department or official, and may call upon any department or official of the
City of Lapeer to furnish him or her with such information and assistance
as he or she may deem necessary for the observance or enforcement of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of such department or official to furnish such
information and assistance whenever required.
§ 6-18. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on the 15th day of October 2003.
Chapter 7
ZONING
such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to
guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
§ 6-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-18
1:103

ARTICLE I
Short Title
§ 7-1.01. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lapeer Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 7-1.02. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of land and structures to
meet the needs of the City's residents for places of residence, recreation,
industry, trade, service, and other uses of land, to ensure that use of the
land is situated in appropriate locations and relationships, to facilitate
orderly development which is harmonious with the surrounding area and
preserves community character, to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of
land and congestion of population, transportation systems, and other public
facilities, to facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation
systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation, and other
public service and facility requirements, and to promote public health,
safety, and welfare.
§ 7-1.03. Enabling authority.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with the authority granted cities
under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006 (MCL § 125.3101
et seq.), as amended.
§ 7-1.04. Conflicting regulations.
Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the
provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any
other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are
imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such ordinance
shall govern.
§ 7-1.05. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be considered as minimum standards
and requirements within each respective zoning district and shall not
preclude the establishment of higher or more restrictive standards, or
requirements for the authorization of and conditional use permit where
such higher or more restrictive standards or requirements are found
necessary by the City Planning Commission to attain the intent of this
chapter. Should any provision or section of this chapter be held invalid
or unconstitutional, such ruling shall not affect the validity of remaining
portions of the chapter.
§ 7-1.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1.06
1:105
§ 7-1.06. Vested right.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to provide any
permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district,
zoning classification or any permissible activities therein, other than noted
in Article XXI. Such uses, structures, and activities are hereby declared to
be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be
necessary for the preservation or protection of public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 7-1.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-1.06
1:106
ARTICLE II
Districts
§ 7-2.01. Districts established.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Lapeer is hereby divided into the
following districts:
§ 7-2.02. District boundaries; changes in boundaries.
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the
Zoning Map, City of Lapeer Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies this
chapter, and which map, with all notations, references and other
information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully
described herein.13
A. Residential districts.
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District
RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District
MHP Manufactured Home Park District
B. Nonresidential districts.
OS-1 Office Service District
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 General Business District
B-3 Regional Business District
CBD-1 Central Business District
CBD-2 Central Business District
I-1 Industrial District
I-2 Planned Industrial District
P-1 Vehicular Parking District
C. Overlay and mixed-use districts.
MU Mixed-Use Overlay District
M-24 M-24 Overlay District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
A. Zoning district amendments.
13.Editor's Note: The most recent Zoning Map is available in the City offices.
§ 7-2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2.02
1:107
(1) The following property, formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family
Residential District, is hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business
District: [Amended 9-13-2012]
(a) 947 Baldwin Road; Tax I.D. #L20-95-505-040-00.
(2) The following property, formerly zoned Planned Unit Development
(PUD) based on a conceptual plan for "The Lapeer Commons" by
CHMP Architects dated 7-1-2009, is hereby rezoned to Planned
Unit Development (PUD) based on a revised conceptual plan for
"The Lapeer Commons" by CHMP Architects with a revision date of
8-3-2012: [Amended 10-11-2012]
(a) 1048 S. Lapeer Road; Tax I.D. # L21-39-831-019-00.
(b) This rezoning is based on substantial compliance with the
aforementioned revised conceptual plan, and supersedes
previous rezoning of the property to PUD based on previous
conceptual plans. This rezoning is further based on completion
of the site plan process for the various phases of the
development within three years from the date of final rezoning
approval by the City Commission as per Article XII.
(3) The following property, formerly zoned One-Family Residential
(R-3), is hereby rezoned to Planned Unit Development (PUD) based
on a conceptual plan and accompanying project summary letter by
Davis Land Surveying and Engineering, P.C. prepared for Grand
Legacy Homes, Inc. dated 3-12-2013: [Amended 5-30-2013]
(a) L22-00-404-040-00 and L22-01-700-040-00.
(b) This rezoning is based on substantial compliance with the
aforementioned conceptual plan and letter, and is further
contingent upon the following:
[1] Waiving the development standard for a common party
wall of an attached single-family dwelling unit not to
exceed 50% of its area in common with an abutting
dwelling wall;
[2] That the infrastructure be constructed in its entirety and
the project be developed in a non-phased manner; and
[3] A thirty-five-foot building height limit on the structures.
(4) The following property, formerly zoned One-Family Residential
(R-1), is hereby rezoned to Planned Unit Development (PUD) based
on a revised conceptual plan by Wilson Road Group, Inc., titled
"Lapeer Area Investment PUD," with a revision date of 3-10-2013:
[Amended 6-13-2013]
(a) L20-66-400-040-00, L20-66-300-004-00, and
L20-66-200-040-00.
§ 7-2.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-2.02
1:108
(b) This rezoning is based on substantial compliance with the
aforementioned revised conceptual plan, and is further based
on completion of the site plan process for the various phases of
the development within three years from the date of final
rezoning approval by the City Commission as per Article XII,
and is contingent upon the following:
[1] A twenty-five-foot height limitation be placed on all
proposed structures;
[2] Commercial uses on the site be restricted to uses
permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business zoning
district; and
[3] All demolition be completed prior to any new construction
beginning on the site.
(5) The following property, formerly zoned I-1 Industrial District, is
hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business District: [Amended
7-31-2014]
(a) 1250 Imlay City Road; Tax I.D. #L21-36-509-040-00.
(6) The following property, formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family
Residential, is hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business District:
[Amended 2-12-2015]
(a) 1177 S. Main Street; Tax I.D. #L21-16-550-015-00.
(7) The following property, formerly zoned R-2 and R-3 Single-Family
Residential, is hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business based on a
conditional rezoning of the following parcels located on the south
side of DeMille Boulevard and the north side of Turrill Road from
R-2 and R-3 to B-2 General Business: [Added 12-7-2015]
(a) 252.68 +/- acres on the south side of DeMille Boulevard, east
of Farmer's Creek, consisting of:
[1] L20-93-502-050-00 zoned R-2, 3 +/- acres east of Farmer's
Creek.
[2] L20-95-701-040-00 zoned R-2, 20.26 acres.
[3] L20-95-704-040-00 zoned R-2, 31.3 acres.
[4] L20-95-700-040-00 zoned R-2, 55 +/- acres east of
Farmer's Creek.
[5] L20-95-705-040-00 zoned R-3, 71.33 acres.
[6] L20-83-358-050-00 zoned R-2, 46.5 +/- acres east of
Farmer's Creek.
[7] L20-83-357-040-00 zoned R-2, 25.29 acres.
§ 7-2.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2.02
1:109
(b) And 192.59 acres on the north side of Turrill Road, east of Cliff
Drive, consisting of:
[1] L20-98-008-003-00 zoned R-2, 111.52 acres.
[2] L20-98-008-006-00 zoned R-2 and R-3, 50.78 acres.
[3] L20-98-008-005-00 zoned R-2, 30.29 acres.
(c) The condition being that the use of the property as zoned
would be limited to the use classification of "Publicly owned
buildings; public utility buildings; telephone exchange
buildings; electric transformer stations and substations; gas
regulator stations with service yards, but without storage
yards; water and sewage pumping stations."
(8) The following property, formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family
Residential, is hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business based on a
conditional rezoning of the following parcel located on the north
side of DeMille Boulevard and west of Farmer's Creek from R-2
Single Family Residential to B-2 General Business: [Added
3-21-2016]
(a) L20-93-502-040-00 zoned R-2, 11+/- acres west of Farmer's
Creek.
(b) The condition being that the use of the property as zoned
would be limited to the use classification of "Publicly owned
buildings; public utility buildings; telephone exchange
buildings; electrical transformer stations and substations; gas
regulator stations with service yards, but without storage
yards; water and sewage pumping stations."
(9) The following property, formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family
Residential, is hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business: [Added
11-21-2016]
(a) 885 Baldwin Road; Tax I.D. #L21-60-100-040-00.
(10) The following properties, formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family
Residential, are hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business: [Added
3-6-2017]
(a) 1061 S. Main Street; Tax I.D. #21-16-550-005-00; Sec 8 T7N
R10E Churchill Farms Subdivision Lot 5;
(b) 1073 S. Main Street; Tax I.D. #L21-16-550-006-00; Sec 8 T7N
R10E Churchill Farms Subdivision Lot 6; and
(c) 1073 Cliff Drive; Tax I.D. #L21-16-550-027-00; Sec 8 T7N
R10E Churchill Farms Subdivision Lot 27.
(11) The following properties, formerly zoned OS-1 Office Service, are
hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business: [Added 11-20-2017]
§ 7-2.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-2.02
1:110
(a) 239 S. Main Street; Tax I.D. #21-54-501-040-00; City of Lapeer
plat of Whitesville Lot 31 and S 47 feet of Lot 33 (L=1 P=73
Sec 5, 17N-R10E) also including that portion of the vacated
alley, contiguous to the easterly property lines.
(b) 239 S. Main Street; Tax I.D. #L21-53-301-040-00; City of
Lapeer plat of Whitesville Lots 38, 40, 42, 44, 46 and that part
lot 48 lying south of RR R/W; also W 1/2 VAC Oak Street
adjacent thereto, also including that portion of the vacated
alley, contiguous to the westerly property lines (L=1 P=73 Sec
5, T7N-R10E).
(12) The following property, formerly zoned B-2 General Business, is
hereby rezoned to I-1 Industrial: [Added 1-16-2018]
(a) East 1/4 corner of Section 4, T7N, R10E, City of Lapeer, Lapeer
County, Michigan, and being more particularly described as
commencing at the center of Sec 4, TH N89°14'30" E 1,326.16
feet; TH S01°56'04" E 518.80 feet to POB; TH continuing
S01°56'04" W 291.15 feet; TH S60°55'19" E 322.06 feet; TH
S01°56'04" E 208.86 feet to the north ROW line of Genesee
Street; TH S60°55'19" E 177.94 feet; N01°56'04" W 600.00
feet; TH N71°44'27" W 456.59 feet to POB containing 4.087
acres NET PROPOSED (4.332 gross) Parcel
ID#L20-83-462-020 proposed.
(13) The following parcels formerly zoned B-2 General Business are
hereby rezoned to I-1 Industrial: [Added 6-4-2018]
(a) Portions of Parcel #L20-83-454-040-00 (1333 Imlay City Road)
and Parcel #L20-83-454-050-00 (adjacent vacant 6.16 acre
parcel herein together described as Parcel A-1 per survey) both
of which are currently zoned B-2 General Business and are
proposed to be reconfigured resulting in Parcel
#L20-83-454-060-00 (1.51 acre Parcel A-2 per survey) to be
zoned B-2 General Business and Parcel #L20-83-454-065-00
(4.65 acre Parcel B-2 per survey) to be zoned I-1 Industrial.
(14) The following parcel formerly zoned I-1 Industrial is hereby
rezoned to B-2 General Business: [Added 7-16-2018]
(a) Parcel #L21-36-503-040-00 (552 Imlay City Road); City of
Lapeer Rood's Paved-Way Plat (L=1 P=76 Sec 4, T7N-R10E)
Lot 3 44-12-560-003-00.
(15) The following parcel formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family Residential/
OS-1 Office Service is hereby rezoned to RM-1 Multiple-Family
Residential: [Added 7-16-2018]
(a) Parcel #L20-94-902-040-00; City of Lapeer T7N, R10E, SEC 7,
COM N88*48'27"W 520.58 FT (previously recorded as
N88*50'00"W 520.96) & N28*56'40"E 281.16 FT &
§ 7-2.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2.02
1:111
§ 7-2.03. District boundaries interpreted.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
N88*52'51"W 267 FT (previously recorded as N88*53'00"W
267.00) FRM E 1/4 COR, Sec 7, to the POB; TH N0*06'38"W
740.89 FT; TH N88*55'50"W (previously recorded as
N88*55'54"W) 673.98 FT; TH S0*06'38"E (previously recorded
as S00*05'24" E) 740.31 FT; TH S88*52'51 E 673.99 FT TO
POB 11.46 A+/-.
(16) The following properties formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family
Residential is hereby rezoned to B-2 General Business: [Added
11-19-2018]
(a) Parcel # L21-16-550-012-00; City of Lapeer Sec 8 T7N R10E
Churchill Farms Subdivision Lot 12; and
(b) Parcel #L21-16-550-021-00; City of Lapeer Sec 8 T7N R10E
Churchill Farms Subdivision Lot 21. Annexed from Township in
8/2018.
(17) The following properties formerly zoned R-2 Single-Family
Residential is hereby rezoned to OS-1 Office Service: [Added
1-22-2019]
(a) 1211 Barry Drive - Parcel #L21-30-014-040-00; City of Lapeer
Knollwood #1 Lot 4, Block B (L=1 P=93 Sec 32, T8N-R10E).
(b) 1217 Barry Drive - Parcel #L21-30-016-040-00; City of Lapeer
Knollwood # 1 Lot 5, BLK B "ACT 135 OF 1976" (L=1 P=93
Sec 32, T8N-R10E).
(c) 1225 Barry Drive - Parcel #L21-30-017-040-00; City of Lapeer
R Knollwood # 1 Lot 6, Block B (L=1 P=93 Sec 32, T8N-R10E).
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
the midway between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall
be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated
§ 7-2.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-2.03
1:112
§ 7-2.04. Overlay zoning districts.
An overlay zone is a zoning district that exists in conjunction with, or
"on top of" conventional zoning districts. It may cross the conventional or
"underlying" zoning districts, or may be located within a single district. The
overlay zone imposes a set of requirements in addition to those laid out by
the underlying zoning regulation and may modify the underlying district's
requirements. The purpose of an overlay zoning district is to address special
features or conditions that may pertain to several districts or a subset of
one district.
§ 7-2.05. Zoning of annexed areas.
Whenever any area is annexed to the City of Lapeer, one of the following
conditions will apply:
as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals,
lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through E above shall be so construed.
G. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by the scale of the map.
H. Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsections A through G above, the
Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall interpret the district boundaries.
I. Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the
Zoning Map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover
public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do
extend to the center of any public right-of-way.
A. Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified as being in
whichever district of this chapter most closely conforms with the zoning
that existed prior to annexation, such classification to be recommended
by the Planning Commission to the City Commission and the
Commission shall approve same by resolution.
B. Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as
an R-3 District until a Zoning Map for said area has been adopted by the
City Commission. The Planning Commission shall recommend the
appropriate zoning district(s) for such area within three months after
the matter is referred to it by the City Commission.
§ 7-2.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2.06
1:113
§ 7-2.06. Zoning of vacated areas.
Whenever any street, alley or other public way, is vacated, the street, alley
or other public way or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in
the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches.
§ 7-2.07. District requirements.
All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of
Article XIV, General Provisions.
§ 7-2.08. Similar use.
The Planning Department shall have the authority to determine that a use,
not otherwise specifically defined, is clearly similar to another use allowed
in a district and is permitted in the district. Where there is uncertainty, an
application for a similar use determination shall be submitted to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
§ 7-2.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-2.08
1:114
ARTICLE III
Single-Family Residential Districts
§ 7-3.01. Intent.
The R-1 through R-3 Single-Family Residential Districts are intended to
provide sites for single-family detached dwellings and residentially related
uses that serve the residents in the district. These districts provide a
range of housing opportunities from larger suburban lots to more compact
urban neighborhoods. These districts are intended to create walkable
neighborhoods that are integrated into the character of the City. It is also
the intent of these districts to protect natural areas and include recreational
open space within neighborhoods and throughout the City. Further, it is the
intent of the Single-Family Residential Districts to eliminate multiple-family
residential uses in these districts.
§ 7-3.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall be not used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.03.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
Key:
Permitted Use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for
the purposes listed by right.
Special Land Use (SLU): Uses which may be permitted by obtaining special
land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII, Use
Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are met.
Additional Requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
Table 7.03.1: Single-Family Residential Districts Schedule of Uses
Use R-1 to R-3
Additional
Requirements
Residential Uses
Home occupation P § 7-13.01C
Single-family detached
dwellings
P § 7-13.01B
Animal and Agricultural Uses
Farms P § 7-13.02B
Public and Institutional Uses
Cemeteries SLU § 7-13.03A
§ 7-3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.02
1:115
Table 7.03.1: Single-Family Residential Districts Schedule of Uses
Use R-1 to R-3
Additional
Requirements
Colleges, universities and
other such institutions of
higher learning, public and
private, offering courses in
general, technical or
religious education and not
operated for profit
SLU § 7-13.03B
Places of public assembly
and places of worship,
including other facilities
normally incidental thereto,
with a seating capacity of
less than 500 people or
parking for less than 250
vehicles
SLU § 7-13.03C
Private noncommercial
recreational areas or
community centers
[Amended 5-17-2012]
SLU § 7-13.07F
Public, parochial and other
private elementary schools
offering courses in general
education and not operated
for profit
P —
Public, parochial and private
intermediate or secondary
schools offering courses in
general education, not
operated for profit
SLU
Publicly owned and operated
libraries, parks, parkways
and recreational facilities
P —
Uses and buildings of the
municipality (without
storage yards)
SLU
§ 7-3.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-3.02
1:116
Table 7.03.1: Single-Family Residential Districts Schedule of Uses
Use R-1 to R-3
Additional
Requirements
Utility and public service
buildings and uses (without
storage yards), when
operating requirements
necessitate the locating of
said building within the
district in order to serve the
immediate vicinity
SLU
Entertainment and Recreation Uses
Golf courses, which may or
may not be operated for
profit
SLU § 7-13.07D
Health and Human Care and Uses
Adult foster care family
home (6 or fewer adults)
P —
Adult foster care small
group home (1 to 12 adults)
SLU —
Child-care center, nursery
schools and day nurseries
SLU § 7-13.09A
Child care institution SLU
Family day-care home (6 or
fewer children less than 24
hours per day)
SLU —
Group day-care home (7 to
12 children less than 24
hours per day)
SLU —
Foster family home (4 or
fewer children 24 hours per
day)
P —
Foster family group home (5
to 6 children 24 hours per
day)
P —
Accessory and Similar Uses
Accessory building and uses,
customarily incident to any
of the above permitted uses
P —
Garage sales P § 7-13.10A
Other uses similar to the
above uses
SLU § 7-13.11
§ 7-3.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.02
1:117
Table 7.03.1: Single-Family Residential Districts Schedule of Uses
Use R-1 to R-3
Additional
Requirements
Private pools shall be
permitted as an accessory
use within the rear yard only
P —
Wireless telecommunication
antenna
SLU § 7-13.10D
Other temporary uses P/SLU § 7-13.10C
§ 7-3.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
All lots and buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements:
Single-Family Residential Districts: Schedule of Area, Height and Placement Requirements
(Table 7.03.2)5
Minimum Lot10
Minimum Setbacks6, 7
(feet)
Side Yards9
Zoning
District1,
5
Area4
(square
feet)
Width2
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height3
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage Front8 Least 1 Total 2 Rear
Minimum
Floor
Area
Per
Dwelling
Unit
R-1 6,000 50 25 30% 25 4 12 35 850
R-2 8,400 70 25 30% 25 5 15 35 1,000
R-3 12,000 90 35 30% 30 10 25 40 1,000
Footnotes to Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
1 Recreational area. All residential developments containing more than six dwelling units shall
provide a recreational area of at least 1,500 square feet for each residential unit. The location of
the area shall be approved by the City Commission, based upon a recommendation by the Planning
Commission.
2 Depth-to-width ratio. All lots created after the adoption date of this chapter shall have a lot depth
not more than four times its width, as measured at the front lot line.
3 Building height. Exceptions to building height shall be as provided for in § 7-14.03A, Height limit.
4 Averaged lot size. The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary lot sizes
and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in Table 7.03.2 for each
Single-Family Residential District. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met:
a. In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed that lot areas
and widths shall not be reduced by more than 10% below that area or width required and shall
not create an attendant increase in the number of lots.
b. Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary plat shall average the minimum required for
the district in which it is located.
§ 7-3.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-3.03
1:118
c. All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be
indicated on the print of the preliminary plat.
5 Flexibility. See § 7-3.04, Subdivision Open Space Plan, and § 7-3.05, Single-family clustering option,
regarding flexibility allowances.
6 Nonresidential setbacks. For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, the setback
shall equal the height of the main building, unless otherwise specified in Article XIII, Use
Requirements. A setback and screening buffer as listed in Table 7.15.1 is required when a rear or
side lot line is adjacent to different zoning district or use.
7 Natural features setback. All structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from all natural features
such as drains, regulated wetlands, natural ponds, lakes and streams.
8 Front yard reduction. The required front yard setback may be reduced to an average of the existing
front yard setbacks of residences immediately adjacent on the same street. If no adjacent residences
exist, then the front yard setback may be reduced to an average of the nearest two residences on
the same street.
9 Rear yards abutting a side yard. In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard setback
abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the district in which
located and all regulations applicable to a front yard shall apply. On corner lots where a lot width of
60 feet or less exists, the side yard may be reduced to the front setback of the home to the rear of
such corner lot.
Figure 7.03.1, Rear Yard Adjacent to Side Yard
10 No sanitary sewer. New lots in areas without sanitary sewer must be a minimum of one acre.
§ 7-3.04. Subdivision Open Space Plan.
A. The intent of the Subdivision Open Space Plan is to promote the
following objectives:
(1) Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the
natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and
similar natural assets.
(2) Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of residential areas.
(3) Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open
area while recognizing a reduction in development costs and
allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site.
§ 7-3.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.04
1:119
(4) Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance
to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage
the development of recreational facilities.
B. Modification to the standards outlined in Table 7.03.2 may be made in
the R-2 and R-3 Single-Family Residential Districts when the following
conditions are met:
(1) The lot area in R-2 Single-Family Residential Districts, which are
served by a public sanitary sewer system, may be reduced up to
20%. In the R-2 District, this reduction may be accomplished in part
by reducing lot widths up to five feet. In the R-3 Districts, this
reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to
10 feet. These lot area reductions shall be permitted, provided that
the dwelling unit gross density shall be no greater than if the land
area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot
lot areas as required for each Single-Family District under Table
7.03.2. All calculations shall be predicated upon the Single-Family
Districts having the following gross densities (including roads):
(a) R-2 = 3.9 dwelling units per acre.
(b) R-3 = 3.4 dwelling units per acre.
(2) Rear yards may be reduced to 30 feet when such lots border on
land dedicated for park, recreation and/or open space purposes,
provided that the width of said dedicated land shall not be less than
100 feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of the
adjacent lot.
(3) Under the provisions of Subsection B(1) above of this section, for
each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision
through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements
as outlined in Table 7.03.2, at least equal amounts of land shall be
dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision in
a manner approved by the municipality.
(4) The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space purposes shall
in no instance be less than three acres and shall be in a location and
shape approved by the Planning Commission.
(5) The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this
section shall not include bodies of water, swamps or land with
excessive grades making it unsuitable for recreation. All land
dedicated shall be so graded and developed as to have natural
drainage. The entire area may, however, be located in a floodplain.
(6) This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be permitted only if it is
mutually agreeable to the legislative body and the subdivider or
developer.
§ 7-3.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-3.04
1:120
(7) This plan for reduced lot sizes shall be started within 12 months
after having received approval of the final plat and must be
completed in a reasonable time. Failure to start within this period
shall void all previous approval.
(8) Under this subdivision open space approach, the proprietor shall
dedicate sufficient park area for the common use of the lot owners
so that each final plat is within maximum density requirements;
provided, however, that any entire park within a single block shall
be dedicated as a whole.
C. The application for approval of Subdivision Open Space Plan shall
contain the following in addition to the information required by Chapter
6, Land Division:
(1) A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated to the
City or to the common use of lot owners (herein called "open land"),
including the following, at a minimum:
(a) Legal description of open land.
(b) Topographical survey of open land.
(c) Type of soil in open land.
(d) Description of natural features on open land (stands of trees or
other vegetation, streams or other bodies of water, etc).
(e) Other relevant factors.
(2) The proposed plan of development of the open land shall be
contained in the application and shall include the following, at a
minimum:
(a) The proposed manner in which the title to land and facilities is
to be held by the owners of land in the subdivision.
(b) The proposed manner of collection of maintenance costs,
financing costs or assessments so that nonpayment will
constitute a lien on the property, thus avoiding municipal
responsibility in the future.
(c) The proposed manner of regulating the use of the common
facilities and areas so as to eliminate possible nuisances to the
property owners and cause for enforcement by the City.
(d) The proposed method of notifying the City when any change is
contemplated in plans that would affect the original
specifications approved by the City.
(e) The proposed method of setting up assessments to cover
contingencies, insurance against casualty and liability and
payment of taxes relating to these properties.
§ 7-3.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.04
1:121
§ 7-3.05. Single-family clustering option.
(f) The proposed use of open land and the proposed improvements
which are to be constructed by the proprietor.
(3) The application shall contain a statement of the benefits to be
realized by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the City
by approval of the proposed Subdivision Open Space Plan with
particular reference to the objectives stated in this chapter.
D. Subdivision Open Space Plans shall follow the review and approval
procedures for subdivisions, including all public hearing requirements,
as set forth in Chapter 6, Land Division.
(1) If the Planning Commission is satisfied that the proposed
Subdivision Open Space Plan is in compliance with this chapter and
should be approved, it shall recommend such approval to the City
Commission with the conditions upon which such approval should
be based. Thereafter, the City Commission shall take action upon
such application in accordance with the procedures for
subdivisions set forth in Chapter 6, Land Division.
(2) If the Planning Commission is not satisfied that the proposed
Subdivision Open Space Plan is in compliance with this chapter or
finds that the approval of said Subdivision Open Space Plan will be
detrimental to existing development in the general area and should
not be approved, it shall communicate such disapproval to the City
Commission with the reasons therefor. The proprietor shall be
entitled to a hearing upon said proposal before the City
Commission upon written request filed with the Clerk.
(3) If the City Commission gives approval to the proposed Subdivision
Open Space Plan, it shall instruct its attorney to prepare a contract
setting forth the conditions on which such approval is based, which
contract, after approval by the City Commission, shall be entered
into between the City and the proprietor prior to the approval of a
preliminary plat.
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of this section is to permit the development of singlefamily
residential patterns which, through design innovation, will
provide for an alternative means for development of single-family
areas. To accomplish this, modifications to the single-family
residential standards, as outlined in Table 7.03.2, shall be
permitted in the R-2 and R-3 Districts.
(2) In R-2 and R-3 Single-Family Residential Districts, the
requirements of Table 7.03.2 may be waived and the attaching of
single-family dwelling units may be permitted, subject to the
standards of this section.
§ 7-3.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-3.05
1:122
B. Conditions for qualification.
(1) The Planning Commission may approve of the clustering or
attaching of dwelling units on parcels of land under single
ownership and control which, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, have characteristics which would make sound
physical development under the normal subdivision approach
impractical because of parcel size, shape or dimension or because
the site is located in a transitional use area or the site has natural
characteristics which are worth preserving or which make platting
difficult. In approving an area for cluster development, the
Planning Commission shall find at least one of the following
conditions to exist:
(a) The parcel to be developed has frontage on a major or
secondary thoroughfare and is generally parallel to said
thoroughfare and is of shallow depth as measured from the
thoroughfare.
(b) The parcel has frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare
and is of a narrow width, as measured along the thoroughfare,
which makes platting difficult.
(c) The parcel is shaped in such a way that the angles formed by
its boundaries make a subdivision difficult to achieve and the
parcel has frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare.
(d) A substantial portion of the parcel's perimeter is bordered by a
major thoroughfare which would result in a substantial
proportion of the lots of the development abutting the major
thoroughfare.
(e) A substantial portion of the parcel's perimeter is bordered by
land that is located in other than an R Single-Family
Residential District or is developed for a use other than singlefamily
detached homes.
(f) The parcel contains a floodplain or poor soil conditions which
result in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel
being unbuildable.
(g) The parcel contains natural land forms which are so arranged
that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in
excess of 10% between these elevations. These elevation
changes and slopes shall appear as the typical feature of the
site rather than the exceptional or infrequent features of the
site. The topography is such that achieving road grades of less
than that permitted by the City could be impossible unless the
site were mass graded. The providing of single-family clusters
will, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, allow a greater
preservation of the natural setting.
§ 7-3.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.05
1:123
(h) The parcel contains natural assets which would be preserved
through the use of cluster development. Such assets may
include natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a
natural habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic features or
other natural assets which should be preserved.
(2) In order to qualify a parcel for development under Subsection
B(1)(f), (g) or (h) above, the Planning Commission shall determine
that the parcel has these characteristics and the request shall be
supported by written and/or graphic documentation, prepared by a
landscape architect, engineer, professional community planner,
registered architect or environmental design professional. Such
documentation shall include the following as appropriate: soil test
borings, floodplain map, topographic map of maximum two-foot
contour interval, inventory of natural assets.
(3) This option shall not apply to those parcels of land which have been
split for the specific purpose of coming within the requirements of
this cluster option section.
C. Permitted densities. In a cluster development, the gross densities
permitted may be increased to the following maximums (including
streets):
(1) For those areas qualifying under Subsection B(1)(a) through (e): six
dwelling units per acre.
(2) For those areas qualifying under Subsection B(1)(f), (g) or (h): five
dwelling units per acre.
(3) Water areas within the parcel may be included in the computation
of density, provided that land adjacent to the water is substantially
developed as open space.
(4) In those instances where a parcel qualifies under both Subsection
C(1) and (2) above, the densities permitted under Subsection C(1)
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, provided that the
Commission finds that such density is reasonable in that it does not
preclude the application of Subsection D(5) and does not result in
the destruction or total removal of such natural assets as
enumerated under Subsection B(1)(f), (g) or (h) above.
D. Development standards and requirements. In areas meeting the criteria
of Subsection B(1) above, the minimum yard setbacks, heights and
minimum lot sizes per unit as required by Table 7.03.2, may be waived
and the attaching of dwelling units may be accomplished, subject to the
following:
(1) The attaching of single-family dwelling units, one to another, may
be permitted when said homes are attached by means of one of the
following:
§ 7-3.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-3.05
1:124
(a) Through a common party wall which does not have over 50% of
its area in common with an abutting dwelling wall.
(b) By means of an architectural wall detail which does not form
interior room space.
(c) Through a common party wall in only the garage portion of
adjacent structures.
(d) No other common party wall relationship is permitted and the
number of units attached in this manner shall not exceed four.
(2) Yard requirements shall be provided as follows:
(a) Spacing between groups of attached dwelling units or between
groups of four unattached units shall be equal to at least 20
feet in an R-3 District, and 15 feet in an R-2 District, measured
between the nearest points of adjacent buildings.
(b) Building setbacks from local streets shall be determined after
consideration of potential vehicular traffic volume, site design
and pedestrian safety. It is intended that setbacks for each
dwelling shall be such that one car length space will be
available between the garage or required off-street parking
spaces and the street pavement. In determining the setbacks
from local streets, the Planning Commission may use the
following guidelines:
[1] Garages or required off-street parking spaces shall not be
located less than 20 feet from the right-of-way of a public
street unless such street (or portion thereof) is serving as
access to not more than 16 residential units.
[2] Where streets are private or the Planning Commission
does not require the twenty-foot setback from a public
right-of-way, garages or required off-street parking spaces
shall not be located less than 20 feet from the pavement
edge of the street or the shoulder of a street.
(c) That side of a cluster adjacent to an arterial or collector street
shall not be nearer to said street than 25 feet, except that in
those areas where topography meets the topographic
conditions set forth in § 7-3.05B(1)(g) above on lands
immediately adjacent to said streets having slopes in excess of
10%, the front yard may be reduced by five feet, but in no
instance shall a structure be closer to the road right-of-way line
than 1/2 the front yard setback for the district in which it is
located.
(d) Any side of a cluster adjacent to a private road shall not be
nearer to said road than 10 feet.
§ 7-3.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.05
1:125
(3) In computing the height of any individual dwelling unit in a cluster
on a slope in excess of 10% and when the unit is constructed on
posts, the first 10 feet of height in the posts shall not be computed.
Application of the definition of "building height" shall apply over
and above the 10 feet of post height.
(4) The area in open space (including subdivision recreation areas and
water) accomplished through the use of one-family cluster shall
represent at least 20% of the horizontal development area of a onefamily
cluster development.
(5) In order to provide an orderly transition of density, where the
parcel proposed for use as a cluster development abuts a onefamily
residential district, the Planning Commission shall
determine that the abutting one-family district is effectively
buffered by means of one of the following within the cluster
development:
(a) Single-family lots subject to the standards of Table 7.03.2.
(b) Detached buildings with setbacks as required by Table 7.03.2
for the applicable residential district.
(c) Open or recreation space.
(d) Changes in topography which provide an effective buffer.
(e) A major or secondary thoroughfare.
(f) Some other similar means of providing a transition as provided
for in § 7-15.02F.
E. Procedures.
(1) In making application for approval under this section, the applicant
shall file a sworn statement that the parcel has not been split for
the purpose of coming within the requirements of this option, and
shall further file a sworn statement indicating the date of
acquisition of the parcel by the present owner.
(2) Qualification for cluster development.
(a) Application to the Planning Commission for qualification of a
parcel for cluster development shall include documentation
substantiating one or more of the characteristics outlined in
Subsection B, Conditions for qualification.
(b) The Planning Commission shall make a preliminary
determination as to whether or not a parcel qualifies for the
cluster option under one of the provisions of Subsection B(1)
above, based upon the documentation submitted.
(c) Preliminary determination by the Planning Commission that a
parcel qualifies for cluster development does not assure
§ 7-3.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-3.05
1:126
approval of the site plan and, therefore, does not approve the
cluster option. It does, however, give an initial indication as to
whether or not a petitioner should proceed to prepare a site
plan.
(3) Site plan and cluster approval.
(a) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
site plan after an initial review of a preliminary plan which
shall not require a public hearing.
(b) In submitting a proposed layout under this section, the sponsor
of the development shall include, along with the site plan,
typical building elevations and floor plans, topography drawn
at two-foot contour intervals, all computations relative to
acreage and density, a preliminary grading plan, and any other
details which will assist in reviewing the proposed plan.
(c) For those parcels which qualified under the provisions of
Subsection B(1)(f), (g) or (h), one copy of the site plan
superimposed on a recent aerial photograph of at least oneinch-
equals-200-feet scale, shall be submitted for review to
show the relationship of the site plan to existing natural
features and to adjacent developments.
(d) Site plans submitted under this option shall be accompanied by
information as required in § 7-3.04C Subdivision Open Space
Plan, provided, however, that:
[1] Submission of an open space plan and cost estimates with
the preliminary site plan shall be at the option of the
sponsor.
[2] The open space plan and cost estimate shall be submitted
prior to final review or the public hearing.
(e) The Planning Commission shall give notice of the public
hearing in accordance with § 7-21.07, Public hearings.
(f) If the Planning Commission is satisfied that the proposal meets
the letter and spirit of the Zoning Ordinance and should be
approved, it shall give tentative approval with the conditions
upon which such approval should be based. If the Planning
Commission is not satisfied that the proposal meets the letter
and spirit of the Zoning Ordinance, or finds that approval of the
proposal would be detrimental to existing development in the
general area and should not be approved, it shall record the
reasons therefor in the minutes of the Planning Commission
meeting. Notice of approval or disapproval of the proposal,
together with copies of all layouts and other relevant
information, shall be forwarded to the City Clerk. If the
proposal has been approved by the Planning Commission, the
§ 7-3.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3.05
1:127
Clerk shall place the matter upon the agenda of the City
Commission. If disapproved, the applicant shall be entitled
to a hearing before the City Commission, if he requests one
in writing within 30 days after action by the Planning
Commission.
(g) The City Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed open space plan and site plan for the cluster option
and shall give notice in accordance with § 7-21.07, Public
hearings. If the City Commission approves the plans, it shall
instruct the City Attorney to prepare a contract, setting forth
the conditions upon which such approval is based, which
contract, after approval by the City Commission, shall be
entered into between the City and the applicant prior to the
issuance of a building permit for any construction in
accordance with site plans.
(h) As a condition for the approval of the site plan and open space
plan by the City Commission, the applicant shall deposit a cash
or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the estimated
cost of the proposed improvements to the open land
guaranteeing the completion of such improvement within a
time to be set by the City Commission. Actual development of
the open space shall be carried out concurrently with the
construction of dwelling units.
§ 7-3.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-3.05
1:128
ARTICLE IV
Multiple-Family Residential Districts
§ 7-4.01. Intent.
The Multiple-Family Residential Districts are designed to provide sites for
multiple-family dwelling structures and related uses, which will generally
serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lowerdensity
single-family districts. The multiple-family districts are further
provided to serve the needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise
medium-density, single-family community, with the RM-2 district providing
for structures of greater height and with a greater density of dwelling units.
§ 7-4.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall be not used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.04.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
Key:
Permitted Use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for
the purposes listed by right.
Special Land Use (SLU): Uses which may be permitted by obtaining special
land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII, Use
Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are met.
Additional Requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
Table 7.04.1: Multiple-Family Residential Districts Schedule of
Uses
Use RM-1 RM-2
Additional
Requirements
Residential Uses
Boarding and renting
of rooms
SLU SLU § 7-13.01A
Home occupation P P § 7-13.01C
Multiple-family
dwellings
P P § 7-13.01B
Single-family
detached dwellings
P P § 7-13.01B
Animal and Agricultural Uses
Farms P P § 7-13.02B
Public and Institutional Uses
§ 7-4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4.02
1:129
Table 7.04.1: Multiple-Family Residential Districts Schedule of
Uses
Use RM-1 RM-2
Additional
Requirements
Cemeteries SLU SLU § 7-13.03A
Places of public
assembly and places
of worship, including
other facilities
normally incidental
thereto, with a
seating capacity of
less than 500 people
or parking for less
than 250 vehicles
P P § 7-13.03C
Colleges, universities
and other such
institutions of higher
learning, public and
private, offering
courses in general,
technical or religious
education and not
operated for profit
P P § 7-13.03B
Private
noncommercial
recreational areas or
community centers
[Amended
5-17-2012]
P P § 7-13.07F
Public, parochial and
other private
elementary schools
offering courses in
general education,
and not operated for
profit
P P —
Public, parochial and
private intermediate
or secondary schools
offering courses in
general education,
not operated for
profit
P P —
§ 7-4.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-4.02
1:130
Table 7.04.1: Multiple-Family Residential Districts Schedule of
Uses
Use RM-1 RM-2
Additional
Requirements
Publicly owned and
operated libraries,
parks, parkways and
recreational facilities
P P —
Uses and buildings of
the municipality
(without storage
yards)
P P —
Utility and public
service buildings and
uses (without storage
yards), when
operating
requirements
necessitate the
locating of said
building within the
district in order to
serve the immediate
vicinity
P P —
Entertainment and Recreation Uses
Golf courses, which
may or may not be
operated for profit
P P § 7-13.07D
Health and Human Care and Uses
Adult foster care
family home (6 or
fewer adults)
P P —
Adult foster care
small group home (1
to 12 adults)
P P —
Adult foster care
large group home
(13 to 20 adults)
P P —
Child-care center,
nursery schools and
day nurseries
SLU SLU § 7-13.09A
Child-care institution SLU SLU § 7-13.09B
§ 7-4.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4.02
1:131
Table 7.04.1: Multiple-Family Residential Districts Schedule of
Uses
Use RM-1 RM-2
Additional
Requirements
Family day-care
home (6 or fewer
children, less than 24
hours per day)
P P —
Group day-care home
(7 to 12 children,
less than 24 hours
per day)
P P —
Foster family home
(4 or fewer children,
24 hours per day)
P P —
Foster family group
home (5 to 6
children, 24 hours
per day)
P P —
Hospitals SLU SLU § 7-13.09C
Hospice SLU SLU —
Housing for the
elderly
SLU SLU § 7-13.09D
Nursing homes SLU SLU § 7-13.09B
Accessory and Similar Uses
Accessory building
and uses,
customarily incident
to any of the above
permitted uses
P/SLU P/SLU —
Garage sales P P § 7-13.10A
Other uses similar to
the above uses
SLU SLU § 7-13.11
Private pools shall be
permitted as an
accessory use within
the rear yard only
P P —
Wireless
telecommunication
antenna
SLU SLU § 7-13.10E
Other temporary
uses
P/SLU P/SLU § 7-13.10C
§ 7-4.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-4.03
1:132
§ 7-4.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
All lots and buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements.
Multiple-Family Residential Districts: Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
(Table 7.04.2)
Minimum Lot
Minimum Setbacks4, 5, 9
(feet)
Side Yards6
Zoning
District1
Area
(square
feet)
Width2
(feet)
Max.
Building
Height3
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage Front Least 1 Total 2 Rear
Minimum
Floor
Area
Per
Dwelling
Unit
RM-1 –7 –7 25 35% 30 1010 2010 35 –8
RM-2 –7 –7 50 — 3011 1010, 11 3511 –8
Footnotes to Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
1 Recreational area: All residential developments containing more than six dwelling units shall
provide a recreational area of at least 1,500 square feet for each residential unit. The location of
the area shall be approved by the City Commission, based upon a recommendation by the Planning
Commission. [Amended 9-26-2013]
2 Depth-to-width ratio: All lots created after the adoption date of this chapter shall have a lot depth
not more than four times its width, as measured at the front lot line.
3 Building height: Exceptions to building height shall be as provided for in § 7-14.03A, Height limit.
4 Nonresidential setbacks: For all uses permitted other than single-family and multiple-family
residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building, unless otherwise specified in
Article XIII, Use Requirements. A setback and screening buffer as listed in Table 7.15.1 is required
when a rear or side lot line is adjacent to different zoning district or use.
5 Natural features setback: All structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from all natural features
such as drains, regulated wetlands, natural ponds, lakes and streams.
6 Rear yards abutting a side yard: In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard
setback abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the district in
which located and all regulations applicable to a front yard shall apply. On corner lots where a lot
width of 60 feet or less exists, the side yard may be reduced to the front setback of the home to the
rear of such corner lot. See Figure 7.03.1, Rear Yard Adjacent to Side Yard.
7 Number of rooms: The total number of rooms in a multiple dwelling structure in RM-1 Districts
shall not be more than the area of the parcel in square feet divided by 1,400. The total number
of rooms in a multiple dwelling structure in RM-2 Districts shall not be more than the area of the
parcel, in square feet, divided by 500. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom,
with the exception of those units designed as efficiency apartments. For the purpose of computing
rooms, refer to Table 7.04.3. The area used for computing gross density shall be the total site area
exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bounding road.
§ 7-4.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4.03
1:133
Table 7.04.3: Minimum Floor Areas
Unit Type Number of Rooms Minimum Floor Area
Efficiency 1 300 square feet
One-bedroom 2 500 square feet
Two- bedroom 3 700 square feet
Three-bedroom 4 900 square feet
Four-bedroom 5 1,100 square feet
Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and including
a "den," "library" or other extra room shall count such extra room as a
bedroom for the purpose of computing gross density.
8 Minimum floor areas: Minimum floor areas for units shall be in
accordance with Table 7.04.3.
9 Distance between buildings: In all RM Multiple-Family Residential
Districts, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be
equal to 1 1/2 times the height of the adjacent building and in no
instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. Parking may be
permitted within a required side or rear yard, but shall not cover
more than 30% of the area of any required yard, or any minimum
distance between buildings.
a. There shall be at least 15 feet of yard space between a parking
area and the multiple-family building.
b. The front and rear of the multiple-family building shall be
considered to be the faces along the longest dimension of said
structure. The front of the multiple-family building shall be
considered to be the direction faced by the living rooms of the
dwelling units in said building; the rear of the multiple-family
building shall be considered to be the direction faced by the
service entrance of the dwelling units in said building; and the
side of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the
face along the narrowest dimension of said building.
§ 7-4.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-4.03
1:134
c. No multiple-family structure shall exceed 180 feet in length
along any one face of the building.
d. Any court shall have a width equal to not less than 50 feet for
the front yard and 60 feet for the rear yard. The depth of any
court shall not be greater than three times the width.
e. Service drives shall comply with the City of Lapeer Construction
Standards, have a width of at least 28 feet and shall not be
located in any front yard.
f. The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify the height
requirements where unusual architectural features exist.
10 Side yards. The side yards of a multiple-family dwelling building or
development shall not be less than 30 feet on those sides which
border on districts other than a multiple-family district.
11 Additional setback for tall buildings. In all RM-2 Multiple-Family
Residential Districts, buildings in excess of three stories or 35 feet
in height shall provide front, side and rear yards as herein required
and shall provide additional yard setbacks for all yards equal to at
least 1/2 the height of the building above the thirty-five-foot height
level.
§ 7-4.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4.03
1:135

ARTICLE V
Manufactured Home Park Districts
§ 7-5.01. Intent.
The purpose of the MHP Manufactured Home Park District is to give
recognition to the fact that manufactured homes can provide satisfactory
living conditions provided certain minimum standards are maintained.
Manufactured home parks possess site development, use and density
characteristics and private drive systems similar to multiple-family
residential development. They are, in this chapter, provided for as a
transitional use between nonresidential development and residential
districts or between multiple-family residential districts and single-family
residential districts.
§ 7-5.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall be not used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.05.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
Key:
Permitted Use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for
the purposes listed by right.
Special Land Use (SLU): The following uses may be permitted by obtaining
special land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII,
Use Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are
met.
Additional requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
Table 7.05.1: Manufactured Home Park Districts Schedule of Uses
Use MHP
Additional
Requirements
Residential Uses
Manufactured homes P —
Public and Institutional Uses
Community buildings for use
by the tenants of the
manufactured home park as
well as recreation areas and
playgrounds
P —
§ 7-5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5.02
1:137
Table 7.05.1: Manufactured Home Park Districts Schedule of Uses
Use MHP
Additional
Requirements
Utility buildings for laundry
facilities and auxiliary
storage space for
manufactured home tenants
P —
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Professional Uses
One office building to be used
exclusively for conducting the
business operation of the
manufactured home park
P —
NOTES:
1 The selling of new and/or used manufactured homes as a commercial
operation in connection with the operation of a manufactured home
development is prohibited. New or used manufactured homes located
on lots within the manufactured home development to be used and
occupied within the manufactured home park may be sold by a licensed
dealer and/or broker. This section shall not prohibit the sale of a new
or used manufactured home by a resident of the manufactured home
development provided the development permits the sale.
§ 7-5.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
All lots and buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements:
Manufactured Home Park Districts: Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
(Table 7.05.2)
Minimum Lot1
Minimum Setbacks2, 3, 4
(feet)
Side Yards
Zoning
District
Area
(square
feet)
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet) Front Least 1 Total 2 Rear
MHP 5,500 50 — — — — —
Footnotes to Table 7.05.2
1 The site area may be reduced to not less than 4,400 square feet, provided that for each square foot
of reduction in site area, at least a corresponding amount of open space land be established for
common use. The reduction permitted in sale areas does not infer any reduction in the minimum
spacing requirements between manufactured homes as required by the State Manufactured
Housing Commission.
§ 7-5.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-5.03
1:138
2 All manufactured homes shall comply with State Manufactured Housing Commission requirements
with respect to the space between homes and other facilities.
3 A setback of at least 50 feet shall be provided between any manufactured home and an office
building, community center or service building and any abutting public thoroughfare right-of-way
line. This area shall be maintained as an open landscape area.
4 A setback of at least 25 feet, the computation of which shall include the ten-foot required distance
established in Rule 944(1) of the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules, shall be provided
between any manufactured home, office building, community center or service building and any
other exterior property line. This latter setback area may be used as yard areas for permitted
buildings. This area may also be used for parking subject to the screening requirements of
§ 7-15.02F. This area may also be part of the required open space when it is part of a functionally
usable open space area.
§ 7-5.04. Review and approval.
§ 7-5.05. Development standards.
A. The proposed site plan for the manufactured home park shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for their review and approval
prior to any consideration. The Planning Commission, in reviewing the
site plan, shall utilize the provisions of Article XVIII, Site Plan Review, in
evaluating the site plan. In utilizing the standards of Article XVIII, the
Planning Commission shall apply the development standards below as
well as those considerations which relate to the City's needs in
furnishing necessary emergency services to the manufactured home
park and/or providing safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular
movements in relation to adjacent properties and public thoroughfares.
The suggestion of any changes or modifications shall be based on such
reasonable requirements as are applied to the review and approval of
all other uses in the City. Any items determined to be undesirable or
inadequate shall be made known to the applicant and a copy of such
objections shall immediately be forwarded to the State Manufactured
Housing Commission for their consideration in reviewing the proposed
manufactured home park plans.
B. The City Engineer shall also review the proposed park plans with
respect to drainage patterns to adjacent properties, water and sewage
needs which would be generated, and the City's ability to accommodate
such manufactured home park needs. In addition, any connections to
municipal facilities shall meet applicable City Engineering design
requirements. A copy of any deficiencies noted shall be transmitted
immediately, with the recommendations of the Planning Commission, to
the State Manufactured Housing Commission.
A. Access. Access to any manufactured home park shall be to an arterial or
collector street as designated on the Master Plan. The intent being to
avoid higher-density traffic movements through existing or planned
single-family developments. An emergency means of ingress and egress
§ 7-5.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5.05
1:139
to a manufactured home park, not used for general access, may be
permitted to other than a major thoroughfare.
B. Principal vehicular access points. Principal vehicular access points
shall be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled
turning movements to minimize hazards regarding vehicular and
pedestrian traffic. Merging and turnout lanes and/or traffic dividers
shall be required where existing or anticipated heavy flows indicate
need. In general, minor streets shall not be connected with streets
outside the district in such a way as to encourage the use of such minor
streets by substantial amounts of through traffic. No lot within the park
shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development.
C. Access for pedestrians and cyclists. Access for pedestrians and cyclists
entering or leaving the park shall be by safe and convenient routes.
Such ways need not be adjacent to or limited to the vicinity of vehicular
access points. Where there are crossings of such ways and vehicular
routes at edges of planned developments, such crossings shall be safely
located, marked, and controlled; and where such ways are exposed to
substantial vehicular traffic at edges of neighborhoods, safeguards may
be required to prevent crossings except at designated points. Bicycle
paths, if provided, shall be so related to the pedestrian way system that
street crossings are combined with bicycle crossings.
D. Protection of visibility: automotive traffic, cyclists, and pedestrians.
(1) No material impediment to visibility more than 2.5 feet above curb
level shall be created or maintained at the intersection of any street
in the manufactured home park.
(2) Where there is pedestrian or bicycle access from within the park to
a street by paths or across yards or other open space without a
barrier to access the street, no material impediment to visibility
more than 2.5 feet above curb level shall be created or maintained.
E. Size of parcel. Manufactured home parks shall not be permitted on
parcels of less than 15 acres in area.
F. State requirement. All manufactured home park development shall
further comply with Act 96 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1987, the
Mobile Home Commission Act (MCLA § 125.2301 et seq.). [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
G. Open space. Manufactured home parks shall provide land for open
space use by residents of the park. These areas shall be so located and
arranged that they functionally serve the residents to be served and
meet or exceed Manufactured Housing Commission rules, as adopted.
H. Outside storage.
§ 7-5.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-5.05
1:140
(1) The outside storage of household effects, other than normal patio
furniture, etc., is prohibited. The storage of recreational vehicles,
i.e., boats, campers, trailers, motor homes, snowmobiles on
manufactured home sites and/or required parking spaces for
longer than 48 hours is also prohibited.
(2) The storage or parking of recreational vehicles, motor homes,
boats, snowmobiles, or other vehicles or items ordinarily towed,
driven or used for a special purpose, if storage or parking of such is
permitted in the manufactured home park, shall be in accordance
herewith. The storage of the vehicles or items in the manufactured
home development is specifically prohibited except in the storage
area. The storage area shall be screened by solid-type fence five
feet in height around its perimeter or by some other similar
screening device.
I. Utilities. All utility connections shall comply with state and local codes.
J. Trees and landscaping.
(1) Each manufactured home site shall be provided with a tree at least
1 1/2 inches in caliper or 10 feet in height at the time of planting.
(2) The manufactured home park developer is also encouraged to
provide trees and other landscape improvements on the individual
manufactured home sites and in the open space areas which will
create an aesthetically pleasing and functional environment.
K. Exterior yards for manufactured home parks minimum requirements;
occupancy. The following requirements and limitations shall apply to
yards at the outer edges of manufactured home parks:
(1) Along public streets. Where manufactured home parks adjoin
public streets along exterior boundaries, a yard at least 25 feet in
minimum dimensions shall be provided adjacent to such streets.
Such a yard may be used to satisfy open space depth requirements
for individual dwellings, but shall not contain carports, recreational
shelters, storage structures, or any other similar structures. No
direct vehicular access to individual lots shall be permitted through
such yards, and no group parking facilities or active recreation
areas shall be allowed therein.
(2) At edges of other residential districts (other than at streets or
alleys). Where manufactured home parks are so located that one or
more boundaries are at the edges of residential districts and
adjoining neighboring districts without an intervening street, alley,
or other permanent open space at least 20 feet in width, an exterior
yard at least 20 feet in minimum dimension shall be provided.
Where the adjoining district is residential, the same limitations on
occupancy and use of such yards shall apply as stated above
concerning yards along public streets. Where the adjoining district
is nonresidential, such yards may be used by group or individual
§ 7-5.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5.05
1:141
parking; active recreation facilities, or carports, recreational
shelters, or storage structures.
(3) Ways for pedestrians and/or cyclists in exterior yards. In any
exterior yard, required or other, ways for pedestrians and/or
cyclists may be permitted if appropriately located, fenced, or
landscaped to prevent potential hazards arising from vehicular
traffic on adjacent streets or other hazards and annoyances to
users or to occupants of adjoining property. Such approved ways in
such locations shall be counted as common recreation areas and
may also be used for utility easements.
L. Yards, fences, walls, or vegetative screening at edges of manufactured
home parks. Along the edges of manufactured home parks, walls or
vegetative screening shall be provided according to the standards as
provided by § 7-15.03, Fences and walls, to protect residents from
undesirable views, lighting, noise, or other off-site influences. In
particular, extensive off-street parking areas and service areas for
loading and unloading other than passenger vehicles, and for storage
and collection of trash and garbage, shall be screened as provided by
§ 7-15.06, Waste receptacles.
M. Internal relation. The site plan shall provide for safe, efficient,
convenient, and harmonious groupings of structures, uses, and
facilities, and for appropriate relation of space inside and outside
buildings to intended uses and structural features. In particular:
(1) Streets, drives, and parking and service areas. All streets shall be
provided with concrete paved curbs and gutters. All streets, drives,
parking areas, and service areas shall provide safe and convenient
access to dwelling units, park facilities, service and emergency
vehicles; however, streets shall not be so laid out as to encourage
outside traffic to traverse the park nor occupy more land than is
required to provide access to each parcel, nor create unnecessary
fragmentation of the park into small blocks. In general, block size
shall be the maximum consistent with use, the shape of the site,
and the convenience and safety of the occupants.
(2) Vehicular access to streets. On-street parking shall not be
permitted. Vehicular access to streets from off-street parking areas
may be direct from dwellings if the street or portion of the street
serves 50 units or less. Determination of units served shall be
based on normal routes anticipated for traffic. Along streets or
portions of streets serving more than 50 dwelling units, or
constituting major routes to or around central facilities, access
from parking and service areas shall be so combined, limited,
located, designed, and controlled as to channel traffic conveniently,
safely, and in a manner that minimizes marginal traffic friction, and
direct vehicular access from individual dwellings shall generally be
prohibited.
§ 7-5.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-5.05
1:142
N. Ways for pedestrians and cyclists; use by emergency, maintenance or
service vehicles.
(1) Walkways shall form a logical, safe, and convenient system for
pedestrian access to all dwellings, project facilities, and principal
off-street pedestrian destinations. Maximum walking distance
between dwelling units and related parking spaces, delivery areas,
and trash and garbage storage areas intended for use of occupants
shall not exceed 100 feet.
(2) Walkways to be used by a substantial number of children as play
areas, routes to school, bus stops, or other destinations shall be so
located as to minimize contacts with normal automotive traffic. If
substantial bicycle traffic is anticipated and an internal walkway
system is provided away from streets, bicycle paths shall be
incorporated in the walkway system. Street crossings shall be held
to a minimum in such walkways and shall be located and designed
to provide safety, and shall be appropriately marked. Ways for
pedestrians and cyclists appropriately located, designed, and
constructed may be combined with other easements and used by
emergency, maintenance, or service vehicles but shall not be used
by other automotive traffic.
O. Protection of visibility: automotive traffic, cyclists, and pedestrians.
(1) Protection of visibility in internal site planning shall be provided at
the intersections of any streets in the manufactured home park
within triangular areas formed by the intersecting edges of the
road edge (projected where corners are rounded) and a line joining
points 35 feet along both intersecting edges from such point of
intersection (see Figure 7.05.1.).
(2) At driveways serving parking bays with 10 or more spaces, similar
visibility triangles shall be maintained. At driveways, the required
visibility triangle shall consist of the area within the intersection
edges of the road edge (projected) and a line joining points 15 feet
along both intersection edges from such point of intersection (see
Figure 7.05.2.).
§ 7-5.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5.05
1:143
Figures 7.05.1 and 7.05.2
P. Streets.
(1) Streets that are to be dedicated to the City, if any, shall be
dimensioned and improved in accordance with City Construction
Specifications.
(2) For other streets, required paving widths shall be as follows, based
generally on a moving lane width of 10 feet for collector streets and
nine feet for minor streets. As an exception to these general rules,
one-way minor streets serving less than 20 lots, and one-way
driveways to parking bays containing less than 10 parking spaces,
shall have a minimum pavement width of 18 feet. Driveways to
parking bays containing 10 or more parking spaces shall be 20 feet
in pavement width in accordance with Table 7.05.3.
Table 7.05.3: Manufactured Home Park Districts Required
Street Paving
Parking Street Class
Paving Width
Permitted
Minimum
(feet)
Minor, one-way (serving
less than 20 lots)
None 18
Minor, two-way (serving
50 lots or less)
None 20
Collector (serving more
than 50 lots)
None 24
(3) Culs-de-sac with a radius of not less than 45 feet shall be provided
on all no outlet streets.
§ 7-5.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-5.05
1:144
Q. Placement of underground utilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
manufactured housing park developer/owner in concert with all utility
providers to assure that all utilities are placed underground at the time
of the initial construction as well as during any future construction for
the life of the manufactured housing park.
R. Outdoor lighting. All streets shall have lighting in accordance with the
current illuminating engineering society standards.
S. Skirting and anchoring. Each occupied manufactured home shall be
skirted and anchored with materials meeting Manufactured Housing
Commission specifications.
T. Other requirements. See Article XIV, General Provisions, and Article
XV, General Site Development Requirements, for additional
requirements.
§ 7-5.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5.05
1:145

ARTICLE VI
Business and Office Districts
§ 7-6.01. Intent.
§ 7-6.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall not be used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.06.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
Key:
Permitted use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the
purposes listed by right.
Special land use (SLU): Uses which may be permitted by obtaining special
land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII, Use
Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are met.
Additional requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
A. The OS-1 Office Service Districts are designed to accommodate uses
such as offices, banks and personal services which can serve as
transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to
provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential
districts.
B. The B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts are designed to meet the dayto-
day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in
adjacent residential areas.
C. The B-2 General Business Districts are designed to furnish locations for
a wide range of businesses, including a variety of automotive services
and goods incompatible with the uses and with the pedestrian
movement in the City's traditional downtown (CBD Central Business
Districts). The B-2 Districts are characterized by more diversified
business types and are often located so as to serve the passerby traffic.
D. The B-3 Regional Business Districts are designed to allow the
development of retail establishments serving a wider regional trade
area than would typically be found in the other zoning districts. The B-3
districts are characterized by intense traffic and traffic volumes
generated by the wider trade area population. The B-3 District zoning
designation is intended to restrict the location and number of regional
retail establishments so as not to overload the City's thoroughfare
system and further to limit the impact realized by the local commercial
districts (B-1, B-2, CBD) that may result from saturation of the
immediate trade area.
§ 7-6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6.02
1:147
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Animal and Agricultural Uses
Veterinary facilities
and clinics
— — P — —
Public and Institutional Uses
Business schools, or
private schools,
operated for profit
— — P P —
Institutional uses,
places of public
assembly and places
of worship,
including other
facilities normally
incidental thereto,
excluding largescale
churches
P P P P § 7-13.03C
Large-scale places
of public assembly
and places of
worship with a
seating capacity of
500 people or more
or parking for 250
vehicles or more
— — SLU SLU § 7-13.03D
Municipal buildings
and post office
— P P P —
Private clubs or
lodge halls
— — P — —
Publicly owned
buildings, public
utility buildings,
telephone exchange
buildings; electric
transformer stations
and substations; gas
regulator stations
with service yards,
but without storage
yards; water and
sewage pumping
stations
SLU SLU P — —
§ 7-6.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-6.02
1:148
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Wireless
telecommunication
tower
SLU SLU § 7-13.10E
Retail Uses
Dry-cleaning
establishments, or
pickup stations,
dealing directly with
the consumer
— P P — —
Commercial
establishments up to
80,000 square feet
of gross floor area
— P P P
Commercial
establishments
consisting of 1 or
more uses and a
minimum of 80,000
square feet in total
gross floor area
— — SLU P § 7-13.04A
Funeral homes and
mortuary
establishments
SLU P P — § 7-13.04D
Greenhouses and
plant nurseries
— — SLU —
Home centers and
lumber yards
— — SLU P § 7-13.04C
Newspaper offices
and printing plants
— — P — —
§ 7-6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6.02
1:149
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Offices and
showrooms of
plumbers,
electricians,
decorator or similar
trades, in
connection with
which not more than
25% of the floor
area of the building
or part of the
building occupied by
said establishment is
used for making,
assembling,
remodeling,
repairing, altering,
finishing, or
refinishing its
products or
merchandise
— — P — —
Personal service
establishments
which perform
services on the
premises, such as
but not limited to:
repair shops
(watches, radio,
television, shoe and
etc), tailor shops,
beauty parlors or
barber shops, tattoo
parlors, day spas,
hair salons,
photographic
studios
P P P — —
Retail cold storage
establishments
— — P —
Self-service laundry — P P —
Motor Vehicle Uses
§ 7-6.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-6.02
1:150
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Automobile car
wash, automatic or
self-service
— — P — § 7-13.05F
Automobile service
station for sale of
gasoline, oil, and
minor accessories
only
— — SLU SLU § 7-13.05A
and B
Minor automobile
repair shops
— — P — § 7-13.05C
Automobile sales or
showroom
— — P —
Outdoor sales space
for exclusive sale of
secondhand
automobiles
— — SLU — § 7-13.05E
Lodging and Food Service Uses
Drive-through
restaurants
— — SLU SLU § 7-13.04B
Bed-and-breakfast — — P P —
Motels and hotels — — SLU SLU § 7-13.06A
Standard
restaurants, brew
pubs and taverns
where the patrons
are served while
seated within the
building occupied by
such establishment,
and wherein said
establishment does
not extend as an
integral part of, or
accessory thereto,
any service of a
drive-in or openfront
store
— — P P —
§ 7-6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6.02
1:151
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Sale and service of
food and drink out of
doors, provided such
use is incidental to a
similar principal use
indoors and
conducted adjacent
to said principal use
— — P P —
Entertainment and Recreation Uses
Adult entertainment
uses
— — SLU — § 7-13.07A
Amusement arcades
which provide space
for patrons to
engage in playing of
electronic and
mechanical video
amusement devices
or similar activities
— — SLU — § 7-13.07B
Bowling alleys, pool
or billiard parlor or
clubs, indoor
archery and indoor
tennis clubs, fitness
centers, athletic
clubs, and other
similar indoor
commercial
recreation
establishments
[Amended
5-17-2012]
— — P — —
Commercial or
institutional outdoor
recreation facilities,
including golf
courses, water
parks, tennis clubs
and similar outdoor
recreation
establishments
[Amended
5-17-2012]
— — P P § 7-13.07D
§ 7-6.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-6.02
1:152
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Commercially used
outdoor recreational
space for children's
amusement parks,
miniature golf
courses
— — SLU — § 7-13.07C
Multi-screen movie
theaters
— — — SLU § 7-13.07E
Theaters when
completely enclosed
— — P
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Professional Uses
Banks, credit
unions, savings-andloan
association, and
similar uses
Drive-through
facilities as an
accessory use
only
P P P P § 7-13.04B
Standalone
drive-through
ATM facilities
— — P P § 7-13.04B
Office buildings for
any of the following
occupations:
executive,
administrative,
professional,
accounting, writing,
clerical,
stenographic,
drafting and sales
P P P — —
Business services
such as mailing,
copying, data
processing and
retail office supplies
P P P — —
§ 7-6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6.02
1:153
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Data processing and
computer centers,
including service
and maintenance of
electronic data
processing
equipment
P P P — —
Health and Human Care and Uses
Adult day-care
centers
SLU P P —
Ambulance service
stations [Added
11-19-2018]
SLU — P P § 7-13.09E
Child-care center,
nursery schools and
day nurseries
SLU P P — § 7-13.09A
Convalescent
homes, nursing
homes and childcare
institutions
P P P — § 7-13.09B
Hospices — — P P
Hospitals
[Amended
9-26-2013]
SLU — P P § 7-13.09C
Medical office and
clinics
P P P — —
Transportation and Warehousing Uses
Bus passenger
stations
— — P — —
Off-street parking
lots
P P P — —
Parking lots and
parking structures
P — —
§ 7-6.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-6.02
1:154
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Warehouse and
storage facilities
when incident to
and physically
connected with any
principal use
permitted, provided
that such facility be
within the confines
of the building or
part thereof
occupied by said
establishment
— — P — —
Accessory and Similar Uses
Accessory building
and uses,
customarily incident
to any of the above
permitted uses
P P P P —
Drive-through
pharmacy as an
accessory use only,
when customarily
incident to a
principal use
permitted in the
district
SLU SLU P SLU § 7-13.04B
Tent sales and
sidewalk sales
P P P P § 7-13.10B
Other uses similar to
the above uses
SLU SLU SLU SLU § 7-13.11
Wireless
telecommunication
antenna
P P P P § 7-13.10D
Other temporary
uses
P/SLU P/SLU P/SLU P/SLU § 7-13.10C
Medical Marihuana Facility Uses [Added 2-19-2018]
Medical marihuana
provisioning center
P P § 7-13.12
§ 7-6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6.02
1:155
Table 7.06.1: Business and Office Districts Schedule of Uses
Use OS-1 B-1 B-2 B-3
Additional
Requirements
Medical marihuana
safety compliance
facility
SLU SLU § 7-13.12
Medical marihuana
secure transporter
facility
SLU SLU § 7-13.12
§ 7-6.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
All lots and buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements:
Business and Office Districts: Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
(Table 7.06.2)
Minimum Lot
Minimum Setbacks4
(feet)
Side Yards5, 6
Zoning
District Area
Width1
(feet)
Max.
Building
Height2
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
of Lot
Coverage Front3 Least 1 Total 2 Rear5
OS-1 — — 35 — 30 — — —
B-1 — — 25 — 10 — — —
B-2 — — 35 — 30 — — —
B-3 10 acres — 35 — 30 — — —
Footnotes to Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
1 Depth-to-width ratio: All lots created after the adoption date of this chapter shall have a lot depth
not more than four times its width, as measured at the front lot line.
2 Building height: Exceptions to building height shall be as provided for in § 7-14.03A, Height limit.
3 Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard, provided that
there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of 10 feet between the
nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest rightof-
way line as indicated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
4 Natural features setback: All structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from all natural features
such as drains, regulated wetlands, natural ponds, lakes and streams.
5 A setback and screening buffer as listed in Table 7.15.1 is required when a rear or side lot line is
adjacent to different a zoning district or use.
§ 7-6.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-6.03
1:156
6 Side yards are not required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise
specified in the Building Code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot line
contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than 10 feet shall be provided. Where
a lot borders on a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than 10 feet on the side
bordering the street.
§ 7-6.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6.03
1:157

ARTICLE VII
Central Business Districts
§ 7-7.01. Intent.
§ 7-7.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall be not used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.07.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
Key:
Permitted use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the
purposes listed by right.
Special land use (SLU): Uses which may be permitted by obtaining special
land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII, Use
Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are met.
Additional requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
Table 7.07.1: Central Business Districts Schedule of Uses
Use CBD-1 CBD-2
Additional
Requirements
Residential Uses
Apartments above
business establishments
P P —
Public and Institutional Uses
Business schools, or
private schools, operated
for profit
P P —
A. The CBD-1 Central Business District is designed to provide for office
buildings and the great variety of retail stores and related activities
which occupy the prime retail frontage of the core downtown area by
serving the comparison, convenience and service needs of the entire
City area as well as a substantial area of the adjacent and surrounding
residential developments and agricultural area beyond the City limits.
The retail stability of the district is promoted by encouraging a
continuous grade level retail frontage.
B. The CBD-2 Central Business District is designed to provide for office
buildings and retail stores and related activities which serve to support
and complement central business district activities of the prime retail
areas of the CBD-1 District.
§ 7-7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.02
1:159
Table 7.07.1: Central Business Districts Schedule of Uses
Use CBD-1 CBD-2
Additional
Requirements
Places of public
assembly and places of
worship, including other
facilities normally
incidental thereto, with a
seating capacity of less
than 500 people or
parking for less than 250
vehicles
P P § 7-13.03C
Municipal buildings and
post office
P P —
Publicly owned
buildings, public utility
buildings, telephone
exchange buildings;
electric transformer
stations and substations;
gas regulator stations
with service yards, but
without storage yards;
water and sewage
pumping stations
P P —
Retail Uses
Dry-cleaning
establishments, or
pickup stations, dealing
directly with the
consumer
P P —
Funeral homes and
mortuary establishments
P P § 7-13.04D
Generally recognized
retail business which
supplies commodities on
the premises within a
completely enclosed
building, such as, but not
limited to: foods, drugs,
liquor, furniture,
clothing, dry goods,
notions or hardware
P P —
Newspaper offices and
printing plants
P P —
§ 7-7.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-7.02
1:160
Table 7.07.1: Central Business Districts Schedule of Uses
Use CBD-1 CBD-2
Additional
Requirements
Offices and showrooms
of plumbers, electricians,
decorator or similar
trades, in connection
with which not more
than 25% of the floor
area of the building or
part of the building
occupied by said
establishment is used for
making, assembling,
remodeling, repairing,
altering, finishing, or
refinishing its products
or merchandise
P P —
Personal service
establishments which
perform services on the
premises, such as, but
not limited to: repair
shops (watches, radio,
television, shoe, etc.),
tailor shops, beauty
parlors or barber shops,
photographic studios,
and self-service
laundries and dry
cleaners
P P —
Lodging and Food Service Uses
Bed-and-breakfast
dwellings
P P
Motels and hotels SLU SLU § 7-13.06A
§ 7-7.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.02
1:161
Table 7.07.1: Central Business Districts Schedule of Uses
Use CBD-1 CBD-2
Additional
Requirements
Restaurants, brew pubs
and taverns where the
patrons are served while
seated within the
building occupied by
such establishment, and
wherein said
establishment does not
extend as an integral
part of, or accessory
thereto, any service of a
drive-in or open-front
store
P P —
Sale and service of food
and drink out of doors,
provided such use is
incidental to a similar
principal use indoors and
conducted adjacent to
said principal use and
subject further to street
occupancy permits and
all rules and regulations
to control such street
occupancy
P P —
Entertainment and Recreation Uses
Amusement arcades
which provide space for
patrons to engage in
playing of electronic and
mechanical video
amusement devices or
similar activities
P P § 7-13.07B
Theaters when
completely enclosed
P P —
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Professional Uses
Banks, credit unions,
savings and loan
association, without
drive-through facilities
P P —
§ 7-7.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-7.02
1:162
Table 7.07.1: Central Business Districts Schedule of Uses
Use CBD-1 CBD-2
Additional
Requirements
Office buildings for any
of the following
occupations: executive,
administrative,
professional, accounting,
writing, clerical,
stenographic, drafting
and sales
P P —
Health and Human Care and Uses
Adult day-care centers P P
Child-care center,
nursery schools and day
nurseries
P P § 7-13.09A
Convalescent homes,
nursing homes and childcare
institutions
P P § 7-13.09B
Hospices P P
Hospitals P P § 7-13.09C
Medical offices and
clinics
P P —
Transportation and
warehousing uses
Bus passenger stations P P —
Parking lots and parking
structures
P P —
Warehouse and storage
facilities, when incident
to and physically
connected with any
principal use permitted,
provided that such
facility be within the
confines of the building
or part thereof occupied
by said establishment
P P —
Accessory and Similar Uses
Accessory uses,
customarily incident to
any of the above
permitted uses
P P —
§ 7-7.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.02
1:163
Table 7.07.1: Central Business Districts Schedule of Uses
Use CBD-1 CBD-2
Additional
Requirements
Accessory buildings,
customarily incident to
any of the above
permitted uses
— P —
Drive-through pharmacy,
banks, credit unions and
savings and loans as an
accessory use only, when
customarily incident to a
principal use permitted
in the district
SLU SLU § 7-13.04B
Sidewalk sales P P § 7-13.10B
Other uses similar to the
above uses
SLU SLU § 7-13.11
Wireless
telecommunications
antenna
P P § 7-13.10E
Other temporary uses P/SLU P/SLU § 7-13.10C
§ 7-7.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
All lots and buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements:
Central Business Districts: Schedule of Uses Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
(Table 7.07.2)
Minimum Lot
Minimum Setbacks4
(feet)
Side Yards5, 6
Zoning
District
Area
(square
feet)
Width1
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height2
(feet) Front3 Least 1 Total 2 Rear5
CBD-1 — — — — — — —
CBD-2 — — 25 10 — — —
Footnotes to Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
1 Depth-to-width ratio: All lots created after the adoption date of this chapter shall have a lot depth
not more than four times its width, as measured at the front lot line.
§ 7-7.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-7.03
1:164
2 Building height: Exceptions to building height shall be as provided for in § 7-14.03A, Height limit.
There shall be no specific height limitation in a CBD-1 District; provided, however, that prior to the
issuance of a building permit for any structure over 35 feet in height, the Planning Commission
shall make a finding that such a height will not be detrimental to the light, air or privacy of any
other structure or use currently existing or approved for construction.
3 Build-to line: Buildings in the CBD-1 District shall be constructed so that at least 60% of the front
wall is located at the front lot line.
4 Natural features setback: All structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from all natural features
such as drains, regulated wetlands, natural ponds, lakes and streams.
5 A setback and screening buffer as listed in Table 7.15.1 is required when a rear or side lot line is
adjacent to different zoning district or use.
6 Side yards are not required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise
specified in the Building Code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot line
contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than 10 feet shall be provided. Where a
lot borders on a residential district or a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than
10 feet on the side bordering the residential district or street.
§ 7-7.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.03
1:165

ARTICLE VIII
Industrial Districts
§ 7-8.01. Intent.
§ 7-8.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall be not used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.08.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
Key:
Permitted use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the
purposes listed by right.
Special land use (SLU): Uses which may be permitted by obtaining special
land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII, Use
Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are met.
Additional requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
Table 7.08.1: Industrial Districts Schedule of Uses
Use I-1 I-2
Additional
Requirements
Animal and Agricultural Uses
Commercial kennels SLU — § 7-13.02A
Public and Institutional Uses
A. The I-1 Industrial District is designed so as to primarily accommodate
wholesale activities, warehouses and manufacturing operations on
individual lots. In order to allow optimum service to activities of this
nature, residential uses, uses incidental to residential development and
most retail activities are prohibited from this district. It is the intent of
this article to encourage the full utilization of the district under
adequate standards of development, health and public safety, and to
protect against the creation of nuisances.
B. The I-2 Industrial District is designed to provide for a planned
community of manufacturing, warehouse, distribution facilities,
research and development facilities and office uses. The I-2 District is
further designated to insure compatibility between the uses in the
district and the character of the neighborhood in which the district is
located and to further provide compatibility among users within the
district.
§ 7-8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.02
1:167
Table 7.08.1: Industrial Districts Schedule of Uses
Use I-1 I-2
Additional
Requirements
Public utilities, including
buildings, necessary
structures, storage yards
and other related uses
P P —
Trade or industrial
schools
P P —
Wireless
telecommunication tower
P P § 7-13.10E
Motor Vehicle Uses
Automobile service
stations for sale of
gasoline, oil and minor
accessories when
developed in conjunction
with convenience market
and accessory services
such as fast food
facilities or automated
automobile washes
P SLU § 7-13.05B
Major auto repair shops
when completely
enclosed
SLU — § 7-13.05D
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Professional Uses
Research and
development
establishment
P P —
Research and office uses
related to permitted
industrial operations and
sales offices
P P —
Health and Human Care and Uses
Ambulance service
stations [Added
11-19-2018]
SLU — § 7-13.09E
Child-care center,
nursery schools and day
nurseries
SLU SLU § 7-13.09A
Transportation and Warehousing Uses
§ 7-8.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-8.02
1:168
Table 7.08.1: Industrial Districts Schedule of Uses
Use I-1 I-2
Additional
Requirements
Mini-warehouses and
storage buildings for
lease to the public
including the office and
residence of a caretaker
P P § 7-13.08D
Storage facilities for
building materials, sand,
gravel, stone, lumber,
open storage of
contractor's equipment
and supplies
SLU SLU § 7-13.08A
Warehousing and
wholesale
establishments when
conducted within
buildings or within a
completely obscured
yard area
P P —
Warehousing and
wholesale
establishments, and
trucking facilities
P P —
Incineration of garbage
or refuse when
conducted within an
approved and enclosed
incinerator plant
SLU — —
Junkyards and places for
the dismantling,
wrecking and disposing
of the junk and/or refuse
material
SLU — § 7-13.08E
Warehouse, storage and
transfer and electric and
gas service buildings and
yards, water supply and
sewage disposal plants,
water and gas tank
holders, heating and
electric power
generating plants, and
all necessary related
uses
P P —
§ 7-8.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.02
1:169
Table 7.08.1: Industrial Districts Schedule of Uses
Use I-1 I-2
Additional
Requirements
Railroad transfer and
storage tracks, railroad
rights-of-way and freight
terminals
P P —
Manufacturing, Testing and Assembly Uses
Laboratories:
experimental, film or
testing
P P —
Lumber and planing
mills when completely
enclosed
SLU SLU § 7-13.08F
Manufacture of corrosive
acid or alkali, cement,
lime, gypsum or plaster
of Paris or any other
potentially noxious
material
SLU SLU § 7-13.08G
Manufacture of musical
instruments, toys,
novelties, metal or
rubber stamps, small
molded rubber products,
pottery and figurines or
other similar ceramic
products (using kilns
fired only by electricity
or gas), electronic
instruments and devices,
or similar products
P P —
§ 7-8.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-8.02
1:170
Table 7.08.1: Industrial Districts Schedule of Uses
Use I-1 I-2
Additional
Requirements
Manufacture,
compounding,
assembling or treatment
of articles or
merchandise from
previously prepared
materials such as, but
not limited to: bone,
canvas, cellophane,
cloth, cork, feathers, felt,
fiber, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paper,
plastics, precious or
semiprecious metals or
stones, sheet metal,
shell, textiles, tobacco,
wax, wire, wood and
yarns
P P —
Manufacture,
compounding,
processing, packaging or
treatment of such
products as, but not
limited to: bakery goods,
candy, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals,
toiletries, food products,
hardware and cutlery;
tool, die, gauge and
machine shops
P P —
Manufacturing and
repair of electric or neon
signs, light sheet metal
products, including
heating and ventilating
equipment, cornices,
eaves and similar items
P P —
Metal plating, buffing
and polishing, subject to
appropriate measures to
control the type of
process to prevent
noxious results and/or
nuisances
SLU SLU —
§ 7-8.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.02
1:171
Table 7.08.1: Industrial Districts Schedule of Uses
Use I-1 I-2
Additional
Requirements
Production, processing,
cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair or storage
of materials, goods or
products that are not
injurious to the
occupants of adjacent
premises by reasons of
the emission or creation
of noise, vibration,
smoke, dust and other
particulate matter, toxic
and noxious materials,
odors, fire or explosive
hazards, or glare or heat
P P —
Uses permitted in
General Business
Districts when such uses
are for the convenience
of persons in the I-1
Industrial District,
subject to the
regulations applicable to
such uses
SLU — —
Restaurants
Restaurants located
within a building
occupied by another
use(s) allowed by this
chapter and not
including any service of
a drive-in or open front
store
SLU SLU —
Retail Uses
Construction contractors
establishment
P P —
Accessory and Similar Uses
Outdoor storage, when
accessory to a principal
use
SLU SLU § 7-13.08B
§ 7-8.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-8.02
1:172
Table 7.08.1: Industrial Districts Schedule of Uses
Use I-1 I-2
Additional
Requirements
Accessory building and
uses, customarily
incident to any of the
above permitted uses
P P —
Other uses similar to the
above uses
SLU SLU § 7-13.11
Wireless
telecommunications
antenna
P P § 7-13.10D
Wireless
telecommunications
tower
P P § 7-13.10E
Other temporary uses P/SLU P/SLU § 7-13.10C
Medical Marihuana Facility Uses [Added 2-19-2018]
Medical marihuana grow
facility
P P § 7-13.12
Medical marihuana
processor/processing
facility
P P § 7-13.12
Medical marihuana
safety compliance facility
P P § 7-13.12
Medical marihuana
secure transporter
facility
P P § 7-13.12
§ 7-8.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
All lots and buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements:
Industrial Districts: Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements Table
(Table 7.08.2)
Minimum Lot
Minimum Setbacks4, 5
(feet)
Side Yards6
Zoning
District
Area
(square
feet)
Width1
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height2
(feet) Front3 Least 1 Total 2 Rear7
I-1 — — — 40 10 20 10
I-2 — — 40 50 10 20 10
§ 7-8.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.03
1:173
Footnotes to Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements
1 Depth-to-width ratio: All lots created after the adoption date of this chapter shall have a lot depth
not more than four times its width, as measured at the front lot line.
2 Building height: Exceptions to building height shall be as provided for in § 7-14.03A, Height limit.
3 Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required under Article XVI,
Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements, may be permitted within the required
front yard, provided that such off-street parking is not located within 20 feet of the front lot line.
4 Natural features setback: All structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from all natural features
such as drains, regulated wetlands, natural ponds, lakes and streams.
5 A setback and screening buffer as listed in Table 7.15.1 is required when a rear or side lot line is
adjacent to different zoning district or use.
6 Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback unless a greenbelt and buffer
are required per Table 7.15.1.
7 All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or
fence, not less than six feet high, and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any
adjacent residential, office or business district or from a public street.
§ 7-8.04. Performance standards.
Any use established in the I-1 or I-2 District shall be operated so as to
comply with the following performance standards:
A. Noise. Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels at the lot line, or
any point beyond, for noise radiating continuously from a facility
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be in accordance
with the following table:
Table 7.08.3: Maximum Sound Pressure Levels2
Frequency Band Cycles Per
Second
Sound Pressure Level in
Decibels1
(re 0.0002 dyne/cm2)
20 to 75 -69
75 to 150 -54
150 to 300 -47
300 to 600 -41
600 to 1,200 -37
1,200 to 2,400 -34
2,400 to 4,800 -31
4,800 to 10,000 -28
§ 7-8.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-8.04
1:174
NOTES:
1 If the sound is not smooth or continuous and is not radiated
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the
corrections listed in the table below shall be added or subtracted
from each of the decibel levels given above.
2 Sound level pressures shall be taken along the property line of the
affected property using a sound level meter of standard design
and properly calibrated.
Table 7.08.4: Noise Corrections
Correction in Type of Operation or
Character of Noise Decibels
Daytime operation only Plus 5*
Noise source operates less than 20% of any
one-hour period
Plus 5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of any
one-hour period
Plus 10*
Noise source operates less than 1% of any
one-hour period
Plus 15*
Noise of impulsive character (hammering,
etc.)
Minus 5*
Noise of periodic character (hum,
screeching, etc.)
Minus 5*
NOTES:
* Apply ONE of the corrections ONLY.
B. Toxic gases. Industrial uses shall emit no noxious, toxic or corrosive
fumes or gases, in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury to
property or business.
C. Heat and glare.
(1) Industrial uses shall not carry on any operation that would produce
heat or glare beyond the boundary line of the Industrial District.
(2) Industrial uses shall not use industrial lighting in a manner that
produces glare on public highways and/or neighboring property.
D. Wastes. Disposal of all wastes shall comply with the City of Lapeer Code
and any amendments thereto.
E. Vibration. Physical vibration produced to the extent of being a
detriment to general health, safety and general welfare at or beyond
property lot lines shall be prohibited.
§ 7-8.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.04
1:175

ARTICLE IX
Parking Districts
§ 7-9.01. Intent.
The P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are intended to permit the establishment
of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles
as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided
by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without
adequate off-street parking facilities.
§ 7-9.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall be not used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.09.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
Key:
Permitted use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for
the purposes listed by right.
Special land use (SLU): Uses which may be permitted by obtaining special
land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII, Use
Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are met.
Additional requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
Table 7.09.1: Parking Districts Schedule of Uses
Use P-1
Additional
Requirements
Transportation and Warehousing Uses
Parking lots and structures P § 7-13.08C
Accessory and Similar Uses
Accessory building and uses,
customarily incidental to any of
the above permitted uses
P
§ 7-9.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
All lots and buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements:
§ 7-9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9.03
1:177
Parking Districts: Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement
Requirements
(Table 7.09.2)
Minimum Setbacks3
Side Yards
Zoning (feet)
District
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet) Front Least 1 Total 2 Rear
P-1 — —1 —2 —2 —2
Footnotes to Schedule of Area, Height and Placement
Requirements
1 Front yards: Where contiguous to a residential district which has
a common frontage in the same block with residential structures,
or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there
shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for said
residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, or whichever is the
greater. A four-foot-six-inch-high obscuring wall or fence shall be
located on this minimum setback line unless, under unusual
circumstances, the City finds that no good purpose would be served.
The land between said setback and street right- of-way line shall be
kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs,
trees, or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition,
neat and orderly in appearance.
2 Side and rear yards: Where contiguous to the side or rear lot lines
of premises within a residential district. A four-foot-six-inch-high
obscuring wall or fence shall be located along said lot line.
3 Natural features setback: All structures shall be set back at least
25 feet from all natural features such as drains, regulated wetlands,
natural ponds, lakes and streams.
§ 7-9.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-9.03
1:178
ARTICLE X
Mixed-Use Overlay Districts
§ 7-10.01. Intent.
§ 7-10.02. Schedule of uses.
Buildings or land shall be not used and buildings shall not be erected except
for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the
top of Table 7.10.1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
KEY:
Permitted use (P): Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the
purposes listed by right.
Special land use (SLU): Uses which may be permitted by obtaining special
land use approval when all applicable requirements in Article XIII, Use
Requirements, and the standards of § 7-19.04, Review standards, are met.
Additional requirements: Indicates requirements or conditions applicable
to the use.
Table 7.10.1: Mixed-Use Overlay Districts Schedule of Uses1
Use MU
Additional
Requirements
Uses
Principal uses permitted in
the underlying zoning district
and which meet the
requirements in the
underlying zoning district for
that use
P
All uses allowed subject to
special conditions in the
underlying zoning district
and which meet the
requirements in the
underlying zoning district for
that use
SLU
A. The Mixed-Use District is intended to allow for a wide range of uses in a
manner in which the impacts on adjacent land uses are minimized.
B. The district overlays one or more conventional zoning districts, which
are referred to in this article as the "underlying" zoning district.
§ 7-10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10.02
1:179
Table 7.10.1: Mixed-Use Overlay Districts Schedule of Uses1
Use MU
Additional
Requirements
All uses allowed in the R-1,
RM, OS-1, B-1, B-2, CBD-1
and I-1 zoning districts as a
principal use but not allowed
in the underlying zoning
district
SLU —2, 3
All uses allowed in the R-1,
RM, OS-1, B-1, B-2 and CBD
zoning districts as a special
land use but not allowed by
right in the underlying zoning
district
SLU —2, 3
Accessory and Similar Uses
Accessory building and uses,
customarily incidental to any
of the above permitted uses
P § 7-13.11
NOTES:
1 More than one principal use may be permitted on a lot of record with
site plan approval by the Planning Commission.
2 The use shall meet the requirements in the zoning district in which
the use is allowed except as provided for in § 7-10.03 below. Where
the use is allowed in more than one district, the Planning Commission
shall apply the standards that are closest in intensity as the underlying
zoning district.
3 Uses permitted under note 2 shall also comply with the following:
a. The Planning Commission may impose conditions on the operation
of the proposed use, including hours of operation, outdoor
operations and delivery and shipping of material that is necessary
to ensure the uses compatibility with surrounding uses.
b. In portions of the Mixed-Use District where residences and offices
predominate, any structure proposed for construction or
expansion shall have an exterior appearance consistent with the
general character of the area, including scale and mass of the
building, arrangement of windows, pitch of roof and type of siding
material.
c. The Planning Commission may reduce minimum number of
parking spaces required for property involving two or more uses if
their parking demand could expect to overlap.
§ 7-10.03. Area, height, and placement requirements.
§ 7-10.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-10.03
1:180
A. Dimensional requirements such as lot area and building height must
comply with those of the underlying zoning district, except as otherwise
provided for in this article.
B. In addition, the Planning Commission may establish maximum front and
side lot line setbacks and minimum height requirements for any
expansion or new development if they determine it is necessary to
maintain the urban character of the neighborhood.
C. Where more than one principal use is allowed on a lot of record,
setbacks between buildings shall be based on the yard setbacks of the
underlying zoning district, but may be modified by the Planning
Commission if they determine that adequate conditions have been
included to address public health and adequate emergency access
within the site.
§ 7-10.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10.03
1:181

ARTICLE XI
M-24 Overlay District
§ 7-11.01. Intent.
The provisions set forth in this overlay district are intended to establish
minimum requirements for access to property and other elements of site
design to improve safety and enhance aesthetics along the M-24 corridor in
the City of Lapeer. The purposes of these requirements are to:
§ 7-11.02. Applicability.
The provisions set forth in this article shall apply to the whole of every
existing and newly created parcel or property falling within 660 feet of
the M-24 state highway center line or which abuts the M-24 state highway
right-of-way within the City of Lapeer. The regulations apply in addition
to, and simultaneously with, other applicable regulations in the Zoning
Ordinance. The regulations of this section shall be applied by the
Department of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission
A. Require greater front yard setbacks and landscaping, coordinated
signage and site layout and design, and buffered parking to foster a
planned character and to avoid a haphazard and sprawling appearance;
B. Recognize that the proliferation of direct access into properties,
specifically high-traffic-generating nonresidential uses (such as a gas
station, fast-food restaurant, auto wash and similar uses), has long-term
traffic flow consequences, as it creates traffic conflict areas due to a
stream of slowing, stopping, turning, entering and exiting vehicles;
C. Provide for safe, efficient and continuous pedestrian accommodations
along M-24 and between properties abutting M-24;
D. Minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflict areas by
reducing the frequency of direct access points to M-24; and to provide
efficient spacing standards between access points and between access
points and intersections to separate conflict areas;
E. Separate traffic conflict areas by requiring separation of direct access
points to M-24, and by encouraging and requiring consolidation of
existing direct access point when redevelopment is contemplated;
F. Require or encourage, wherever possible, coordinated/shared access
among several developments or redevelopments;
G. Provide reasonable access to properties, though the access may not
always be direct access; and
H. Implement the recommendations of The Access Management
Guidebook, produced by the Michigan Department of Transportation in
October 2001; and the City of Lapeer Master Plan as it pertains to the
M-24 corridor.
§ 7-11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11.02
1:183
during the site plan review or other applicable process. Where regulations
of this section conflict with other applicable regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance, the most stringent requirements shall apply.
§ 7-11.03. Process requirements.
A. Parcels with access to the M-24 right-of-way shall be subject to access
approval from the Michigan Department of Transportation. Parcels
without direct frontage along the M-24 right-of-way, but falling within
660 feet of the M-24 right-of-way line, shall be subject to access
approval from the City of Lapeer with coordination with the Michigan
Department of Transportation. The City of Lapeer shall review the
access elements of a site plan and as appropriate shall coordinate with
the Michigan Department of Transportation prior to a final decision on
a particular site plan or development application. The City shall not
take action on an application without first consulting the Michigan
Department of Transportation.
B. An applicant shall be required to secure applicable permits and other
applicable approvals from the Michigan Department of Transportation
and other entities in addition to receiving site plan and other applicable
approvals from the City of Lapeer.
C. When site plan or other approval has been granted and an access
permit issued by the Michigan Department of Transportation, said plan
of access shall not be altered without a new application for access.
D. Failure to begin construction within one year of the approval date by
the City shall void approval, and a new application process is required.
E. The City of Lapeer may require a letter of credit, bond, or cash deposit
in any reasonable sum for each approved access structure, including,
without limitation, driveways, shared service drives, etc., to insure
compliance with an approved application. Such insurance shall
terminate and be returned to the applicant when the terms of approval
have been met or when authorization is canceled. The City of Lapeer
Engineer shall determine the amount. This financial guarantee is not
intended to duplicate the bond requirement of the Michigan
Department of Transportation when applicable.
F. Except for shared driveways, existing driveways that do not conform to
the requirements of this section shall be closed or modified to conform
to this section when site plan approval is required by § 7-18.02.
Provided, if the Planning Commission determines that existing site
constraints would make conformance to this section unreasonable or
impossible, the Planning Commission shall determine the extent of
upgrades to bring the site into greater compliance with the
requirements of this section. In making its decision, the Planning
Commission shall consider the existing and projected traffic conditions,
any sight distance limitations, existing access configurations, site
topography, natural features, external and internal site circulation,
§ 7-11.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-11.03
1:184
§ 7-11.04. Additional submittal information.
In addition to the submittal information required for site plan review in
§ 7-18.03, the following shall be provided with any application and
illustrated on the site plan:
§ 7-11.05. General access management standards.
§ 7-11.06. Spacing standards.
recommendations from the Michigan Department of Transportation,
and others as deemed appropriate. Required improvements may
include removal or reconfiguration of one or more existing access
points and establishing cross access to a neighboring property.
A. Existing access points within 500 feet of the subject property's
boundaries on both sides of the M-24 frontage, and along both sides of
any intersecting roads where access is proposed.
B. Dimensions between proposed and existing access points.
C. Where shared cross access is proposed or required, a shared access
and maintenance agreement may be required for City review. It shall
include provisions for maintenance, legal descriptions of easements,
and other elements as may be required. Once approved, the agreement
shall be recorded with the Lapeer County Register of Deeds.
A. Access for an individual parcel, lot or building site or for contiguous
parcels, lots or building sites under the same ownership shall consist of
either one single two-way driveway or a paired system wherein one
driveway is designed, and appropriately marked, to accommodate
ingress traffic and the other egress traffic.
B. One driveway shall be permitted for each single-family residential lot.
Other uses shall be subject to the regulations of this section.
C. For a parcel, lot, property or building site with frontage along M-24
exceeding 600 feet, or where the subject property has frontage on at
least two streets, an additional driveway may be permitted, if
warranted. The City Planning Staff and MDOT officials will jointly
determine whether a traffic impact study should be submitted by the
applicant demonstrating that conditions warrant an additional driveway
and that all driveways meet spacing requirements. Where possible,
second access points shall be located on a side street or service drive,
or shared with adjacent uses.
A. A driveway shall be located a minimum of 600 feet from any expressway
ramp.
B. Minimum required spacing standards.
§ 7-11.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11.06
1:185
(1) Driveways shall meet the minimum required spacing standards
listed below, based on posted speed limits along M-24, unless the
Michigan Department of Transportation approves less based on the
land use and restricted turns in the driveway design. The minimum
spacing requirements are measured from the center line of one
driveway to the center line of another driveway. For parcels or sites
with insufficient road frontage to meet the standards below, one of
the following shall be required:
(a) Construction of the driveway along a side street.
(b) A shared driveway with an adjacent property.
(c) Construction of a driveway along the property line farthest
from the intersection.
(d) A service drive as required § 7-11.08
(e) The provisions of § 7-11.03F may apply.
(2) The Planning Commission may grant temporary access approval
until such time that minimum spacing requirements can be met, or
alternative access meeting the requirements of this chapter is
approved, per § 7-11.11.
Table 7.11.1: Driveway Spacing Requirements
Source: MDOT, Traffic and Safety Division
Posted Speed Limit
(mph)
Minimum Driveway Spacing
(feet)
25 130
30 185
35 245
40 300
45 350
50+ 455
C. Driveway separation from intersections.
(1) Driveway separation from intersections shall be measured from the
center line of the driveway to the extended edge of the travel lane
on the intersecting street, as follows. For parcels or sites with
insufficient road frontage to meet the standards below, one of the
following shall be required:
(a) A shared driveway with an adjacent property.
(b) Construction of a driveway along the property line farthest
from the intersection.
§ 7-11.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-11.06
1:186
§ 7-11.07. Access design.
(c) A service drive as required in § 7-11.08.
(d) The provisions of § 7-11.03F may apply.
(2) The Planning Commission may grant temporary access approval
until such time that minimum spacing requirements can be met, or
alternative access meeting the requirements of this chapter is
approved, per § 7-11.11.
Table 7.11.2: Driveway Spacing Requirements from Street
Intersections
Location of
Driveway
Minimum
Spacing for Full
Movement
Driveway
(feet)
Minimum Spacing
for a Driveway
Restricting Left
Turns
(feet)
Along arterial or from
another intersecting
arterial
300 125
Along arterial
intersecting a
collector or local
street
200 125
Along a collector 125 75
Along a local street or
private road
75 50
D. A driveway may not be permitted when offsets may result in left-turn
conflicts, as determined by the Planning Commission and/or the
Michigan Department of Transportation.
A. There shall be a minimum of 27 feet of throat length for entering and
exiting vehicles at the intersection of a driveway and pavement of the
public road or service drive as measured from the pavement edge. For
driveways serving over 100 vehicles per peak hour (two-way traffic
volume) and for all driveways controlled by a traffic signal, adequate
throat length may be determined by a traffic impact study financed by
the applicant and as approved by the Planning Commission.
B. Access design and construction standards shall conform to the
requirements of the Michigan Department of Transportation and the
City of Lapeer, as applicable.
C. A five-foot-to-ten-foot-wide pedestrian walkway shall be integrated into
the site, as appropriate, so as to provide a continuous and safe
pedestrian linkage along M-24 and from M-24 to buildings. The
§ 7-11.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11.07
1:187
§ 7-11.08. Service drives. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Service drives are strongly encouraged and in some cases may be required.
The following provisions shall apply:
§ 7-11.09. Shared driveways.
§ 7-11.10. Parking lot connections.
Planning Commission shall determine the proper placement and design
of the walkway feature. More than one walkway may be required per
site.
D. The Planning Commission and/or the Michigan Department of
Transportation shall retain the right to ensure adequate corner
clearance and sight distance objectives as stated in § 7-11.03F of this
chapter or as determined best for the specific situation.
A. A front or rear service drive may be required. The service road shall
generally be parallel to the front property line and may be located
either in front of, or behind, principal buildings and may be placed in
required yards. In considering the most appropriate location and
alignment for a service road, the Planning Commission shall consider
the setbacks of existing and/or proposed structures and anticipated
traffic flow.
B. A minimum of five feet of landscaping/snow storage area shall be
reserved along both sides of a service drive. The Planning Commission
may adjust this standard, provided it finds adequate provision for snow
storage and green space.
C. Service drive access shall be set back at least 30 feet from an
intersection of a public or private street right-of-way and the access
drive to the parcel. The service drive may curve and be parallel with the
public street and be located no less than 15 feet from the public or
private street right-of-way. The service drive shall not be established
within a public right-of-way, unless dedicated to and accepted by the
applicable public agency. A service drive shall be used for circulation
and not as parking, loading or unloading.
A. Shared driveways are strongly encouraged and may be required.
B. In cases where access is restricted by the minimum spacing
requirements of § 7-11.06, a shared driveway may be the only access
option permitted.
C. The shared driveway shall be constructed along the midpoint between
the two properties unless a written easement is provided which allows
for traffic to travel across one parcel to another or otherwise access the
public street.
§ 7-11.07 LAPEER CODE § 7-11.10
1:188
§ 7-11.11. Temporary access permits.
An applicant for site plan or other approval that cannot meet the access
standards of this section and has no alternative means of reasonable access
to the public road system, as determined by the Planning Commission, may
be issued a temporary access permit. When adjoining parcels develop which
can provide a shared driveway, shared access via a service drive, or a cross
parking lot connection, the temporary access permit shall be rescinded and
an application for an access permit consistent with the requirements of this
section shall be met.
§ 7-11.12. (Reserved)14
A. A parking lot connection or the provision of a parking lot connection,
where feasible, shall be provided in the following situations:
(1) A proposed parking lot adjacent to an existing parking lot.
(2) A proposed parking lot adjacent to vacant land.
(3) Change to an existing parking lot adjacent to an existing parking
lot.
(4) Change to an existing parking lot where adjacent to vacant land.
B. Where a parking lot connection is required, a written cross-access
easement signed by both landowners and recorded with the Lapeer
County Register of Deeds shall be presented as evidence of the parking
lot connection prior to the issuance of any final zoning approval.
14.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 7.11.12, Landscaping, was repealed 9-26-2013.
§ 7-11.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11.12
1:189

ARTICLE XII
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs)
§ 7-12.01. Intent.
The Planned Unit Development Zoning District is designed to provide a
framework within which a developer, upon his/her/its initiation, can relate
the type, design and layout of residential and/or commercial uses to a
particular site and particular demand for housing and/or other local
commercial facilities in a manner consistent with the preservation of
property values within established areas. The section also provides an
added degree of flexibility in the building design and land use arrangement
so that a mixture of uses and provision of common open space can be
provided. The zoning district is intended to accommodate developments
with mixed or varied uses, on sites with unusual topography or unique
settings within the community, or on land which exhibits difficulty or costly
development problems or sites that contain natural features such as
wetlands or woodlots that are important for the City to retain in order to
protect its character. This zoning classification shall not be granted where
it is sought primarily to avoid the imposition of standards and requirements
of other zoning classifications rather than to achieve the stated purposes
herein set forth. The following regulations are the minimum requirements
for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Some uses permitted in this district are required to comply with specific
design standards.
§ 7-12.02. Eligibility requirements.
In order to be eligible for consideration of rezoning to PUD, a parcel must
comply with the following:
§ 7-12.03. Uses permitted. [Amended 9-26-2013]
All permitted principal uses by right or by special conditions in any of the
zoning districts in this chapter may be permitted in the PUD district based
on the standards outlined in § 7-12.04 below, subject to the discretion of
the City Commission. Uses permitted by special condition in another zoning
district may be authorized as a use by right by the City Commission in
granting PUD approval.
§ 7-12.04. Standards for approval.
Based upon the following standards, the Planning Commission may
recommend denial, approval, or approval with conditions, and the City
A. The parcel must be at least one acre in area.
B. The parcel must have access to an arterial street.
C. The parcel must have access to municipal water and sewer.
§ 7-12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12.04
1:191
Commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions the proposed
planned unit development.
A. The proposed mix of uses and density of residential uses shall be found
to be consistent with the City Master Plan.
B. Off-street parking shall be sufficient to meet the minimum required by
the ordinances of the City. However, if it is deemed necessary in order
to achieve the purposes of this section, the Planning Commission may
relax parking requirements during site plan review.
C. All streets within the planned unit development shall meet the
minimum requirements of Chapter 6, Land Division, and the City's
Construction Specifications, unless modified by the Planning
Commission.
D. Landscaping shall be provided so as to ensure that proposed uses will
be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public
and private property.
E. Judicious effort shall be used to ensure the preservation of the integrity
of the land and the preservation of natural, historical, and architectural
features.
F. Surface water shall be retained on the site unless the applicant can
demonstrate that to do so would be harmful to the environment, or is
not practical. In any case, stormwater shall not flow off the site at a rate
greater than the rate of flow prior to development and stormwater shall
not be directly discharged into a lake, river or stream.
G. The setbacks, building height, open space, maximum density and other
dimensional requirements for a proposed use in the concept plan shall
be based on the dimensional requirements for that use listed in the
applicable zoning district in this chapter. Where a proposed use or
range of uses is permitted in more than one zoning district, the PUD
concept plan as approved will identify which zoning district
dimensional requirements will apply. However, if it is deemed necessary
in order to achieve the purposes of this section, the City Commission
may modify the dimensional requirements for a given use or range of
uses. Noncontiguous property may be used in calculating open space
and the open space may be located on noncontiguous property.
H. The following standards concerning traffic and accessory conditions
shall be met:
(1) Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular and
pedestrian circulation within and to the zoning district shall be
provided.
(2) Drives and streets shall not be laid out to encourage outside traffic
to traverse the development nor to create unnecessary
fragmentation of the development into small blocks.
§ 7-12.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-12.04
1:192
§ 7-12.05. Approval procedure.
§ 7-12.06. Conceptual PUD plan requirements.
The conceptual PUD development plan that is required to be reviewed and
approved as part of the PUD rezoning process outlined above shall comply
with the following requirements:
(3) No material impediment to the visibility of automotive traffic,
cyclists or pedestrians shall be created or maintained.
A. The PUD zoning approval shall follow procedural requirements of
Article XXIII of this chapter for amending the Zoning Ordinance. An
applicant for PUD zoning approval shall submit a rezoning application,
a proposed concept plan as outlined in § 7-12.06 below, and any
proposed language for the PUD zoning district. The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall
review the conceptual PUD development plan based on the standards
described in § 7-12.06 to determine its suitability. [Amended
9-26-2013]
B. The Planning Commission shall then submit the proposed amendatory
ordinance to the City Commission together with its recommendation
and a summary of comments received at the public hearing.
C. The City Commission, prior to the first reading of the amendatory
ordinance, shall hold a public hearing meeting the notice requirements
in § 7-21.07. Following that public hearing, it may amend or place
additional conditions on the Zoning Ordinance amendment. The City
Commission may, at its discretion, send a revised PUD back to the
Planning Commission for their recommendation regarding the changes.
D. PUD site plan approval procedure may commence only after the
acceptance by the City Commission of the conceptual PUD development
plan and the rezoning of the property as required.
E. PUD site plan approval process shall follow the procedures for site plan
approval outlined in Article XVIII.
A. The applicant for preliminary phase approval of a PUD conceptual plan
shall submit sufficient copies of the following technical or graphic
materials together with such fees as may be required.
B. The PUD conceptual plan shall indicate the entire contiguous holding of
the petitioner or owner who wishes to develop the entire parcel or any
part thereof, and shall include the area and use of land adjacent to the
parcel to be developed. The plan shall exhibit any unusual
characteristics of topography, utility service, land usage or land
ownership. The plan shall also exhibit all existing and proposed
structures, existing and proposed streets, open spaces and other
features as required to determine compliance with approval of the
conceptual plan.
§ 7-12.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12.06
1:193
§ 7-12.07. Site plan approval.
Following approval of the conceptual plan by the City Commission, the
applicant may submit site plans for phases of the approved conceptual PUD
development plan. The site plans shall conform to the approved conceptual
plan. The site plans shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission following
the procedures outlined in Article XVIII. After its review, Planning
Commission shall make a recommendation to City Commission for its
approval, denial or approval with conditions.
§ 7-12.08. Deviations for approved PUD site plan.
Deviations from the approved plan may occur only under the following
circumstances:
C. The conceptual plan shall show all proposed uses and allotted spaces,
gross site area, street and vehicular access areas, number of each
variety of habitable space, total number of dwelling units and total open
space. The plan shall:
(1) Define the location of the areas to be devoted to particular uses.
(2) State the acreage to be devoted to the particular uses.
(3) Set forth the proposed density of the dwelling units by use type and
of the entire project.
(4) Show the location of parks, open recreation areas, other open
space and all public and community uses.
(5) The applicant shall present material as to the development's
objectives and purposes to be served; conformity to plans and
policies of the City; market needs; impact on public schools,
utilities, and circulation facilities; impact on natural resources; and
a staging plan showing the general time schedule of the expected
completion dates of the various elements of the plan.
(6) Any additional graphics or written materials reasonably requested
by Planning Commission or City Commission to assist the City in
visualizing and understanding the proposal shall be submitted.
(7) Upon submission of all required materials and fees, the Planning
Commission shall follow the procedures for review of a zoning
amendment.
(8) Approval of the conceptual PUD plan, shall confer upon the owner
the right to proceed through the subsequent planning phase for a
period not to exceed three years from date of approval. If so
requested by the petitioner, an extension of a two-year period may
be granted by the Planning Commission.
A. Minor changes to a previously approved PUD site plan may be approved
without the necessity of Planning Commission or City Commission
§ 7-12.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-12.08
1:194
§ 7-12.09. Design standards.
Design of the proposed improvements within a PUD shall comply with the
design requirements established by the City under this chapter as well as
those established under Chapter 6, Land Division, (if applicable) and other
ordinances or guidelines adopted by the City.
action if the Planning Director certifies in writing that the proposed
revision does not alter the basic design or any specified conditions
of the plan as agreed upon by the Planning Commission and the City
Commission. Any other change will require approval following the
procedures outlined above for the original approval. Appeal of the
Planning Director decision regarding the need for formal review by the
Planning Commission and City Commission is appealable to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
§ 7-12.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12.09
1:195

ARTICLE XIII
Use Requirements
§ 7-13.01. Residential uses.
A. Boarding and renting of rooms.
(1) This use shall be considered as an accessory use; board or renting
shall not be furnished to more than two persons in addition to the
family.
(2) In the case of renting rooms, such convenience shall not be
furnished unless there shall be provided at least 50 square feet of
floor area per boarder or renter in that part of the building directly
occupied for rooming purposes.
(3) Boarding and the renting of rooms shall not include the operating
of what is normally termed a restaurant or similar use where meals
are served to transient guests. Board shall not be provided to other
than those rooming in the residence.
B. Dwelling units. All newly constructed dwellings (single-family or
multiple-family) for which a building permit is required shall be
reviewed by the Building Official and shall be subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable City codes and
ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to
abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to
the construction of the dwelling.
(2) Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter
foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the
dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at
the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be
constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of
durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with
respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below
the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which
is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area.
(3) Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials
similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
(4) Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs with a minimum
pitch of 4:12. Roofing materials shall be similar to the dwelling
units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential
neighborhood.
§ 7-13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.01
1:197
(5) Dwelling units shall be provided with attached garages in areas
where 75% of the dwelling units located within 300 feet of the
subject premises have attached garages.
(6) Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall
configuration which represents an average width-to-depth or
depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in
reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on
adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential
neighborhood. Each such dwelling unit shall provide a minimum
width and depth of at least 20 feet over 80% of any such width or
depth dimension.
(7) The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located
under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate
structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality
than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to
10% of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet,
whichever shall be less.
(8) Any such home shall be anchored by an anchoring system approved
by the City.
(9) The foregoing conditions in Subsection B(1) through (8) shall not
apply to existing dwellings or existing accessory structures.
(10) The Building Official or Planning Commission shall not seek to
discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the
reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby
protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding
residential uses and the City at large. In reviewing any such
proposed dwelling unit, the Building Official may require the
applicant to furnish such plans, elevations, and similar
documentation reasonably necessary to permit a complete review
and evaluation of the proposal. The surrounding residential area
shall mean those dwellings within 300 feet of the subject premises.
If the area within 300 feet does not contain 20 homes, then the
nearest 20 similar type dwellings shall be considered.
C. Home occupations.
(1) Home occupation shall not be permitted that:
(a) Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling or is visible
from the street;
(b) Generates traffic, parking, sewerage or water use in excess of
what is customary in the residential neighborhood;
(c) Creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in
electrical interference, or becomes a nuisance;
§ 7-13.01 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.01
1:198
(d) Results in outside storage or display of anything, including
signs;
(e) Requires the employment of anyone in the home other than the
dwelling occupant;
(f) Requires exterior building alterations to accommodate the
occupation;
(g) Occupies more than 25% of the ground floor area of the
dwelling, or 50% of a detached garage;
(h) Requires parking for customers that cannot be accommodated
on the site and/or not exceeding one parking space at curb side
on the street;
(i) Requires the delivery of goods or the visit of customers before
8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m.
(2) The following are permitted home occupations, provided they do
not violate any of the provisions of the previous subsection:
(a) Barber shop or beauty shop with no more than one chair;
(b) Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring;
(c) Painting, sculpturing or writing;
(d) Telephone answering;
(e) Home crafts, such as model-making, rug-weaving and lapidary
work;
(f) Tutoring, limited to four students at a time;
(g) Home cooking and preserving;
(h) Computer programming;
(i) Salespersons office or home office of a professional person;
(j) Laundering and ironing;
(k) Repair of clocks, instruments or other small appliances which
do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors or results in electrical interference;
(l) Instruction in a fine art or craft.
(3) The following are prohibited as home occupations:
(a) Dance studios;
(b) Private clubs;
§ 7-13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.01
1:199
§ 7-13.02. Animal and agriculture uses.
(c) Repair shops which may create a nuisance due to noise,
vibrations, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference;
(d) Restaurants;
(e) Stables or kennels;
(f) Bed-and-breakfast;
(g) Automobile repair or paint shops.
(4) Any proposed home occupation that is neither specifically
permitted by Subsection C(2) nor specifically prohibited by
Subsection C(3) shall be considered a use permitted subject to
special conditions and be granted or denied upon consideration of
those standards contained in Subsection C(1) above and under the
procedures specified in Article XIX. [Amended 9-26-2013]
A. Commercial kennels:
(1) Shall not abut any area zoned for residential purposes.
(2) Are subject further to all health standards of the City.
B. Farms. Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the
boundaries of either a proprietary or assessor's plat are subject to the
health and sanitation provisions of the City of Lapeer, and shall be
further subject to the following:
(1) Property shall be used for agriculture or horticulture for
commercial, hobby or personal purposes, including but not limited
to: greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, poultry
farms and apiaries.
(2) Buildings, structures, or yard areas used for the keeping of animals
shall be located not less than 100 feet from a property line.
(3) No farms shall be operated as garbage-fed piggeries, or for the
disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or
for the slaughtering of animals, except such animals as have been
raised on the premises or have been maintained on the premises
for at least a period of one year immediately prior thereto and for
the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises.
(4) Establishments keeping or operating fur-bearing animals, public
riding, or boarding stables or commercial dog kennels, shall not be
considered a farm under this chapter unless combined with bona
fide farm operations on the same continuous tract of land.
(5) None of the provisions of this chapter is intended to conflict with
those rights protected under the Michigan Right to Farm Act,
MCLA § 286.471 et seq.
§ 7-13.01 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.03
1:200
§ 7-13.03. Public and institutional uses.
A. Cemeteries.
(1) Not more than 51% of the area of a cemetery shall be part of a
recorded plats.
(2) The site shall have access to a paved arterial or collector street as
defined in the Master Plan.
B. Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning
(public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious
education and not operated for profit).
(1) The site shall have access to a paved arterial or collector street as
defined in the Master Plan.
(2) No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any property line.
C. Places of public assembly and places of worship. Places of public
assembly and places of worship, as well as other facilities normally
incidental thereto with a seating capacity of less than 500 people or
parking for less than 250 vehicles.
(1) Buildings of greater than the maximum height permitted in the
district may be allowed, provided front, side and rear yards are
increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each
foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed.
(2) Adequate site space to allow for expansion shall be provided in
order to allow for growth of facilities without causing an impact on
any adjacent residential neighborhood.
(3) The site shall have access to a paved arterial or collector street as
defined in the Master Plan.
(4) Storage of buses, trucks and maintenance equipment shall be
entirely within a totally enclosed building.
(5) Outdoor lighting of buildings and grounds shall be completely
shielded from abutting residential areas.
D. Large-scale places of public assembly and places of worship. Largescale
places of public assembly and places of worship with a seating
capacity of more than 500 people or parking for more than 250
vehicles.
(1) The site shall have at least 150 feet of frontage on a major
thoroughfare as designated on the Master Plan.
(2) All access to the site shall be from major thoroughfares.
(3) All buildings shall have a setback a minimum of 50 feet from any lot
line in an abutting single-family residential district, unless such
§ 7-13.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.03
1:201
§ 7-13.04. Retail uses.
abutting lot is occupied by an existing institutional use other than
a dwelling unit.
(4) All structures and parking and loading areas shall meet the
requirements for a type "B" buffer and setback required in Table
7.15.1 when the lot line abuts a single-family residential district.
(5) Storage of buses, trucks and maintenance equipment shall be
entirely within a totally enclosed building.
(6) Outdoor lighting of buildings and grounds shall be completely
shielded from abutting residential areas.
(7) An analysis of the impact on existing traffic patterns in the City
must be submitted for the Planning Commission's review and
consideration. At a minimum, the traffic impact analysis should
provide existing and future traffic counts and a quantitative
assessment of the impact the proposed development will have on
the level of service for the affected thoroughfares.
A. Commercial establishments consisting of one or more uses and a
minimum of 80,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(1) Land considered for the B-3 Regional Business District use must
have a minimum area of 10 acres under single ownership and
control, or the mix of lots being developed as an integrated and
cohesive development must have a combined minimum area of 10
acres. At least one anchor store with a minimum of 80,000 square
feet shall be included in the development.
(2) Prior to the approval of any B-3 Regional Business District, an
analysis of the impact on existing traffic patterns in the City must
be submitted for the Planning Commission's review and
consideration. At a minimum, the traffic impact analysis should
provide existing and future traffic counts and a quantitative
assessment of the impact the proposed development will have on
the level of service for the affected thoroughfares.
B. Business in the character of a drive-through.
(1) A setback of at least 60 feet must be maintained from the right-ofway
line of any existing or proposed street and the drive-through
window.
(2) No more than three drive-through lanes are permitted per parcel in
the B-1 District.
(3) Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from the
intersection of any two streets.
(4) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
§ 7-13.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.04
1:202
§ 7-13.05. Motor vehicle uses.
(5) The drive-through lane shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide. Clear
identification and delineation between the drive-through facility
and the parking lot shall be provided.
(6) Each drive-through facility shall provide a bypass lane to allow
other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served.
(7) Minimum stacking spaces shall comply with § 7-16.07 of this
chapter.
(8) The drive-through facility shall be located on the side or rear
elevation of the building to minimize visibility from a public or
private roadway. The drive-through window and menu board
speaker shall not face an adjacent residential district.
(9) Drive-through restaurants are prohibited on parcels fronting on
M-24 between Turrill Road and Tower Street.
C. Home centers and lumber yards.
(1) Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major
thoroughfares and shall have the entrance to the business and the
parking area on the major thoroughfare, except when access is
more appropriate and safe from another street that can
accommodate the projected traffic.
(2) Lumber yard storage associated with such activities shall be
completely obscured from view from public streets and from
residential districts in a manner acceptable to the Planning
Commission.
(3) Seasonal displays (garden centers) are not required to be obscured
from view.
(4) Outdoor display of materials or articles for sale, other than a
preapproved garden center, including accessory buildings for sale,
must undergo an annual administrative zoning review. Outdoor
display shall not be allowed in the required front yard setback or in
required parking spaces.
D. Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.
(1) The site plan shall provide for adequate off-street assembly area for
vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further that
such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required
off-street parking area.
(2) A caretaker's residence may be provided within the building of
mortuary establishments.
§ 7-13.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.05
1:203
A. Automobile service station for sale of gasoline, oil and minor
accessories.
(1) The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not
be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic
hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances
shall be no less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured
from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet and so arranged
that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required
to wait.
(3) Overhead canopies shall be set back at least 20 feet from the rightof-
way with materials consistent with the principal building. The
proposed clearance of the canopy shall be noted on the site plan.
Lighting within the canopy shall be fully recessed.
(4) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(5) All rest room doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and
residential districts.
B. Automobile service station for sale of gasoline, oil and minor
accessories, when developed in conjunction with a convenience market
and accessory services such as fast-food facilities and automated
automobile washes.
(1) The site shall be at the intersection of major thoroughfares as
defined by the Master Plan.
(2) The site must abut on a minimum of one side property that is zoned
or planned for commercial use.
(3) There shall be a limit of a single facility for any single platted
industrial park in the City.
(4) Automobile repair work shall be prohibited.
(5) Curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not be
permitted at such locations what will tend to create traffic hazards
in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrance shall be no
less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured from the
road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts.
(6) The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet, and so arranged
that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required
to wait.
(7) Overhead canopies shall be set back at least 20 feet from the rightof-
way with materials consistent with the principal building. The
proposed clearance of the canopy shall be noted on the site plan.
Lighting within the canopy shall be fully recessed.
§ 7-13.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.05
1:204
(8) All rest room doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and
residential districts.
C. Minor automobile repair shops.
(1) The site shall have access to a paved arterial or collector street as
defined in the Master Plan.
(2) Access to and from such use shall not be cause for traffic to utilize
local streets.
(3) Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited unless
such storage is within a fenced and obscured area which meets all
setback requirements.
(4) Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for
more than 48 hours unless awaiting repair for which a "work
order," signed by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle
so as to be visible from outside the vehicle.
(5) Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be
utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair.
(6) All vehicle servicing or repair, except minor repairs, such as, but
not limited to: tire changing and headlight changing, shall be
conducted within a building.
(7) Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal
of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public
view.
D. Major automotive repair. Major automotive repair businesses such as
engine rebuilding, paint and body shops, rebuilding or reconditioning of
motor vehicles and collision service shall be subject to the following:
(1) Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited.
(2) Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for
more than 48 hours unless awaiting repair for which a work order,
signed by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to
be visible from outside the vehicle. The area to be used for vehicle
storage shall be shown on the site plan.
(3) Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be
utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair.
(4) All vehicle servicing or repair shall be conducted within an
enclosed building.
(5) Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal
of used parts, and such containers shall be screened from public
view. Used tire storage shall be limited to 25 tires and all tires shall
be stored inside a building.
§ 7-13.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.05
1:205
§ 7-13.06. Lodging and food service uses.
§ 7-13.07. Entertainment and recreation uses.
E. Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of secondhand automobiles.
(1) Outdoor storage of automobiles or vehicles for sale shall not be
permitted in any required front or required side yard.
(2) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(3) Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60
feet from the intersection of any two streets.
(4) Any use involving the maintenance, service or repair of vehicles
shall also meet the standards for automobile repair businesses.
(5) The entire area of the sales space shall be provided with asphaltic
or concrete surfacing.
F. Automobile car wash, including self-service car wash.
(1) Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any single
street.
(2) Vacuuming and drying may be located outside the building, but
shall not be in the required front yard and shall be set back at least
50 feet from any residential district. Such areas shall be screened
with obscuring landscaping as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(3) Adequate stacking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XVI, Parking, Loading, Access and
Circulation Requirements. Such spaces shall not be permitted in
the public right-of-way.
A. Motels and hotels.
(1) Ingress and egress must not conflict with adjacent business uses.
(2) Kitchen or cooking facilities shall not be provided within individual
units, with the exception of units for the use of the manager or
caretaker. This does not prohibit refrigerators, microwaves and
coffee makers within individual units.
(3) Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area.
A. Adult entertainment uses.
(1) Purpose.
(a) It is recognized that there are some uses which, because of
their nature, are recognized as having objectionable,
operations characteristics, particularly when several of them
§ 7-13.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.07
1:206
are concentrated in an area, thereby having deleterious effect
upon adjacent areas. Special regulations of these uses are
necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting, deteriorating, and/or downgrading
of the area and the adjacent areas. The City believes control or
regulation is for the purpose of preventing the overcrowding of
such uses into a particular location and thereby minimize their
adverse impact on any specific neighborhood.
(b) The prohibition against the establishment of more than one
adult regulated use, within 500 feet of each other and other
incompatible uses, serves to avoid the clustering of such uses,
avoids the deleterious effects of blight and downgrading of
both business and residential property values, and prevents
the deleterious effect of blight and devaluation of recreation,
educational and/or religious uses.
(c) Distance limitations shall be measured along a straight line
forming the shortest distance between any portion of the
subject parcel and parcels zoned residential or occupied by
uses specified herein.
(d) Concern for, and pride in, the orderly planning and
development of the neighborhood and area should be
encouraged and fostered in those persons who comprise the
business and residential segments of that neighborhood and
area.
(2) Requirements.
(a) Unless and until approval is obtained, it shall be unlawful to
hereafter establish any adult regulated use as defined herein.
(b) Any adult regulated use/building shall be at least 500 feet from
any of the following, except as otherwise provided below:
[1] Another existing adult regulated use.
[2] Any residential district.
(c) Any adult regulated use/building offering material described in
this chapter shall comply with the following performance
standards:
[1] That any display of adult-oriented material be shielded
from public view either placed behind a counter, or by
providing a separately established room which would have
restricted access controlled by the owner or employees;
[2] That all access to adult-oriented material be restricted to
person 18 years of age or older;
§ 7-13.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.07
1:207
[3] That signage be posted regarding the restrictions to this
type of material; and
[4] That the location of the counter or room be limited to an
area away from the main entry.
(d) Site and building requirements:
[1] Building size shall not exceed 5,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
[2] The building and site shall be designed, constructed and
maintained so material such as a display, decoration or
sign depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this
chapter, cannot be observed by pedestrians or motorists
on a public right-of-way or from an adjacent land use. No
exterior door or window on the premises shall be kept
open at any time while the business is in operation.
[3] The building shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing
insulation so noise generated inside said premises shall
not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or
public right-of-way.
[4] The hours of operation shall be approved by the City
Commission.
[5] Access shall be from a major thoroughfare.
[6] Any adult regulated use, which allows customers to remain
on the premises while viewing live, filmed or recorded
entertainment or while using or consuming the products
or services supplied on the premises, shall provide at least
one security guard on duty outside the premises. Security
guard provided will patrol the grounds and parking areas
at all times while the business is in operation.
[7] A license is required.
(e) Prior to granting a permit for any adult regulated use, the City
Commission may impose any such conditions or limitations
authorized by law in connection with the grant of special uses.
(f) An adult regulated use granted pursuant to the terms of this
chapter may not be reestablished after discontinuance for a
period of 90 consecutive days without a new grant of approval
by the City.
B. Amusement arcades.
(1) Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to arterial
streets and shall have the entrance to both the business and
§ 7-13.07 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.07
1:208
parking area for such establishment on an arterial or collector
street. Access from a minor street shall be prohibited.
(2) Locations for any such facility shall be no closer than 500 feet to
the property line of any elementary, intermediate or high school.
(3) Businesses shall not be located within 500 feet of the property line
of a similar business.
(4) Business buildings shall not be located within 150 feet of any front,
rear or side yard line of any residential lot in a residential district.
C. Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children's
amusement parks, miniature golf courses.
(1) Children's amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a fourfoot
wall or fence.
D. Golf courses and other outdoor commercial or institutional recreation
areas (which may or may not be operated for profit). [Amended
5-17-2012]
(1) The site shall have access to a paved arterial or collector street as
defined in the Master Plan.
(2) All principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than 200 feet
from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided
that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be
screened from view, the Planning Commission may recommend to
the Board of Appeals the modification of this requirement.
(3) Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, said pool shall be
provided with a protective fence in accordance with the Michigan
Building Code.
E. Multi-screen movie theaters.
(1) Minimum parcel size shall be three acres.
(2) The site must have a minimum of 200 feet of frontage on a major
thoroughfare, or, a minimum of two means of access to either M-21
(Genesee Street) or M-24 (Lapeer Road).
(3) A traffic impact analysis must be submitted pursuant to § 7-18.04G,
Traffic impact.
F. Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community
recreation centers; nonprofit swimming pool clubs.
(1) The site shall have access to a paved arterial or collector street as
defined in the Master Plan.
§ 7-13.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.07
1:209
§ 7-13.08. Industrial uses.
(2) Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 50 feet wide, and shall
be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass. All such landscaping shall
be maintained in a healthy condition.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less
than 1/2 of the member families and/or individual members. The
Planning Commission may modify the off-street parking
requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically
determined that the users will originate from the immediately
adjacent areas, and will, therefore, be pedestrian. Prior to the
issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws
of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the
membership involved for computing the off street parking
requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or
organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the offstreet
parking requirement shall be determined by the Planning
Commission on the basis of usage.
(4) Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of § 7-14.07 of
this chapter.
A. Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber,
open storage of contractor's equipment and supplies.
(1) Commercial outdoor display, sales, or storage may be allowed on
the same property as an approved mini-storage use or other
principal use deemed compatible by the Planning Commission, but
such commercial outdoor display, sales or storage in all instances
requires a special land use approval.
(2) No outdoor display, sales, or storage shall be permitted in the
required front, side or rear yards.
(3) The storage of soil, sand, mulch, and similar loosely packaged
materials shall be contained and covered to prevent it from blowing
into adjacent properties. The outdoor storage of fertilizers,
pesticides and other hazardous materials is prohibited.
(4) All outdoor display, sales and storage area property lines shall be
screened from public view and from an adjacent residential district.
(5) All stored materials including loosely packaged materials shall not
be piled or stacked higher than the height of the obscuring screen.
Vehicles and implements may exceed the height of the screen,
provided that they are set back from the screen a distance equal to
their height.
(6) All outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable
and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of
all surface water.
§ 7-13.07 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.08
1:210
(7) All loading and truck maneuvering shall be accommodated on-site.
(8) Fencing and lighting for security purposes may be required as
determined by the Planning Commission. All lighting shall be
shielded from adjacent residential areas.
B. Outdoor storage when accessory to a principal use. Outdoor storage of
trucks, trailers, equipment, supplies, materials, finished and semifinished
products, building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, and
supplies when accessory to a principal use shall be subject to the
following:
(1) All outdoor storage uses shall be located within the rear yard or
side yard.
(2) Outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer than 150 feet from
any street right-of-way. Outdoor storage areas shall comply with
building setbacks of the district for all other yards.
(3) The height of any item stored outdoors shall not exceed 12 feet.
The Planning Commission may increase this standard if the storage
area will not have a negative impact on surrounding properties and
all storage is in accordance with the Fire Code requirements.
(4) All storage facilities shall be enclosed within a building or within an
obscuring wall or obscuring privacy fence on those sides abutting
all residential, office or business districts, and on any yard abutting
a public street. The extent of the wall or fence may be determined
by the Planning Commission on the basis of usage. The wall or
fence shall not be less than six feet in height, and may, depending
on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height.
(5) Landscaping shall be provided around the exterior boundary of the
storage area. All planting plans shall meet the requirements of
§ 7-15.02 and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission.
(6) All outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable
and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of
stormwater without negatively impacting adjacent property; the
Planning Commission may approve a gravel surface for all or part
of the storage area for low intensity activities, such as landscape
materials, upon a finding that neighboring properties and the
environment will not be negatively impacted.
(7) A dedicated fire lane through the storage yard shall be provided for
emergency services if determined necessary by the City Fire
Department.
C. Parking lots and structures.
(1) The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection
with one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located
§ 7-13.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.08
1:211
in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with
one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or
institutions.
(2) Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an RM-1, RM-2 or
nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when
adjacent to said districts, or on the end of a block where such areas
front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the
district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public
alley between such P-1 District and above listed districts.
(3) Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger
vehicles, for periods of less than one day and shall not be used as
an off-street loading area.
(4) Commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display
thereof, shall not be conducted in such parking area.
(5) Signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use, shall not be maintained on such parking area.
(6) Buildings, other than those for shelter or attendants, shall not be
erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in
height.
(7) Applications for P-1 District rezoning shall be made by submitting a
dimensional layout of the area requested showing the intended
parking plans in accordance with § 7-16.04
D. Mini warehouses and storage buildings for lease. Mini warehouses and
storage buildings for lease to the public, including the office and
residence of a caretaker, shall be subject to the following:
(1) Buildings shall be spaced not less than 30 feet apart.
(2) Exterior building walls visible from a public right-of-way or
nonindustrial district shall be finished with brick or other highquality
masonry material.
(3) Adequate maneuvering space for firesafety vehicles shall be
provided.
(4) The office and dwelling of a caretaker may be included on-site.
E. Junkyards and places for the dismantling, wrecking and disposing of
junk and/or refuse material.
(1) Such use shall not be located closer than 300 feet from the border
of any I-1 District.
(2) Permits or licenses are required for one year periods upon
authorized inspection and approval of the Planning Department,
whose approval shall be based on the performance standards set
forth in § 7-8.04, Performance standards.
§ 7-13.08 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.08
1:212
§ 7-13.09. Health and human care uses.
F. Lumber and planing mills.
(1) All operations shall be completely enclosed.
(2) The site shall be located so that no property line shall form the
exterior boundary of the I-1 District which abuts a Residential
District.
G. Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or
plaster of paris or any other potentially noxious materials.
(1) The site shall be located not less than 400 feet distant from any
residential district and 300 feet from any other nonindustrial
district.
(2) The operation shall be subject to appropriate measures to control
the type of processes to prevent noxious results or nuisances.
A. Child-care centers, nursery schools and day nurseries.
(1) Such uses shall be duly licensed by the State of Michigan
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs pursuant to Act
116 of 1973, as amended.15
(2) For each child, a minimum of 50 square feet of indoor activity space
shall be provided. Indoor activity space shall exclude hallways,
bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and
cloakrooms, areas used exclusively for resting, sleeping or eating.
(3) A minimum of 1,200 square feet of safe outdoor play area shall be
provided in the rear yard.
(4) All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed with a fence of no less than
four feet and no more than six feet in height capable of containing
the children within the play area.
B. Nursing homes and child-care institutions.
(1) There shall be provided on the site not less than 1,000 square feet
of open space for each bed in the home. The 1,000 square feet of
land area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking,
service drives, loading space, yard requirement and accessory
uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory
buildings.
(2) Buildings shall not be closer than 40 feet to any property line.
C. Hospitals.
15.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.111 et seq.
§ 7-13.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.09
1:213
§ 7-13.10. Accessory uses.
(1) All hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least
10 acres in area.
(2) The site shall have access to a paved arterial or collector street as
defined in the Master Plan.
(3) The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from
bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for front, rear
and side yards for all two-story structures. For every story above
two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20
feet.
(4) Whenever any such use abuts a residential district, a transition
buffer area of at least 100 feet in width shall be provided. Walls,
fences or landscaping shall be required as part of this buffer area
as determined by the Planning Commission.
(5) Emergency room, ambulance and delivery areas shall be screened
from public view with an obscuring wall and/or landscaping a
minimum of six feet in height.
(6) Auxiliary uses, such as a pharmacy, gift shop, cafeteria and similar
customary hospital-related uses shall be allowed.
D. Housing for the elderly.
(1) All dwellings shall consist of at least 350 square feet per unit (not
including kitchen and sanitary facilities).
(2) Total coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units and related
service buildings) shall not exceed 25% of the total site, exclusive
of any dedicated public right-of-way.
(3) Service uses such as a dry-cleaning pickup station, beauty shop,
barber shop or similar use for the exclusive service to residents of a
building or complex may be allowed in RM-2 Districts within a
building housing 50 or more residents. In no instance shall such
service use be provided with direct access to a street for the use of
the public in general, it being the purpose of this provision to allow
such use to only be provided as a convenience to occupants of the
building in which such service is located. No signs of any nature
shall be visible from outside the building in which the use is
located.
E. Ambulance service stations. [Added 11-19-2018]
(1) The office, dispatch, storage, maintenance, and sleeping rooms
may be included on-site.
A. Garage sales.
§ 7-13.09 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.10
1:214
(1) Before any garage sale may be held, the person holding the sale
shall register the same with the City of Lapeer Police Department
at least 24 hours before holding the sale.
(2) The registrant shall provide the following information: the name of
the person holding the sale; the name of the owner, occupant or his
personal representative; the dates and times the sale will be held;
the address of the premises where the sale will be held; the
anticipated number of people expected to attend the sale each day;
and such other information as the Chief of Police may deem
important for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
(3) A garage sale may be held for not more than seven consecutive
days duration, and for not more than twice each calendar year.
B. Tent sales and sidewalk sales.
(1) Tent sales and sidewalk sales shall comply with the requirements of
§ 7-14.09, Open storage and outdoor display, Subsection B, as
deemed applicable by the Planning Department. [Amended
5-17-2012]
(2) Tents shall be anchored adequately to withstand strong winds.
(3) A sidewalk sale located within a public right-of-way must be
approved by the City of Lapeer City Commission.
(4) Displays for sidewalk sale must be arranged in a manner that
maintains a five-foot-wide path for through pedestrian traffic.
(5) No tent sales or sidewalk sales shall interrupt the flow of traffic on
public streets or through parking lots.
C. Other temporary uses. Temporary uses not otherwise listed may be
approved as follows:
(1) Traditional temporary uses associated with permitted uses and
activities such as carnivals, tent revivals and similar activities may
be permitted by the Planning Department, provided they do not last
for more than seven consecutive days and the site is not used more
than twice a year for such temporary activity, adequate toilet and
parking facilities are provided, setback requirements are complied
with and the outdoor activities do not occur between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(2) Seasonal outdoor display of merchandise for sale, when accessory
to a principal use, may be permitted in accordance with § 7-14.09.
(3) Facilities for temporary storage and office use during construction
or similar activities may be permitted by the Planning Department,
provided the buildings and material comply with setback
requirements and are removed once construction is complete.
§ 7-13.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.10
1:215
§ 7-13.11. Other uses similar to above uses.
The Planning Commission may allow a use not specifically permitted in a
zoning district by right or as a special land use if they determine that it is
similar to other uses allowed in the district. The use may only be allowed
as a use by special land use. In making the determination, the Planning
Commission shall consider the following:
(4) Other temporary uses of property meeting the criteria of § 7-13.11
may be permitted by the Planning Commission as a special land
use.
D. Wireless telecommunication antenna. The installation of a wireless
telecommunication antenna on an existing structure is permitted as an
accessory use, provided:
(1) The antenna is unobtrusive and blends in with the character of the
area it is located in.
(2) The telecommunication equipment and cabinet are housed in an
existing structure or in a structure designed to be consistent with
the character of the site it is located on.
E. Wireless telecommunication towers.
(1) The applicant must demonstrate that there is no existing tower or
other suitable structure available within the area for the location of
the wireless telecommunication tower.
(2) The applicant must agree to provide access to the tower for other
wireless telecommunication providers.
(3) The tower must be capable of supporting a minimum of four
telecommunication antenna.
(4) The tower must be set back a minimum of the tower height from all
lot lines unless the applicant certifies that the tower is selfcollapsing,
in which case, a setback of 50% of the tower height is
required.
(5) If the tower is a lattice type, then the applicant must propose
measures to prevent trespassers from climbing the tower.
(6) The telecommunication equipment and cabinet shall be screened
from the surrounding property.
A. The intent of the zoning district.
B. The anticipated off-site impact of the use due to traffic, hours of
operation, and generation of noise, dust or odors in comparison with
the uses allowed in the proposed district.
C. The similarities of the proposed use with uses allowed in other zoning
districts.
§ 7-13.10 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.11
1:216
§ 7-13.12. Medical marihuana facility uses. [Added 2-19-2018]
D. No use may be classified as a use allowed in a district using this
procedures if the use is specifically permitted in another district.
A. Any uses or activities found by the State of Michigan or a court with
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise not permitted by state
law may not be permitted by City of Lapeer. In the event that a court
with jurisdiction declares some or all of this section invalid, then City of
Lapeer may suspend the acceptance of applications pending the
resolution of the legal issue in question.
B. At the time of application for a permit, the marihuana facility must be
licensed by the State of Michigan and then must be at all times in
compliance within the laws of the State of Michigan, including but not
limited to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCLA § 333.26421 et
seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA
§ 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCLA
§ 333.27901 et seq.; and all other applicable rules promulgated by the
State of Michigan.
C. Facilities shall provide a security plan in compliance with the
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs rules.
D. The use or facility must be at all times in compliance with all other
applicable state laws and ordinances of City of Lapeer.
E. Marihuana and tobacco products shall not be smoked, ingested, or
otherwise consumed in the building space occupied by the provisioning
center.
F. All medical marihuana facilities activity shall be conducted in a fully
enclosed building. Outdoor display, outdoor production, outdoor sales,
or outdoor storage shall not be allowed. [Amended 11-19-2018]
G. A marihuana facility, or activities associated with the licensed growing,
processing, testing, transporting, or sales of marihuana, may not be
permitted as a home business or accessory use, nor may they include
accessory uses except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
H. Hours of operation.
(1) Hours of operation of provisioning center facilities shall be
restricted to be between the hours 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(2) Hours of operation of safety compliance facilities shall be restricted
to be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
I. Buffer requirements are considered a setback or separation area in
which a medical marihuana use permitted under this chapter must
maintain a defined spacing from an existing use as stated below. Buffers
are measured from the property line as determined by the City of
§ 7-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.12
1:217
Lapeer Assessing Department. A proposed medical marihuana use must
be outside of designated buffer areas.
(1) A one-thousand-foot buffer is required from all public, parochial
and other private schools offering courses in general education,
and consisting of grade levels kindergarten through 12th grade.
This buffer requirement is in correlation with the State of Michigan
Drug Free School Zone (MCLA § 333.7410), not including
measuring procedures along a public right-of-way.
(2) A five-hundred-foot buffer is required from all licensed child-care
centers, child day-care centers, nursery schools and child-care
institutions. All facilities listed here pertain to child-care facilities
that cater to children under the age of 18, but excluding those
operating out of a private home, such as child care group home and
child care family home licenses. Such facilities, centers and
institutions are further defined in Subsection A ("child-care or daycare
center") and Subsection B ("child-care institution" of the term
"child-care facilities") in § 7-24.03 of this chapter.
(3) A five-hundred-foot buffer is required from all federal owned, used,
or operated property. Such federal uses currently include the
United States National Guard Armory of Michigan,
Telecommunication Exchange Federal Facility, and the United
States Postal Office, excluding transportation facilities such as the
railroad and interstate I-69.
(4) A two-hundred-foot buffer is required from all designated public
parks within the City of Lapeer, excluding trail ways and
cemeteries such as Linear Park and Oakdale Cemetery.
J. Buildings used for grow facilities, processor facility, safety compliance
facility, provisioning center, and secure transport shall be equipped
with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure
that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes
through an activated carbon filter. The filtration system shall consist of
one or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s)
shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume
of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided
by three. The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM. The
filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in
use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every 365 days or
as determined by the manufacturer's recommendations. Negative air
pressure shall be maintained inside the building. Doors and windows
shall remain closed, except for the minimum length of time needed to
allow people to ingress or egress the building.
(1) An alternative odor control system is permitted if the applicant
submits and the City of Lapeer Planning Commission accepts a
report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Michigan
demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well
§ 7-13.12 LAPEER CODE § 7-13.12
1:218
or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise
required. The City of Lapeer may hire an outside expert to review
the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and
whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted.
§ 7-13.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13.12
1:219

ARTICLE XIV
General Provisions
§ 7-14.01. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations and conditions that
are generally applicable to all districts of this chapter unless otherwise
indicated. It is to provide uniform regulations applicable within the City of
Lapeer that supplement the specific requirements for each district and each
use.
§ 7-14.02. General exceptions: uses.
§ 7-14.03. General exceptions: dimensional requirements.
The following are exceptions to the dimensional requirements of the district
regulations of this chapter:
A. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed or altered and maintained, no new use or change shall be
made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof,
and no lot shall be created or modified except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. This requirement will not infringe on the
rights of nonconforming lots, structures or uses outlined in Article XX of
this chapter.
B. The following are exceptions to the use regulations of the district
regulations of this chapter:
(1) Essential services. Essential services serving the City of Lapeer
shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other
ordinances of the municipality and shall not require zoning
approval. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and
towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the
City of Lapeer are permitted as a special land use as identified in
the district regulations of this chapter.
(2) Voting place. The provisions of this chapter shall not be so
construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as
a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public
election.
A. Height limit.
(1) The height limitations in Articles III through XII of this chapter
shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires,
flagpoles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers;
provided, however, that the Planning Commission may specify a
height limit for any such structure when such structure requires
authorization as a special land use.
§ 7-14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14.03
1:221
(2) Antennas (excluding satellite dish antennas) in residential districts
accessory to a residential use may be constructed to a height of 35
feet, provided the structure is located so that the base of the
structure is no closer to any property line than the height of the
structure. No such structure shall be placed in a front yard.
B. Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an
alley for the purpose of applying lot area and setback requirements of
this chapter, 1/2 the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be
considered as part of such lot.
C. Porches, walks and terraces.
(1) An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch, paved terrace or wood
deck may project into a required front or rear yard for the distance
not exceeding 10 feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or
permit a fixed roof.
(2) Any walk, terrace or other surface servicing a like function, and not
in excess of 12 inches above the grade upon which placed, shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, not be considered to be a structure,
and shall be permitted in any required yard.
D. Projections into yards. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves,
gutters, fire escapes, fire towers, chimneys, platforms, and balconies,
not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required
side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such
side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear
yard not more than three feet. Window wells may extend or project into
the required side yard no more than four feet. [Amended 11-19-2018]
E. Access through yards. For the purpose of this chapter, access drives
may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access
to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not
be considered as structural violations in front and side yards.
F. Lots having water frontage. Those residential lots or parcels having
water frontage and abutting a public thoroughfare shall maintain the
yard on the water side as an open, unobscured yard. Accessory
structures shall be permitted in the setback between the abutting road
right-of-way and the main building providing the front yard setback
required in this chapter is met.
G. Side yard exceptions. On legal nonconforming lots that do not meet the
minimum lot width requirements of this chapter, the side yard setback
may be reduced based on the ratio that the lot width is below that
required. Example: a lot is 80 feet wide in a district that requires 100
feet of width or 80% of the requirement. The minimum side yard
setback may be reduced to 80% of the requirement. In no case shall a
side yard be reduced to less than five feet under the terms of this
exception.
§ 7-14.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-14.04
1:222
§ 7-14.04. Accessory buildings and uses.
Accessory buildings and uses, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter,
shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of
this chapter applicable to the main building.
B. Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any minimum side yard
setback nor in any front yard, except detached buildings accessory to a
residential buildings, which may be located in the side or rear yard,
provided it shall be set back at least three feet from any side or rear lot
line. In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an
alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than one
foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be
located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. [Amended
9-26-2013]
C. A building accessory to a residential building shall not occupy more
than 25% of a required rear yard; the combined areas of accessory
buildings shall not exceed the ground floor area of the main building.
D. No detached building accessory to a residential building shall be
located closer than 10 feet to any main building.
E. No detached accessory building in R-1 through R-3, RM-1, RM-2, MHP,
OS-1 and P-1 Districts shall exceed one story or 14 feet in height.
Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal
the permitted maximum height of structures in said district.
(1) Where the accessory buildings are structurally attached or
detached to the main building, it shall be required that exterior
materials used be consistent with the principal building's material,
in R-1, R-2, R-3, RM-1, and RM-2 Districts. [Added 11-19-2018]
F. When a building accessory to a residential building is located on a
corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the
front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond
the front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot.
In no instance shall an accessory building be located nearer than 20
feet to a street right-of-way line.
§ 7-14.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14.04
1:223
G. A resident of a dwelling unit may have not more than one motorized
vehicle for sale on the site of such dwelling unit at any time, and in no
instance shall vacant residential lots or parcels be utilized for the sale
of vehicles. A resident may repair vehicles of the resident on the
property of the resident's dwelling unit; however, in no instance shall a
resident repair the vehicles of other than a resident of the dwelling unit
on said property. In no instance shall vehicles for sale be displayed or
repaired in a front yard other than on the driveway portion of such yard.
H. Freestanding solar panels shall be considered an accessory building
and shall be subject to the requirements for such, together with all
other applicable building codes and ordinances.
I. Wind generators may be permitted as an accessory use when the
following conditions are met:
(1) Wind generators may be permitted in the rear yards of residentially
zoned property, provided:
(a) The highest point of any portion of the generator shall not
exceed 35 feet above the average grade of the lot.
(b) The generator device shall be placed no closer to any side or
rear lot line than the total distance between the grade of the lot
at the base of the tower and the highest point of any portion of
the generator.
(c) The maximum diameter formed by a circle encompassing the
outermost portions of the blades or other wind-activated
surfaces shall not exceed 30% of the distance between the
§ 7-14.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-14.04
1:224
ground and the highest point of any portion of the wind
generator. The generator shall be so located that no portion
of the structure would penetrate the vertical plane of any
adjacent property line if it were to topple over in its normally
assembled configuration.
(d) The construction of the tower's blades, base structure,
accessory building and wiring shall meet all applicable local
building codes and ordinances.
(2) Wind generators may be permitted on the roofs of principal
structures of any property, provided:
(a) Height. The height of a structure-mounted wind generator
shall not exceed 15 feet as measured from the highest point of
the roof, excluding chimneys, antennas, and other similar
protuberances.
(b) Setback. The setback of the structure-mounted wind generator
shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the property line, public
right-of-way, public easement, or overhead utility lines if
mounted directly on a roof or other elevated surface of a
structure. If the structure-mounted wind generator is affixed
by any extension to the side, roof, or other elevated surface,
then the setback from the property line or public right-of-way
shall be a minimum of 15 feet. The setback shall be measured
from the furthest outward extension of all moving parts.
(c) Location. The structure-mounted wind generator shall not be
affixed to the wall on the side of a structure facing a road.
(d) Quantity. No more than three structure-mounted wind
generators shall be installed on any parcel of property.
(e) Separation. If more than one structure-mounted wind
generator is installed, a distance equal to the height of the
highest structure-mounted wind generator must be maintained
between the furthest outward extension of any moving part of
each structure-mounted wind energy system.
(3) Wind generators may be permitted in the rear yard, or nonrequired
front or side yard of a commercial or industrially zoned
property, provided:
(a) The highest point of any portion of the generator shall not
exceed 65 feet above the average grade of the lot.
(b) The generator device shall be placed no closer to any side or
rear lot line than the total distance between the grade of the lot
at the base of the tower and the highest point of any portion of
the generator.
§ 7-14.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14.04
1:225
(c) The maximum diameter formed by a circle encompassing the
outermost portions of the blades or other wind-activated
surfaces shall not exceed 30% of the distance between the
ground and the highest point of any portion of the wind
generator. The generator shall be so located that no portion of
the structure would penetrate the vertical plane of any
adjacent property line if it were to topple over in its normally
assembled configuration.
(d) The construction of the tower's blades, base structure,
accessory building and wiring shall meet all applicable local
building codes and ordinances.
J. Satellite reception antenna may be permitted as an accessory use in
any district, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Roof-mounted: residential districts.
(a) The dish portion of roof-mounted satellite reception antenna
shall not exceed a diameter of three feet.
(b) Satellite reception antenna shall be mounted directly upon the
roof of the main or accessory building and shall not be upon
appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, or poles.
(c) Satellite reception antenna shall not exceed a height of more
than three feet above the roof on which it is mounted.
(d) Satellite reception antenna shall be designed to withstand a
wind force of 85 miles per hour without the use of supporting
guy wires.
(e) Satellite reception antenna shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
(2) Roof-mounted: nonresidential districts.
(a) The dish portion of roof-mounted satellite reception antenna
shall not exceed a diameter of eight feet.
(b) Satellite reception antenna shall not exceed the maximum
height of structure requirements for the district in which it is
located.
(c) Satellite reception antenna shall be designed to withstand a
wind force of 85 miles per hour without the use of supporting
guy wires.
(d) Satellite reception antenna shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
(3) Ground-mounted: residential districts.
(a) No satellite reception antenna, including its concrete base slab
or other substructures, shall be constructed less than 10 feet
from any property line or easement.
§ 7-14.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-14.04
1:226
§ 7-14.05. Corner clearance.
(b) No satellite reception antenna shall be linked, physically or
electronically, to a receiver which is not located on the same
zoning lot as is the satellite reception antenna.
(c) A satellite reception antenna shall not exceed a height of 16
feet.
(d) Wiring between a satellite reception antenna and a receiver
shall be placed at least four inches beneath the surface of the
ground within rigid conduit.
(e) Such satellite reception antenna shall be designed to withstand
a wind force of 75 miles per hour without the use of supporting
guy wires.
(4) Ground-mounted: nonresidential districts.
(a) No satellite reception antenna, including its concrete base slab
or other substructure, shall be constructed less than five feet
from a property line or easement.
(b) No satellite reception antenna shall be linked, physically or
electronically, to a receiver which is not located on the same
zoning lot as is the satellite reception antenna.
(c) A satellite reception antenna shall not exceed a height of 16
feet.
(d) Wiring between a satellite reception antenna and a receiver
shall be placed at least four inches beneath the surface of the
ground within a rigid conduit.
(e) Such satellite reception antenna shall be designed to withstand
a wind force of 75 miles per hour without the use of supporting
guy wires.
(f) A satellite reception antenna must be bonded to a grounding
rod.
A. No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a
height of two feet from the established street grades shall be permitted
within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street rightof-
way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a
distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection.
§ 7-14.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14.05
1:227
§ 7-14.06. Frontage on public street.
No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter unless said
lot abuts a public street, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
§ 7-14.07. Private swimming pools and hot tubs.
B. No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a
height of two feet from the established street grades shall be permitted
within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street rightof-
way line with a driveway by a straight line drawn between said rightof-
way lines and the edge of the driveway at a distance along each line
of 10 feet from their point of intersection.
A. Location. Private swimming pools and hot tubs shall be permitted as an
accessory structure to the rear or side of the principal structure in
§ 7-14.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-14.07
1:228
§ 7-14.08. Required water supply and sanitary sewerage facilities.
After the effective date of this chapter, no structure for human occupancy
shall be erected, altered, or moved upon any lot or premises and used in
whole or in part for dwelling, business, industrial, or recreational purposes
unless it shall be provided with a safe potable water supply and with a
safe and effective means of collection, treatment, and disposal of human
excrement and domestic, commercial and industrial wastes. All such
installations and facilities shall conform to the minimum requirements of
the City of Lapeer.
§ 7-14.09. Open storage and outdoor display.
residential districts, provided that pools in the side yard shall be
screened with landscaping or natural vegetation such that they cannot
be seen from the road. Pools and hot tubs shall not be located in any
road or utility right-of-way or easement.
B. Setbacks. Private swimming pools shall be located no closer than 10
feet to any side or rear property line and no closer than 10 feet to any
building on the same parcel.
C. All swimming pools shall be subject to the requirements in the Michigan
Residential Code, including requirements regarding fencing.
D. Swimming pools located on lots with vacant homes shall be drained,
and proper fencing maintained.
A. Open storage of building material, contractor's equipment and supplies
and other similar material may be permitted by the Planning
Commission at site plan review provided an obscuring wall or fence
screens the material from view of the street or adjacent parcels.
B. Outdoor display of material for sale may be approved by the Planning
Department by issuance of a zoning permit as an accessory use to the
principal use, provided the following conditions apply. Any variances
from these requirements must be approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(1) Approval must be applied for annually, although such approval may
be for more than a single event per calendar year.
(2) The display of the materials is accessory to the principal use.
(3) Provisions are taken to prevent the blowing of trash or loosely
packed materials.
(4) Display areas shall consist of a permanent, durable and dustless
surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of stormwater
without a negative impact on adjacent property.
§ 7-14.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14.09
1:229
(5) Outdoor display may not occupy required parking spaces. Display
areas within parking lots shall have fencing, railing or similar
equipment to delineate the display area from the parking area.
(6) No outdoor display shall be permitted in the required front, side or
rear yard setbacks for principal buildings for the district in which
the outdoor display is located.
(7) The Planning Department may limit the height that materials may
be stacked in order to maintain clear vision and protect customers
from falling material.
(8) The Planning Department may require annual review of a site to
ensure that conditions of approval and these requirements are met.
§ 7-14.09 LAPEER CODE § 7-14.09
1:230
ARTICLE XV
General Site Development Requirements
§ 7-15.01. Building appearance.
A. Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a set of exterior
building wall material standards, the intent of which is to enhance the
visual environment of the City. Furthermore, the review of exterior
building wall design and the consistent administration of standards can
help to maintain the City's sense of place by encouraging consistent
quality and character when structures are built or redeveloped. All
development shall utilize quality architecture to ensure that a building
protects the investment of adjacent landowners, blends harmoniously
into the streetscape, and maintains a positive image for the City's
various multifamily developments, business areas and commercial
shopping districts.
B. Applicability.
(1) This section shall apply to the exterior building walls of all
construction, except one-family detached and two-family
residential structures and their associated accessory buildings.
(2) Architecture shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as a
part of site plan review under the requirements of this section.
(3) Where additions or remodeling of existing buildings is proposed,
the following standards shall apply:
(a) Where a new wall material is proposed for an existing building
wall, only that portion of the building being altered shall be
subject to the standards of this section. However, in
considering the proposed alteration, the Planning Commission
may modify the material requirements of the section so it will
be consistent with the architecture of the entire building.
(b) Where an addition is proposed to an existing building, the
Planning Commission may allow the use of existing wall
materials for the addition provided that the design of the
alteration is compatible with the existing building wall design.
C. Exterior building design.
(1) Buildings shall possess architectural variety, but enhance the
overall cohesive community character. All commercial and office
buildings should provide architectural features, details, and
ornaments such as archways, colonnades, recesses, projections,
wall insets, arcades, window display areas, peaked roof lines,
decorative cornices or towers.
§ 7-15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.01
1:231
(2) Building walls and roofs over 50 feet in length shall be broken up
with varying building lines, windows, gables, and/or architectural
accents such as pilasters, columns, dormers, and awnings.
(3) Window area shall make up at least 20% of the exterior wall area
facing the principal street(s) from which access is gained. Bars
shall not be put over windows and doors that are visible from the
street.
(4) Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential district.
The Planning Commission or Building Official can modify this
requirement upon a determination that there is no reasonable
alternative and the visual impact will be moderated through use of
building materials, architectural features and landscaping beyond
that required in § 7-15.02. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(5) Additions to existing buildings must complement the current
building design with regard to height, proportions, scale, materials,
and rhythm of openings. [Amended 6-25-2015]
D. Building materials.
(1) All building materials shall be durable and weather-resistant,
provide an attractive, quality appearance, and must be properly
maintained by the property owner or tenant at all times.
(2) The predominant building materials should be quality materials
that are characteristic of Michigan such as earth-toned brick,
decorative tilt-up panels, wood, native stone, and tinted/textured
concrete masonry units, glass products or other similar material as
determined by the Planning Commission.
(3) Other materials such as smooth-faced concrete block, undecorated
tilt-up concrete EIFS (Exterior Insulation Finishing System) panels,
or prefabricated steel panels or other similar metal siding should
only be used as accents and not dominate the building exterior of
the structure.
(4) Metal roofs may be allowed if deemed by the Planning Commission
to be compatible with the overall architectural design of the
building.
E. Building colors.
(1) Exterior colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earthtone
colors. The use of high-intensity colors such as neon, metallic,
or fluorescent for the facade or roof of the building is prohibited
except as approved by the Planning Commission for building trim.
(2) The use of trademark colors not meeting this requirement shall
require approval by the Planning Commission.
§ 7-15.01 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.01
1:232
(3) Mechanical and service features such as gutters, ductwork, service
doors, etc. that cannot be screened must be of a color that blends in
with the color of the building.
F. Roof design.
(1) Roofs shall be designed to reduce the apparent exterior mass of a
building, add visual interest, and be appropriate to the
architectural style of the building.
(2) Variations in architectural style are highly encouraged. Visible roof
lines and roofs that project over the exterior wall of a building
enough to cast a shadow on the ground are highly encouraged, with
a minimum overhang of 12 inches.
(3) Architectural methods shall be used to conceal flat rooftops and
mechanical equipment.
(4) Overhanging eaves, peaked roofs, and multiple roof elements are
highly encouraged.
G. Customer entrances. Clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances
shall be included in the design. Features such as canopies, porticos,
arcades, arches, wing walls or integral planters shall be used to identify
such entrances.
H. Community amenities. Community amenities such as patio/seating
areas, water features, artwork or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian
plazas with park benches, or other features located adjacent to the
primary entrance to the building(s) are highly encouraged and may be
calculated as part of the landscaping requirement.
I. Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with Article XVII, Signs. All sign
bases shall be constructed of materials compatible with the
architecture of the building(s) located on the premises.
J. Natural features. Buildings shall be sited to protect existing natural
areas such as steep natural grades, trees, significant groupings of
healthy vegetation (shrubs and trees), and rock outcroppings. To the
extent practical, these areas shall be incorporated into the overall site
plan.
K. Building location and orientation. New buildings shall have at least one
principal building entrance visible from the front lot line.
L. Administrative waiver. The Planning Department may waive the
requirements of this section, provided they find the use demonstrates
compliance with the following criteria:
(1) The improvement covered by the waiver still meets the spirit and
intent of this section.
§ 7-15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.01
1:233
§ 7-15.02. Landscaping.
(2) The waiver is the minimum necessary to ensure equitable
treatment to the applicant.
(3) The waiver will not have a significant negative impact on the
surrounding property.
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of this section is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards for the design,
installation and maintenance of landscaping as buffer zones
between zoning districts, along roadways, between adjacent
buildings and in parking lots.
(2) The standards of this section are intended to guide and encourage
the protection and enhancement of the environment through
requirements for site design and the use of landscape materials.
Applicants are encouraged to provide landscaping in addition to
the minimum requirements of this chapter to further improve the
ecological, infrastructural and programmatic functions,
appearances and values of their property.
B. Applicability.
(1) The requirements set forth in this article shall apply to all uses for
which site plan review is required under Article XVIII of this
chapter. No site plan or land use shall be approved unless said site
plan provides landscaping consistent with the provisions of this
article.
(2) The Planning Commission may also determine that dimensional
conditions unique to the parcel would prevent development of
required buffer zones, off-street parking area, landscaping or green
belts. If such a determination is made, the Planning Commission
may grant an exception from the landscaping provisions of this
article. In the case of an administrative site plan review, the
Planning Department may grant an exception based on the same
site conditions. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(3) The following landscape information shall be submitted as part of a
site plan review. The landscape plan shall include, but not be
limited to the following items:
(a) Minimum scale of one inch to 20 feet.
(b) Proposed plant location, spacing, size, species (common and
botanical name) and necessary descriptions for use within
required landscape areas.
(c) Existing and proposed contours on-site and 100 feet beyond
the site at intervals not to exceed two feet.
§ 7-15.01 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.02
1:234
(d) Straight cross section, including slope, height and width of
berms and type of ground cover, or height and type of
construction of wall or fence, including footings.
(e) Significant construction details to resolve specific site
conditions, such as tree wells to preserve existing trees or
culverts to maintain existing natural drainage patterns.
(f) Planting and staking details in either text or drawing form to
ensure proper installation and establishment of proposed
materials.
(g) Identification of existing trees proposed to be saved, including
individual tree caliper size and species. Clearly reference on
the plan the total number of trees proposed to be preserved,
category of preserved tree caliper size and number of trees
requested for credit consideration.
(h) Identification of tree protection method for trees proposed to
be preserved.
(i) Identification of existing trees over two-and-one-half-inch
caliper proposed to be removed.
(j) Identification of grass and other ground cover and method of
planting.
(k) Clearly reference on the plan the total number of proposed
parking spaces and number of parking lot trees required to be
placed within the interior of the parking area.
(l) Site plan review for preexisting sites shall clearly identify the
proposed building and/or parking expansion and label the net
percent site increase and calculated landscape requirement.
[Amended 6-25-2015]
(m) Any of the informational requirements above may be waived by
the Planning Commission or Planning Department by general
rule or on an individual basis if they determine that the
information is not necessary to verify compliance with this
chapter. [Amended 6-25-2015]
C. Replacement of removed trees. A tree survey shall be submitted with
any site plan for new development, and for additions to or expansion of
existing development. The survey shall identify the location, species
and size of existing trees on the proposed site. Existing trees that are
greater than eight caliper inches that are planned to be removed shall
be replaced on the site in accordance with the following standards:
[Amended 6-25-2015]
(1) Removed trees between eight and 18 caliper inches shall be
replaced at a rate of 50% of the total diameter breast height (dbh).
§ 7-15.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.02
1:235
(2) Removed trees greater than 18 caliper inches shall be replaced at a
rate of 75% of the total dbh.
(3) Removed trees greater than 30 caliper inches shall be replaced at a
rate of 100% of the total dbh.
(4) Trees that are dead or diseased, with no visible growth, as
determined by the City Arborist, are exempt from replacement
requirements.
(5) A summary table of existing trees shall be provided, indicating
those trees that will be removed.
D. Incentives to preserve existing trees. The standards listed below are
intended to encourage the preservation of quality and mature trees
within a development area by providing credits toward required
landscape components. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(1) Trees intended to be preserved shall be indicated on the site plan.
(2) To obtain credit, the preserved trees shall be arranged to meet the
intent of this section, be of high quality, as confirmed by the City,
and at least two-and-one-half-inch caliper in size for deciduous
trees, six feet in height for evergreen trees.
(3) Each deciduous tree preserved that is between 2.5 inch to 7.9 inch
caliper in size and evergreen tree that is between six feet to 19 feet
shall be calculated as one required tree, two credits for deciduous
trees with a caliper of eight inches or greater and evergreen trees
greater than 19 feet.
(4) The landscape plan shall include a matrix that lists required trees
and credits for preserved trees.
(5) During construction, tree protection fencing shall be placed 10 feet
beyond the dripline of the tree. Unless space does not allow, in
which case they shall at a minimum be placed at the dripline. The
ground area within the fence line shall be maintained with
vegetative landscape material or pervious surface cover. The
Planning Commission may allow pedestrian pathways, driveways or
parking within the dripline upon determination that the setback
from the trunk of the tree is suitable to reasonably ensure
protection of the tree and the public. Storage of soils or other
materials within the dripline is prohibited.
(6) If trees are lost within three years after completion of the
construction, the property owner shall replace with new trees
equal to the number of tree credits granted.
(7) Tree credits may account for up to 50% of the required trees and be
applied anywhere on the site.
§ 7-15.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.02
1:236
E. Greenbelts. A greenbelt shall be planted or preserved along public
rights-of-way. The greenbelt is intended to provide a transition between
the roadway and an existing or proposed land use. Greenbelts shall be
provided in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The green belt plantings shall be planted within the required
setback. Such plantings may be placed anywhere within the front
yard if there is no front yard parking. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(2) Greenbelts shall include only living materials and planting beds,
except for approved sidewalks, bike paths, signs, driveways, and
essential services.
(3) Where sidewalks are located within the greenbelt, plant material
shall be provided on each side of the pathway, whenever possible,
to provide visual and physical separation between the vehicular
and pedestrian circulation. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(4) The greenbelt shall contain a minimum of one canopy tree and six
upright shrubs per 30 linear feet, or fraction thereof, of street
frontage including any openings for driveways, pathways or
easements. Evergreen trees may be substituted for up to 50% of
the required canopy trees when appropriate in consideration of the
land use and existing character of adjacent uses. A hedgerow with
upright shrubs planted 2 1/2 feet on center along the entire road
frontage not to exceed three feet in height may also be utilized
provided the clear vision requirements of § 7-14.05 are met.
[Amended 6-25-2015]
§ 7-15.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.02
1:237
(5) Ornamental trees may be used to diversify greenbelt planting
requirements, provided two ornamental trees shall be provided for
each one required canopy tree.
(6) Greenbelt plantings shall be arranged to simulate a natural setting
such as massing or staggered rows, except where the Planning
Commission finds a more formal arrangement would be consistent
with the established character of the area.
(7) Greenbelts shall be designed to ensure adequate sight visibility for
motorists, adequate clearance for pedestrians and vehicles
including compliance with the clear vision requirements of
§ 7-14.05, clearance from overhead utility lines, adequate
separation from underground utilities and accessibility to fire
hydrants. Where such conditions prohibit full compliance, the
location of the required materials may be adjusted so as long as the
design intent is met. [Amended 6-25-2015]
F. Buffer zones. Buffer zones shall be required where a proposed use
shares a common lot line with an adjacent use in accordance with Table
7.15.1. The buffering requirement is based on the intensity of the
proposed use and its potential impact on the adjacent use.
Table 7.15.1: Required Buffer Zones
Proposed Use
Adjacent to
Single-Family
District or
Use
Adjacent to
Multiple-
Family District
or Use
Adjacent to
Manufactured
Home Park
District or Use
Adjacent to
Business
District or
Use
Adjacent to
Industrial
District or Use
Single-family
residential
None B B B A
Multiple-family
residential
B None B B A
Manufactured
home park
B B None B A
Business B B B C1 B2
Industrial A A A B2 C
Institutional B2 B2 B2 C C
§ 7-15.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.02
1:238
Buffer Zone
Type
Minimum Width4
(feet) Wall/ Berm3 Minimum Plant Materials
A 50 6-foot wall or
4-foot berm
1 canopy tree, 2 evergreen trees and 4
shrubs per 20 linear feet along the lot line,
rounded upward
B 20 6-foot wall or
4-foot berm
1 canopy tree, 1 evergreen tree and 4 shrubs
per 30 linear feet along the lot line, rounded
upward
C 10 None 1 canopy or evergreen tree or 4 shrubs per
20 linear feet along the lot line, rounded
upward
NOTES:
1 Buffer zone landscaping shall not be required between business uses where shared access,
shared parking or service drive connections are provided or where there is a zero-lot-line
setback between uses.
2 Buffer zone "A" shall be required where the use has outdoor storage or truck loading area
adjacent to a dissimilar use.
3 Walls shall be constructed in accordance with § 7-15.03, Fences and walls, and berms in
accordance with § 7-15.02J, Berms.
4 Minimum width is required for either wall or berm. In the case of wall, the minimum width will
be maintained clear of structures and planted in grass or similar material.
G. Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Landscaping shall be dispersed evenly throughout the parking lot
in order to break up large expanses of pavement and assist with
vehicular and pedestrian flow.
(2) At least one canopy tree shall be provided per eight parking spaces.
(3) All of the required parking lots trees shall be placed within the
parking lot envelope as described by the area including the parking
lot surface and extending outward 10 feet from the edge of the
parking lot.
(4) A minimum of 1/3 of the trees shall be placed within parking islands
located inside the perimeter of the parking lot.
(5) Parking lot islands shall be curbed and be at least 100 square feet
in area. Islands within parking lots having less than 100 spaces
may be a minimum of 10 feet in width, parking areas with more
than 100 spaces shall have islands at least 20 feet in width. The
depth of the island shall be two feet shorter than an adjacent
parking space.
§ 7-15.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.02
1:239
(6) Only trees, shrubs, grass or other living ground cover shall be used
within parking lot islands.
(7) Where parking lots are located within the required front yard, a
berm, hedge row, three-foot-high brick wall, or a three-foot-high
wrought iron fence with a continuous evergreen hedge row shall be
provided between the parking spaces and the street. The hedge
row shall be planted with evergreen or deciduous shrubs, 2 1/2 feet
on center. The landscape greenbelt required by § 7-15.02E,
Greenbelts, above shall also be provided, except the hedge row
plantings may be credited towards the shrub plantings of
§ 7-15.02E(4).
(8) Where a parking lot or loading area for a nonresidential use abuts a
residential district or use a minimum six-foot-high wall shall be
provided between the parking lot and residential lot. Walls shall be
constructed of brick or other masonry material compatible with the
front facade of the principal building. A privacy fence may be
approved where it is more compatible with adjacent residential
uses. [Amended 6-25-2015]
H. Foundation plantings. A portion of the on-site landscaping shall abut
the walls of the main building so that the vegetation combined with the
architectural features significantly reduce the visual impact of the
building mass as viewed from the street. [Amended 6-25-2015]
I. Detention/retention pond landscaping. Ponds shall be located outside
required setbacks and designed to provide a natural appearance.
Detention and retention ponds shall be provided in accordance with the
following standards: [Amended 6-25-2015]
(1) Side slopes shall be such that the perimeter of the pond shall not
need to be fenced.
(2) One canopy or evergreen tree and 10 shrubs are required per 50
linear feet of pond perimeter, as measured along the top of the
bank elevation. The required landscaping shall be planted in a
random pattern, not limited to the top of the pond bank.
(3) Where a natural landscape is found not to be particularly desirable,
the Planning Commission may require some type of decorative
fencing.
(4) An aerator shall be provided in any pond where there will be
standing water.
J. Berms. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(1) Where required, berms shall have a slope no greater than 1:3, i.e.,
one foot of vertical rise for each three feet of horizontal distance on
the exterior side facing the street or adjacent land use with at least
§ 7-15.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.02
1:240
a two foot flat area on top (measured from the ground adjacent to
the berm).
(2) The berm area shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground
cover to ensure that it withstands wind and weather and retains its
height and shape.
K. Plant material spacing and size. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(1) Plant material shall not be located within four feet of the property
line.
(2) Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings
shall be staggered in rows.
(3) Creativity in landscape design is encouraged. Accordingly, required
trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, at random,
or in groupings, depending on the designer's desired visual and
functional effect and, equally important, the desire of the City to
coordinate landscaping on adjoining properties.
(4) Minimum plant sizes and spacing at time of installation shall be in
accordance with Table 7.15.2.
Table 7.15.2: Minimum Plant Size and Spacing
Type of Plant
Material
Minimum Plant
Sizes
Spacing
Requirements
Large deciduous
trees
2-inch caliper 30 feet on-center
Small deciduous/
ornamental trees
1 1/2-inch caliper
6-foot height (clump
form)
15 feet on-center
Evergreen trees 7-foot height 20 feet on-center
informally
12 feet on-center in
rows
Narrow
evergreen trees
5-foot height 10 feet on-center
informally
5 feet on-center in
rows
Large shrubs 30-inch height 6 feet on-center
informally
4 feet on-center in
rows
§ 7-15.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.02
1:241
Table 7.15.2: Minimum Plant Size and Spacing
Type of Plant
Material
Minimum Plant
Sizes
Spacing
Requirements
Small shrubs 30-inch spread
2 1/2-foot height
4 feet on-center
L. Plant material species. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(1) The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 33% of any
one plant species. A mixture of plant materials (evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubs) is suggested in all landscape plans as a
protective measure against disease and insect infestation.
(2) The use of trees native to the area, and mixture of trees from the
same species association, is encouraged.
(3) All plants shall conform to the current issue of the American
Standard for Nursery Stock published by the American Association
of Nurserymen and shall have passed inspections required under
state regulations.
(4) All areas not occupied by building, pavement or storage shall be
landscaped with living plant material. Stone or wood chips may be
permitted when the maintenance of the living material would be
impractical or undesirable due to size, configuration or character of
the area or if part of drainage erosion control.
(5) Plant materials recommended as part of landscape plans are
included in Table 7.15.3.
Table 7.15.3: Recommended Plant Materials
Trees
Evergreen trees Fir; spruce; pine; hemlock; Douglas fir
Narrow evergreen trees Red cedar; arborvitae; juniper
Large deciduous trees Oak; hard maple; beech; linden; ginkgo
(male only); honeylocust (seedless and
thornless varieties); birch
Small deciduous/
ornamental trees
Flowering dogwood; hawthorn; redbud;
magnolia; hornbeam; Russian Olive;
flowering crabapple (disease-resistant
varieties)
Large Shrubs
§ 7-15.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.02
1:242
Table 7.15.3: Recommended Plant Materials
Deciduous Honeysuckle; lilac; border privet;
sumac; buckthorn; Pyracantha;
flowering quince; barberry; forsythia;
cotoneaster (Peking, spreading);
Sargent crabapple; dogwood (red osier,
grey)
Evergreen Irish yew; Hicks yew; Mugo pine; Pfitzer
juniper; Savin juniper
Small Shrubs
Deciduous Compact burning bush; regal privet;
fragrant sumac; Japanese quince;
cotoneaster (cranberry, rockspray);
potentilla
Evergreen Spreading yews (dense, Brown's, Ward,
etc.); Low-spreading junipers (Andora,
Hughes, Tamarack, etc.); dwarf Mugo
pine; big leaf wintercreeper
(6) Plant materials that are not permitted, as they split easily; their
wood is brittle and breaks easily; their roots clog drains and
sewers; and they are unusually susceptible to disease or insect
pests, are included in Table 7.15.4.
Table 7.15.4: Prohibited Plant Materials
Trees Not Permitted
Ash Mulberry
Box elder Poplar
Catalpa Soft maple (red and silver)
Elms (except disease-resistant
American Liberty elm)
Tree of heaven
Honey or black locust
Horse chestnut (nut-bearing)
Willow
M. Installation and maintenance provisions. All landscaping shall be
maintained in a healthy, neat and orderly state free from refuse and
debris. [Amended 6-25-2015]
(1) In-ground automatic irrigation shall be provided for all landscaped
areas.
(2) All trees required on the site plan must be maintained and shall not
be removed unless approved as a site plan amendment or a tree
removal permit is obtained from the City Arborist. Any dead or
diseased plants shall be removed and replaced.
§ 7-15.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.02
1:243
§ 7-15.03. Fences and walls.
(3) Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not
obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns on
site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for safety of ingress
or egress.
(4) All plantings shall be planted to completion within three months,
and no later than November 30, from the date of issuance of a
certificate of occupancy if said certificate is issued during the April
1 through September 30 period; if the certificate is issued during
the October 1 through March 31 period, the planting shall be
completed no later than the ensuing May 31.
(5) Plantings shall not be located within rights-of-way or utility line
easements.
N. Compliance for existing sites. In any case where the building and/or
parking area is being increased by at least 25% over the originally
approved site plan or is being changed to a more intense use, the site
shall be brought into full compliance with the landscape standards
herein. In instances where the increase in building and/or parking area
is less than 25% over the original site plan, the extent of new
landscaping shall be equal to 4% of compliance for every 1% of increase
in building or parking footprint. For example, a building or parking area
increase of 10% requires 40% compliance with the landscape
standards. [Amended 6-25-2015]
A. Required fences and walls. The following standards apply to any fences
or walls required under this chapter or as a condition of zoning
approval.
(1) For those use districts and uses listed below, there shall be
provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a
residential district an obscuring wall as required in Table 7.15.5,
except otherwise required in § 7-15.03A(6) or B(6) below, and
further subject to corner clearance requirements in § 7-14.05.
[Amended 5-17-2012]
Table 7.15.5: Wall Requirements
Use Requirements
P-1 Vehicular Parking District
Off-street parking area (other
than P-1 Districts, unless a
greater wall is required by
Table 7.15.01)
4-foot 6-inch high wall
OS-1, B-1, CBD and B-2
Districts
See Table 7.15.1 requirements
§ 7-15.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.03
1:244
Table 7.15.5: Wall Requirements
Use Requirements
I-1 and I-2 Districts: open
storage areas, loading or
unloading areas, service areas
6-foot to 8-foot high wall or
fence (Height shall provide the
most complete obscuring
possible.)
Auto wash, drive-in restaurants
Hospital: ambulance and
delivery areas
Utility buildings, stations and/or
substations
6-foot 0-inch high wall
(2) Chain-link or other wire fence utilizing metal, plastic or wood slats
shall not be considered an obscuring wall for the purpose of this
chapter. The City may in its review of site plans for specific uses,
allow or require the provision of a greenbelt planting consisting of
trees and shrubs to serve as an obscuring wall, where such
obscuring walls are required under this chapter, and where
conditions are such that a more effective and harmonious
development with abutting or neighboring land uses would result.
Review and approval shall be required by the City of types of plant
materials and their location in such greenbelt.
(3) Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where
underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this
chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in
abutting Residential Districts. Upon review of the site plan, the
Planning Commission may approve an alternate location for the
wall or may waive the wall requirement if in specific cases it would
not serve the purposes of screening the parking area effectively.
Required walls may, upon approval of the Board of Appeals, be
located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a
nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually
agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the
required wall on a given block will be a major consideration of the
Zoning Board of Appeals in reviewing such request.
(4) Walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular
traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter and except such openings as may be approved by the
Planning Commission during site plan review.
(5) Walls shall be constructed of materials approved by the Building
Official to be durable, weather-resistant, rustproof and shall be
maintained by the property owner or tenant at all times equal in
condition to the completed structure at the time of initial
installation. Wood or wood products, when utilized, shall be treated
§ 7-15.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.03
1:245
and/or painted and shall be so maintained at all times. The finished
side of the wall shall face the exterior of the property.
(6) Walls may be constructed with openings which do not in any square
section (height and width) exceed 20% of the surface. Where walls
are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the
obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum
height requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission during site
plan review.
B. Non-required fences. The installation, erection and/or maintenance of a
fence is hereby prohibited except in strict compliance with the
requirements herein. If the work authorized under a zoning compliance
permit for fencing has not been completed within six months of the date
of issuance, said permit shall become null and void.
(1) A permit shall be required prior to the construction of any fence
over three feet in height or over 16 feet in total length.
(2) Location.
(a) Non-required fences may be located along the property line.
(b) In the case of adjoining properties, only one fence between the
two properties may be erected.
(c) The City shall not be responsible for the determination of the
location of any fence to be erected on a lot line.
(3) Height and design.
(a) Fences on all lots of record in all zoning districts which enclose
property and/or are within a required side or rear yard shall
not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of
the principal structure or the required minimum front yard,
whichever is greater; and shall comply with the following
height limitations, measured from the surface of the ground:
[Amended 5-17-2012]
[1] In Residential and Office Districts, not to exceed six feet in
height.
[2] In Commercial and Industrial Districts, not to exceed eight
feet in height.
[3] Fences which enclose public or institutional parks,
playgrounds, or public landscaped areas, situated within
an area developed with recorded lots, shall not exceed
eight feet in height, measured from the surface of the
ground, and shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater
than 25% of their total area.
§ 7-15.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.03
1:246
(b) Ornamental fences not exceeding 3 1/2 feet in height are
permitted within front yards. Ornamental fences are to be
constructed of approved materials as specified in Subsection
B(4) below, of a design as to be non-sight-obscuring and of a
fence type listed below:
[1] Post and rail.
[2] Split rail.
[3] Picket.
[4] Wrought iron.
[5] Other types of ornamental fences must be approved by the
Planning Commission or Planning Department prior to
placement in a front yard area.
(c) If a fence is constructed of pickets, such pickets must be made
of not less than one-inch-by-three-inch materials and shall have
an angle at the top of not less than 90°.
(d) Fences shall match the design of those previously installed on
an abutting parcel(s); however, the Planning Commission or
Planning Department may waive this requirement upon a
finding that it would detract from or be inconsistent with, the
style or materials of the single-family dwelling unit contained
on the same zoning lot.
(4) Materials and construction.
(a) Fences, including fence posts, shall be constructed with cedar,
redwood, pressure treated material, wrought iron or vinyl.
Chain link is permitted in rear and interior side yards only.
Upon Planning Commission or Planning Department approval,
brick or stone may be used as an accent material, comprising
not more than 25% of the surface area of the fence.
(b) Dimensional lumber used in fence construction shall have a
minimum thickness of 3/4 inch, and fence posts shall be 3 1/2
inch by 3 1/2 inch or larger.
(c) Fences shall not contain barbed or razor wire, electric current
or charge of electricity.
(d) All fences shall be constructed in such a manner that all
structural members, including braces, posts, poles and other
projections shall be on the interior side of the fence.
§ 7-15.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.03
1:247
(5) Maintenance.
(a) All fences shall be maintained in a good condition, in an
upright position and shall not constitute an unreasonable
hazard. Any fence which is not maintained in accordance with
this chapter shall be removed or replaced (any required fence
shall be replaced).
(b) The City shall not be responsible for the enforcement of any
agreements relative to the mutual or separate payments of the
cost of construction, maintenance or repair of fences.
(6) Exceptions.
§ 7-15.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.03
1:248
§ 7-15.04. Sidewalks and paths.
Sidewalks and pathways shall be installed by the developer within the
dedicated street right-of-way, private road access easements or special
easement where grades or other factors prevent placement within the rightof-
way or access easement.
(a) Fences which serve as architectural or decorative landscaping
and are not used to enclose property and/or are not placed on
common lot lines, may be erected within the provisions of the
minimum yard requirements in each district.
(b) Recorded lots having a lot area in excess of two acres and a
frontage of at least 200 feet, and acreage or parcels not
included within the boundaries of a recorded plat, in all
residential districts, are excluded from these regulations.
A. Sidewalks. Any development shall provide sidewalks meeting the
following requirements:
(1) Where required. Sidewalks shall be required by the Planning
Commission on one or both sides of the street or road in
consideration of factors such as the density of development, age
characteristics of the expected residents, expected traffic volumes
along the street, proximity to other sidewalk systems and proximity
to schools, parks and public institutions. Sidewalks shall also be
required to be constructed where shown on the City's Non-
Motorized Transportation Plan.
(2) Sidewalk width. All sidewalks shall be a minimum five-foot-wide
concrete and constructed in accordance with City Construction
Specifications, and specifications of the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). Sidewalks
abutting parking areas shall be a minimum of seven feet to
accommodate vehicle overhang.
B. Pathways. Any development shall provide pathways meeting the
following requirements:
(1) Where required. Pathways shall be required to be constructed
where shown on the City's Non-Motorized Transportation Master
Plan, and where a connection to the City's Non-Motorized
Transportation system is identified during the site plan review
process.
(2) Pathway width. Pathways shall be at least ten-foot-wide asphalt and
constructed in accordance with City Construction Specifications,
and the specifications of the AASHTO.
C. Boardwalks. The Planning Commission may permit wooden boardwalks
in open space areas or areas with sensitive environmental features
instead of paved sidewalks or pathways. The boardwalk shall meet the
§ 7-15.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.04
1:249
§ 7-15.05. Lighting standards.
minimum width requirements as stated in the above sections or greater
if required by AASHTO, MDOT, or other applicable agency.
D. Other requirements.
(1) Crosswalks. Crosswalk pavement markings and signs may be
required.
(2) Barrier-free. All nonmotorized accommodations shall comply with
Michigan Barrier-Free requirements.
(3) Additional requirements as outlined in the City of Lapeer
Construction Specifications may apply.
A. Intent. The purpose of the following standards is to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public by recognizing that buildings and sites
need to be illuminated for safety, security and visibility for pedestrians
and motorists. To do so, the standards provide for various forms of
lighting that will: minimize light pollution; maintain safe nighttime
driver performance on public roadways; preserve the restful quality of
nighttime by eliminating intrusive artificial light and lighting that
unnecessarily contributes to "sky glow"; reduce light pollution and light
trespass from light sources onto adjacent properties; conserve
electrical energy; and curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual
environment.
B. Applicability. The standards shall apply to any light source that is visible
from any property line, or beyond, for the site from which the light is
emanating. The Building Official may review any building or site to
determine compliance with the requirements under this section.
Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical
permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a special land use approval,
subdivision approval or site plan approval from the City, the applicant
shall submit sufficient information to enable the Planning Department
and/or Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
lighting will comply with the standards.
C. Submittal requirements. The following information must be included
for all site plan submissions. Where site plan approval is not required,
some or all of the items may be required by the Planning Department
prior to lighting installation:
(1) Location of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light
fixtures on the site plan and building elevations.
(2) Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the
overall light intensity throughout the site (in footcandles).
§ 7-15.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.05
1:250
(3) Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed
including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of
shielding.
(4) Use of the fixture proposed.
(5) Any other information deemed necessary by the Building Official/
Planning Department to determine compliance with provisions of
this section.
D. Lighting standards. Unless granted a variance under the provisions of
§ 7-23.04, all lighting must comply with the following standards:
(1) Freestanding pole lighting.
(a) All parking lots shall be illuminated. Fixtures shall be highpressure
sodium lamps or metal halide. Photocells or other
approved equipment are required on all fixtures. No wiring
shall be exposed. Wiring shall be UL listed for wet locations.
(b) Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward
to prevent off-site glare. Fixed (not adjustable), downward
directed, metal halide shoebox fixtures shall be used in an
effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the
City and prevent "sky glow."
(c) Lighting intensities shall average one footcandle measured at
the surface of the parking area. Service drives shall have a
lower intensity averaging 0.5 footcandle measured at the
ground surface. At any property line abutting a residential use,
the maximum intensity shall be 0.1 footcandle.
(d) The Planning Commission may approve decorative light
fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be
proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed
fixtures are necessary to preserve the intended character of
the site.
(e) The maximum height of parking lot light fixtures shall be 20
feet, except that the Planning Commission may permit a
maximum height of 30 feet within commercial, industrial, and
office zoning districts and for institutional uses in residential
districts when the poles are no closer than 150 feet to a
residential district or use.
(f) Parking lot poles shall be located in parking lot islands or in the
periphery parking lot area. Light poles shall be prohibited in
parking spaces.
(2) Building-mounted lighting.
§ 7-15.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.05
1:251
(a) Commercial and industrial buildings are required to have
adequate lighting at sides of the building with entries and
exits.
(b) Building-mounted lighting shall be fully shielded and directed
downward to prevent off-site glare. Fixed (not adjustable),
downward-directed, metal halide fixtures shall be used in an
effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the
City and prevent "sky glow."
(c) The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed 10
footcandles within any site or one footcandle at any property
line, except where it abuts a service drive or other public rightof-
way. Footcandles abutting a residential district or use can be
a maximum of 0.5 footcandle at the property line.
(d) The Planning Commission may approve decorative light
fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be
proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed
fixtures will improve the appearance of the site.
(e) Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is
prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings, such as
along roof eaves and around windows, etc. The Planning
Commission may approve internally illuminated architectural
bands when it can be shown that the treatment will enhance
the appearance of the building or is necessary for security
purposes.
(3) Window lighting.
(a) Any light fixtures visible through a window must be shielded to
prevent glare at the property line.
(b) Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting (visible
from the property line) is prohibited unless it is part of a sign
that meets the requirements of Article XVII, Signs.
(4) Residential streetlighting.
(a) In residential developments, substantial completion of
streetlighting shall be constructed once 50% of build-out has
occurred.
(b) The developer may be required to furnish a surety in an
acceptable form (cash, bond, etc.) in an amount determined by
the City to ensure completion of streetlight installation.
(5) Other lighting.
(a) The internal illumination of building-mounted canopies is
prohibited.
§ 7-15.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.05
1:252
§ 7-15.06. Waste receptacles.
(b) Indirect illumination of signs, canopies and buildings is
permitted provided a maximum 125 watt bulb is utilized and
there is no glare.
(c) Ground lighting (uplighting) used for the purpose of
illuminating signs, landscaping and architectural details shall
be shielded away from public view, directed solely at the object
to be lit, and screened with landscaping as necessary.
(d) The use of a laser light source, search lights or any similar
high-intensity light for outdoor advertisement or
entertainment is prohibited.
(e) Lighting shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type.
(f) Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is
permitted as part of a sign meeting the requirements of Article
XVII, Signs, of this chapter.
E. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the lighting requirements
of this section, except that the Planning Department may take steps to
eliminate the impact of the exempted items when deemed necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public:
(1) Sports field lighting, in use no later than 10:00 p.m., provided they
are located at least 1000 feet away from any existing residential
zone or use. Other sports field lighting may be approved by the
Planning Commission after a determination that compliance with
the standards in this article have been met to the greatest extent
possible, and that all efforts possible were made to minimize any
negative impacts to surrounding uses.
(2) Swimming pools.
(3) Holiday decorations.
(4) Window displays without glare.
(5) Shielded pedestrian walkway lighting.
(6) Residential lighting with no off-site glare.
(7) Streetlights.
F. Lamp or fixture substitution. Should any light fixture regulated under
this section, or the type of light source therein, be changed after the
permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the
Planning Department for approval, together with adequate information
to assure compliance with this chapter, which must be received prior to
substitution.
§ 7-15.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.06
1:253
§ 7-15.07. Mechanical equipment.
A. Waste receptacles, including dumpsters and compactors, shall be
required in all multiple-family and nonresidential developments unless
indoor facilities are provided as determined by the Planning
Commission. These requirements do not apply to single-family
residences.
B. All waste receptacles must be located within an enclosure meeting the
following standards:
(1) Waste receptacles shall have an enclosing lid or cover and be
enclosed on three sides with a gate on the fourth side. The
enclosure shall be constructed of brick or decorative masonry block
material consistent with the principal building with a maximum
height of six feet or at least one foot higher than the waste
receptacle and spaced at least three feet from the waste
receptacle. Suggested timber materials for the gate include Cedar,
No. 2 Cedar rough sawn seasoned, Redwood, No. 2 Common Finish
(S4S), Douglas Fir-larch or Southern Pine. Chain-link fencing with
vinyl or wood strips is not acceptable screening material.
(2) Waste receptacle enclosures shall be located in the rear yard or
non-required side yard, at least 10 feet from any nonresidential
property line, combustible walls, or combustible roof eaves and in
no case be less than 20 feet from any residential district.
(3) Waste receptacle enclosures shall be easily accessed by refuse
vehicles without potential to damage automobiles parked in
designated parking spaces.
(4) The waste receptacle enclosure base shall be at least nine feet by
six feet, constructed of six inches of reinforced concrete pavement.
The base shall extend six feet beyond the waste receptacle pad or
gate to support the front axle of a refuse vehicle.
(5) No refuse or trash shall be permitted to be stored higher than the
waste receptacle enclosure.
A. Mechanical equipment and utilities, including but not limited to
blowers, ventilating fans, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning units
(HVAC), water and gas meters, elevator housing, and tanks shall meet
the following standards:
(1) Such equipment and utilities shall not be located in any front yard
and shall be placed not closer than three feet to any lot line in the
CBD Central Business District, and not closer than 12 feet to any
lot line in all other districts.
(2) All such equipment shall be screened by a solid wall, fence,
landscaping and/or architectural feature that is compatible in
appearance with the principal building.
§ 7-15.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-15.07
1:254
B. Roof-mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of 10 feet above the
surrounding roof surface, and shall occupy no more than 15% of the
total roof area.
C. All roof-mounted mechanical units must be screened so they are not
visible from ground level; even if not specifically addressed as part of
site plan review.
§ 7-15.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15.07
1:255

ARTICLE XVI
Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation Requirements
§ 7-16.01. General requirements.
There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement
of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with
adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in
conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed:
A. Location of spaces on a lot. Off-street parking spaces may be located
within a rear yard or within a side yard which is in excess of the
minimum side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a front yard or within a
minimum side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. Off-site spaces. Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be
either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to
serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest
point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots
or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant.
C. Single- and two-family dwellings parking components. Required
residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip,
parking bay, driveway, garage or combination thereof, including spaces
in a stacking configuration, and shall be located on the premises they
are intended to serve. Lawn and yard areas, other than designated
parking areas, shall not be utilized for off-street parking.
D. Parking for other uses. Required off-street parking for all other uses
shall consist of an unencumbered parking stall or strip, parking bay,
vehicle maneuvering space or driveway, garage or combinations
thereof. All residential parking shall be located on the premises it is
intended to serve. Parking garages or structures, when accessory to a
principal use, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
E. Replacement of required parking spaces. Minimum required off-street
parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless and until
equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere.
F. Reduction of existing parking. Off-street parking existing at the
effective date of this chapter, in connection with the operation of an
existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than
hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use.
G. Collective parking. The required off-street parking spaces for two or
more buildings or uses may be provided collectively by a group of offstreet
parking spaces, subject to the following:
§ 7-16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.01
1:257
(1) The total number of spaces provided collectively shall not be less
than the sum of spaces required for each separate use. However,
the Planning Commission may reduce the total number of spaces if
they determine that the operating hours of the buildings or uses do
not overlap.
(2) The collective off-street parking shall not be located farther than
500 feet from the building or use being served measured from the
nearest point of the building or use entrance to the nearest point of
the off-street parking lot.
H. The sale or storage of merchandise, motor vehicles or trailers, trucks,
construction trailers or the repair of vehicles is prohibited on off-street
parking lots.
I. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for offstreet
parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which is similar in
type.
J. When units or measurements determining the number of required
parking spaces result in the requirement for a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including 1/2 shall be disregarded and fractions over
1/2 shall require one parking space.
K. Wherever the City shall establish off-street parking facilities by means
of a special assessment district, or by any other means, the City may
determine, upon completion and acceptance of such off-street parking
facilities by the City, all existing buildings and uses and all buildings
erected or uses established thereafter within the special assessment
district, or districts, shall be exempt from the requirements of this
section for privately supplied off-street parking facilities.
L. Recreational vehicle parking and storage.
(1) Standards in residential districts.
(a) Except as otherwise permitted in this section, recreational
vehicles and equipment greater than 104 inches in width or 37
feet in length shall not be parked or stored on any lot or parcel
or on the road in any residential district.
(b) Recreational vehicles and equipment 104 inches in width or 37
feet in length or less shall be parked and stored in the side or
rear yards.
(c) For the purposes of loading and unloading, recreational
vehicles, and equipment may be parked anywhere in a
driveway or parking area on a residential premises for a period
not to exceed two days.
(d) Such equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential
lot, or in any location not approved for such use.
§ 7-16.01 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.01
1:258
§ 7-16.02. Number of spaces required.
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be
determined in accordance with the following schedule. The requirements of
this section shall not apply to property located within the area zoned CBD-1
Central Business District and shall be reduced to 1/2 for that area zoned
CBD-2 Central Business District:
(e) Recreational vehicles and equipment may not be stored or
parked in residential districts for the purpose of making major
repairs, refurbishing, or reconstruction of the recreational
vehicle or equipment.
(f) Recreational vehicles must have a current or prior year license
plate and registered to an occupant of the dwelling unit on the
parcel on which it is stored.
(2) Nonresidential districts. The storage of recreational vehicles and
equipment in nonresidential districts, when it is not associated with
the business of the property, shall provide proper screening so that
it is not visible from the road and abutting residential areas.
M. Repair of vehicles. The parking, carrying out of repair, restoration and
maintenance procedures or projects on vehicles in any residential
district, when such work is not conducted entirely within the interior of
the vehicle, shall be subject to the following limitations:
(1) All vehicles parked or being worked on outside shall be on an
improved driveway surface, licensed, and operable.
(2) Procedures exceeding 48 hours in duration or which require the
vehicle to be inoperable in excess of 48 hours shall be conducted
within an enclosed building.
(3) Inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts shall be stored inside an
enclosed building.
N. Parking of commercial vehicles.
(1) Parking of commercial vehicles over two tons shall be prohibited in
all Residential Districts; except this restriction shall not apply to
essential public service vehicles.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or lessee of any lot to
permit the open storage or outdoor parking of semi-tractor (WB-50
or larger) trucks and/or semitrailers, bulldozers, earth carriers,
cranes, or any other similar equipment or machinery, unless the
storage or display of such vehicles is an approved use or unless the
vehicles are temporarily parked while in use for approved
construction on such lot.
§ 7-16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.02
1:259
Table 7.16.1: Parking Space Numerical Requirements
GFA = Gross Floor Area
UFA = Usable Floor Area
Residential
One-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwellings 2 spaces for each dwelling unit having
2 or less bedrooms and 2 1/2 spaces for
each dwelling unit having 3 or more
bedrooms
Manufactured homes in a
manufactured housing park
3 spaces for each mobile home site and
1 space for each employee of the
mobile home park
Boarding and rooming houses 2 spaces for the owner-occupant and 1
space for each roomer
Housing for the Elderly
Assisted living or interim care
housing
1 space per each room or 3 beds,
whichever is less
Dependent housing facilities
including convalescent homes,
nursing homes, rest homes, etc.
1 space per each 4 beds or 2 rooms,
whichever is less
Senior apartments 1 space per unit
Institutional/Public
Churches, temples and other
places of worship or public
assembly
The greater of 1 space per each 3 seats
or 6 feet of pews in the main unit of
worship, plus required spaces for any
accessory uses such as a school, childcare
center, recreation facilities, etc.
Hospitals, urgent care centers,
and similar uses
2 spaces per bed plus parking for
related uses
Municipal office buildings 1 space per 250 square feet of GFA
Schools, elementary and junior
high schools
1 space for each teacher, employee or
administrator plus spaces required for
any assembly hall, auditorium, and/or
outdoor arena or athletic fields
Senior high schools 1 space for each teacher, employee or
administrator, and 1 space for each 10
students, plus spaces required for any
assembly hall, auditorium, and/or
outdoor arena or athletic fields
§ 7-16.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.02
1:260
Table 7.16.1: Parking Space Numerical Requirements
GFA = Gross Floor Area
UFA = Usable Floor Area
Group day-care homes, adult
foster care group homes, and
adult congregate care facilities
1 space per 4 residents, plus 1 space
per employee, plus adequate drop-off
spaces
Public utility use 1 space per employee
Colleges, business and vocational
schools, and technical training
facilities
2 spaces per classroom plus 15 student
spaces per classroom plus parking
required for any assembly hall,
auditorium, or outdoor arena
Lodge and union halls; fraternal
orders; private and civic clubs
and similar uses
1 space per every 3 persons allowed
within the maximum occupancy load as
established by the Michigan Building
Code
Fraternity or sorority 1 space for each 5 permitted active
members; or 1 space for each 2 beds,
whichever is greater
Stadium, sports arena or similar
place of outdoor assembly
1 space for each 3 seats or 5 feet of
benches
Theaters and auditoriums 1 space for each 3 seats plus 1 space
for each 2 employees
Nursery school, day nurseries or
child-care centers
1 space for each 350 square feet of
UFA plus 1 space for each employee
Library, museum, post office 1 space for each 150 square feet of
UFA
Business and Commercial
Retail stores with 80,000 square
feet GFA or less, unless
otherwise specified
1 space for each 250 square feet of
GFA including outdoor sales space
Retail stores, planned
commercial center or regional
retailer with over 80,000 square
feet GFA
1 for each 275 square feet of GFA,
including outdoor sales space
Animal grooming establishments 1 space per 300 square feet of GFA
plus 1 space per employee
§ 7-16.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.02
1:261
Table 7.16.1: Parking Space Numerical Requirements
GFA = Gross Floor Area
UFA = Usable Floor Area
Automobile service stations 1 space per each pump island and
service bay (bay can be included as a
space), plus 1 space per employee, 1
space for each 500 square feet of GFA
devoted to sales of automotive goods,
plus required spaces for any
convenience store (mini-mart),
restaurant or auto wash
Automobile washes (automatic) 1 space per employee, plus stacking
space equal to 5 times the maximum
number of possible vehicles
undergoing some phase of washing at
the same time
Automobile wash (self-service or
coin-operated)
5 spaces for each washing stall in
addition to the stall itself
Minor and major auto repair
shops
3 spaces for each service bay (bay can
be included as a space), plus 1 space
per employee, plus 1 space for each
tow truck, plus 1 stacking space per
bay
Automobile and vehicle
dealerships, including
recreational vehicles, boats,
motorcycles, and mobile homes
1 space per 400 square feet of GFA of
interior sales space plus 1 space per
600 square feet of GFA of exterior
display, plus 1 space per each service
bay
Beauty parlor or barber shop 3 spaces for each of the first 2 beauty
or barber chairs, and 1 1/2 spaces for
each additional chair
Dance halls, pool or billiard
parlors
1 space for each 2 persons allowed
within the maximum occupancy load as
established by the Michigan Building
Code
Repair shops, showroom of a
plumber or decorator, electrician
or similar trade, shoe repair, and
other similar uses
1 space for each 800 square feet of
UFA
§ 7-16.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.02
1:262
Table 7.16.1: Parking Space Numerical Requirements
GFA = Gross Floor Area
UFA = Usable Floor Area
Furniture and appliance,
carpeting and flooring, hardware
and home improvement stores
100,000 square feet GFA or less: 1 for
250 square feet of GFA, including
outdoor sales space
Over 100,000 square feet GFA: 1 for
each 275 square feet of GFA, including
outdoor sales space
Wholesale establishments and
warehouse clubs
1 for each 500 square feet of GFA,
including outdoor sales space
Banks, with or without drivethrough
service
1 for each 100 square feet of UFA, plus
stacking space for drive-through
windows as required in § 7-16.07
Kennels, commercial 1 space per 400 square feet of GFA,
plus 1 space per employee
Laundromats 1 space per each 2 washing machines,
plus 2 spaces for employees
Mini or self-storage warehouses Minimum of 6 spaces
Motel, hotel, bed-and-breakfast
inn, boarding houses and similar
uses
1 space per guest room, plus 1 space
per employee, plus 75% of required
spaces for restaurants, conference
rooms, banquet halls and other uses
Conference, meeting or banquet
rooms, exhibit halls and similar
uses
1 space for each 2 persons allowed
within the maximum occupancy load as
established by the Michigan Building
Code
Open-air businesses, including
nurseries, garden centers and
other outdoor display, sales, and
storage uses
1 space per 500 square feet of GFA of
outdoor display, sales and storage area,
plus 1 space per 200 square feet of
GFA of indoor space, plus 1 space per
employee
Pharmacies 1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
plus stacking space for drive-through
windows as required in § 7-16.07
Restaurants, standard, with
liquor license [Amended
5-17-2012]
1 space per 70 square feet of GFA, or
0.5 space per seat, whichever is
greater, plus spaces required for any
banquet or meeting rooms
§ 7-16.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.02
1:263
Table 7.16.1: Parking Space Numerical Requirements
GFA = Gross Floor Area
UFA = Usable Floor Area
Restaurants (standard, without
liquor license) [Amended
5-17-2012]
1 space per 80 square feet of GFA or
0.5 space per seat, whichever is
greater, plus spaces required for any
banquet or meeting rooms, plus up to 3
double-length spaces designated for
recreational vehicles and semi trucks
(as required by the Planning
Department for sites in proximity to
M-24)
Restaurants, fast-food with drivethrough
window, including coffee
shops, cafes, delicatessens, etc.
1 space per 80 square feet of GFA, plus
stacking space for drive-through
windows as required in § 7-16.07, plus
up to 2 double-length spaces
designated for recreational vehicles
and semi trucks (as required by the
Planning Department for sites in
proximity to M-24)
Restaurants, fast -food without
drive-through window
1 space per 80 square feet of GFA or
0.5 space per seat, whichever is
greater, plus up to 2 double-length
spaces designated for recreational
vehicles and semi-trucks (as
determined by the Building Official/
Planning Department for sites in
proximity to M-24)
Restaurant carry-out and open
front window, with fewer than 6
tables and/or booths
6 spaces plus 1 space per employee
Studios for art, photography,
music, dance and similar uses
1 space per 300 square feet of GFA
plus 1 space per employee
Offices
Business or professional offices 1 space for each 300 square feet of
GFA
Professional office of doctor,
dentist or similar professions
1 space for each 250 square feet of
GFA
Veterinary offices, clinics or
animal hospitals
1 space per 250 square feet of GFA
Industrial
§ 7-16.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.02
1:264
Table 7.16.1: Parking Space Numerical Requirements
GFA = Gross Floor Area
UFA = Usable Floor Area
Light industrial, research, design
and development centers and
accessory offices
5 plus 1 space for every 1 1/2
employees in the largest working shift.
Space on site shall also be provided for
all construction workers during periods
of plant construction
Warehouse (non-retail) and
related accessory offices
5 plus 1 space for every 1 employee, in
the largest working shift, or 5 spaces
plus 1 space for each 1,700 square feet
of UFA, whichever is the greater
Recreation/Entertainment
Arcades 2 spaces per machine plus 1 space per
employee
Baseball and softball fields 25 spaces per field
Batting cages 3 spaces per cage
Bowling centers 3 spaces per lane, plus 0.5 space per
seat in spaces designated for any
lounge or dining area
Recreation centers (indoor)
commercial, not already specified
1 space per 1,000 square feet of GFA,
plus required spaces for restaurants,
banquet rooms, offices, sales area, and
other uses
Golf course driving ranges 1 space per practice tee
Private golf clubs, swimming pool
clubs, tennis clubs, or other
similar uses
1 space for each 2 member families or
swimming pool clubs, individuals plus
spaces required for each accessory
tennis clubs, or other use such as a
restaurant or bar
Athletic clubs, exercise
establishments, health studios,
sauna baths, judo clubs and other
similar health uses
1 parking space for each 3 persons
allowed within the maximum
occupancy load as established by the
Michigan Building Code plus 1 space
per employee
Golf courses open to the general
public, except miniature or par-3
courses
6 spaces for each 1 golf hole and 1
space for 1 employee, plus spaces
required for each accessory use, such
as a restaurant or bar
Recreation centers (outdoor)
public or commercial, not already
specified
1 space per 200 square feet of GFA
§ 7-16.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.02
1:265
Table 7.16.1: Parking Space Numerical Requirements
GFA = Gross Floor Area
UFA = Usable Floor Area
Ice skating or roller rink 1 for each seat or 6 feet of benches, or
1 for each 150 square feet of skating
area, whichever is the greater
Soccer and football fields 30 spaces per field
Tennis courts and racquetball
centers
1 space per 1,000 square feet GFA or 6
spaces per court, whichever is greater,
plus 50% of required spaces for
restaurants, banquet rooms, offices,
sales area, and other uses
Medical Marihuana Facility [Added 2-19-2018]
Medical marihuana grow facility 1 space per employee in the largest
working shift, plus two additional
spaces
Medical marihuana processor/
processing facility [Amended
11-19-2018]
5 plus 1 space for every 1 1/2
employees in the largest working shift
Medical marihuana provisioning
center [Amended 11-19-2018]
1 space per 275 square feet of gross
floor area
Medical marihuana safety
compliance facility [Amended
11-19-2018]
5 plus 1 space for every 1 1/2
employees in the largest working shift
Medical marihuana secure
transporter facility
5 plus 1 space for every 1 employee, in
the largest working shift, or 5 spaces
plus 1 space for each 1,700 square feet
of UFA, whichever is the greater
Health and Human Care and Uses [Added 11-19-2018]
Ambulance service stations One space per commercial vehicle and
one space per employee on the largest
working shift
§ 7-16.03. Barrier-free parking requirements.
A. Each parking lot that serves a building or use, with the exception of
single- and two-family dwelling units, shall provide spaces for physically
handicapped persons in accordance with the Michigan Department of
Labor, Construction Code Commission, Barrier-Free Design Division.
B. The required number of accessible parking spaces shall be included
with the number of total parking spaces for the use and shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
§ 7-16.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.03
1:266
§ 7-16.04. Off-street parking space design and setback
requirements.
Where required, off-street parking facilities shall be designed, constructed
and maintained according to the following standards and regulations:
Table 7.16.2: Barrier-Free Parking Spaces
Total Number of Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Accessible Spaces Required
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each 100 spaces
over 1,000
A. Ingress and egress. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking facility
shall be provided by clearly defined driveways and maneuvering lanes.
Spaces backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. Access to offstreet
parking which serves a nonresidential use shall not be permitted
across land that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
B. Surfacing and drainage.
(1) Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall comply with City
Engineering specifications and subject to the review and approval
of the City Engineer. All driveways, parking lots, access lanes and
other vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with
concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material in accordance with
specifications of the City.
(2) Off-street parking areas, access lanes, and driveways shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface
water shall not be permitted to drain onto adjoining property,
unless in accordance with an approved drainage plan.
C. Curbs. Curbs shall be subject to review and approval by the City
Engineer and in compliance with the City of Lapeer Construction
Specifications or engineers specifications.
§ 7-16.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.04
1:267
D. Parking lot setbacks.
(1) From street rights-of-way. Parking lots, including drives and
maneuvering aisles but excluding driveways, shall not be permitted
within any minimum required yard abutting a street right-of-way,
private road, or access drive unless otherwise provided in the
Business and Office Districts: Schedule of Area, Height, and
Placement Requirements (Table 7.06.2), Footnote 3; and the
Industrial Districts: Schedule of Area, Height, and Placement
Requirements (Table 7.08.2), Footnote 3.16 [Amended 5-17-2012]
(2) From nonresidential districts. Parking lots shall have a minimum
setback of 10 feet from any nonresidential property line that is not
a street right-of-way line. This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Commission in the CBD or where a shared access
driveway, connected parking lots, frontage road, or rear service
drive is provided.
(3) From landscaped buffer. Parking lots shall be set back from
required berm or buffer zones as required in Table 7.15.1.
E. Lighting. Lighting of parking lots shall conform to the lighting
standards set out in Article XV, General Site Development
Requirements.
F. Dimensions. All spaces shall be designed and marked with dimensions
described below and shown in Figure 7.16.1, Off-Street Parking Design
Standards:
Table 7.16.3: Off-Street Parking Design Standards
Parking
Pattern
Maneuvering
Lane Width
(feet)
Parking
Space Width
(feet)
Parking
Space
Length*
(feet)
Total Width of
One Tier of
Spaces Plus
Maneuvering
Lane
(feet)
Total Width of
Two Tiers of
Spaces Plus
Maneuvering
Lane
(feet)
0° (parallel
parking)
12 8 23 20 28
30° to 53° 12 8.5 20 32 52
54° to 74° 15 8.5 20 36.5 58
75° to 90° 20 9 20 40 60
NOTES:
* The parking space length may be reduced by two feet when the space is adjacent to a sidewalk at
least seven feet wide or a curbed landscape area.
16.Editor's Note: The Schedules of Area, Height, and Placement Requirements are included
as attachments at the end of this chapter.
§ 7-16.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.04
1:268
§ 7-16.05. Parking lot construction and maintenance.
G. Parking lot marking. All parking spaces must be marked with double (or
loop) stripes three to four inches wide and spaced 18 to 24 inches apart
(see Figure 7.16.1: Off-Street Parking Design Standards).
H. Pedestrian circulation. The design and layout of the parking lots shall
provide appropriate pedestrian circulation and connections to
perimeter pedestrian connections.
A. Two sets of plans and specifications for parking areas shall be
submitted to the Planning Department prior to the issuance of a
building permit. These plans shall be subject to review and approval by
the City Engineer and in compliance with the City of Lapeer
Construction Specifications or engineers specifications and shall
include:
(1) Existing and proposed grades;
(2) Indication that stormwater runoff shall be accommodated on-site
through approved drainage facilities, including catch basins, runoff
calculations, pipe sizes and connections to existing drainage
structures; and
(3) Indication of surface and base materials to be used during
construction.
B. Required parking lots shall be installed and completed within six
months of receipt of a building permit and before issuance of an
occupancy permit. The Planning Department may grant a single
extension for an additional six months in the event of adverse weather
conditions or unusual delays beyond the control of the property owner.
C. All parking areas shall be maintained free of dust, trash, and debris.
Surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, signs, and related appurtenances
shall be maintained in good condition. The visibility of pavement
markings delineating parking spaces and directional control shall be
maintained.
D. All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this article shall
be maintained free of accumulated snow or standing water which
prevents full use and occupancy of such facilities, except for temporary
periods of no more than five days in the event of heavy rainfall or
snowfall.
E. Parking deferment. A smaller amount of parking may be approved by a
finding by the Planning Commission that the required amount of
parking is excessive, provided that the area to meet the full parking
requirement is retained as open space. The site plan shall note the area
where parking is being deferred with a dotted parking lot layout. If
within a two-year period following issuance of a certificate of occupancy
the Planning Commission determines based on observed use that the
§ 7-16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.05
1:269
§ 7-16.06. Off-street loading and unloading requirements.
deferred parking is needed, then the parking shall be constructed
by the applicant within six months of being informed in writing by
the City Planner. The Planning Commission may require posting of
a performance bond to cover the estimated construction cost of the
deferred parking with a refund in two years if the additional parking is
not found to be necessary.
F. Limits on excessive parking. In order to minimize excessive areas of
pavement which reduces aesthetic standards and contribute to high
rates of stormwater runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space
requirements by more than 20% shall only be allowed with approval by
the Planning Commission. In granting such additional space, the
Planning Commission shall determine that such parking will be
required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a
typical day.
A. Compliance with the loading space regulations set forth herein shall be
required in order to avoid interference with the public use of streets,
alleys, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, and other public areas.
B. General applicability. On-premises space for standing, loading and
unloading vehicles shall be provided for each use involving the receipt
or distribution of goods.
C. Change in use and intensity. Whenever use of a building, structure, or
lot is changed, loading space shall be provided as required by this
article for the new use, regardless of any variance which may have been
in effect prior to change of use.
D. Location.
(1) Loading/unloading areas and docks shall be prohibited in the front
yard or on any building side facing and directly visible to a public
street.
(2) In those instances where exterior side yards have a common
relationship with an industrial district across a public
thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in said
exterior side yard when the setback is equal to at least 50 feet.
(3) Loading/unloading operations shall not interfere with traffic on
public streets or off-street parking.
(4) The vehicular path to the loading area must be shown on the site
plan to verify truck maneuverability on site.
E. Size. The size of all required loading/unloading spaces shall be at least
10 feet by 50 feet or 500 square feet in area with a clearance of at least
14 feet in height.
F. Surfacing and drainage.
§ 7-16.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.06
1:270
(1) Loading areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed
bituminous material.
(2) Loading areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of
surface waters.
(3) Surface water shall not be permitted to drain onto adjoining
property, unless in accordance with an approved drainage plan.
(4) Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall be subject to review
and approval by the City Engineer and in compliance with the City
of Lapeer Construction Specifications or engineer's specifications.
G. Storage and vehicle repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale
of motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles, or repair of vehicles is
prohibited in required loading space.
H. Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for
individual loading spaces serving businesses on separate lots, provided
that all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(1) Each business served shall have direct access to the central loading
area without crossing streets or alleys.
(2) The total loading space provided shall meet the minimum
requirements specified herein, in consideration of total floor area
of all businesses served by the central loading space.
(3) No building served shall be more than 300 feet from the central
loading area.
I. Number of spaces. The minimum number of loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the following table. The Planning
Commission may modify these requirements upon making the
determination that another standard would be more appropriate
because of the number or type of deliveries experienced by a particular
business or use.
Table 7.16.4: Loading Spaces Required
Institutional, Commercial and Office Uses
Up to 5,000 square feet GFA 1 space
5,001 to 60,000 square feet GFA 1 space, plus 1 space per each
20,000 square feet GFA or fraction
thereof
60,001 square feet GFA and over 3 spaces, plus 1 space per each
50,000 square feet GFA or fraction
thereof
Industrial Uses
Up to 1,400 square feet GFA 0
§ 7-16.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.06
1:271
§ 7-16.07. Stacking requirements for drive-through facilities.
Table 7.16.4: Loading Spaces Required
1,401 to 20,000 square feet GFA 1 space
20,001 to 100,000 square feet
GFA
1 space, plus 1 space per each
20,000 square feet GFA in excess of
20,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
100,001 square feet GFA and
over
5 spaces
J. Screening. When off-street loading in a nonresidential district is visible
from a public right-of-way or abuts a residential district, the off-street
loading shall be screened from such contiguous, residential district by a
solid, ornamental masonry wall at least six feet in height above the
grade elevation at the residential district line, in addition to the
landscape requirements of Article XV.
K. Calculation. Required loading areas shall not be included in
calculations for off-street parking space requirements.
A. In addition to the parking requirements, establishments with drivethrough
facilities shall provide stacking space for vehicles awaiting
service as follows:
Drive-through restaurant 8 spaces per window
Minor automobile service or
repair
2 spaces per service stall
Gasoline fueling station 2 spaces per fueling station
Drive-through banking 4 spaces per window
Drive-through pharmacy 3 spaces per window
B. Each stacking space shall be measured at not less than 20 feet in length
and 10 feet in width. In no instance shall stacking spaces interfere with
required parking or maneuvering lanes.
§ 7-16.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.07
1:272
§ 7-16.08. Curb cuts and driveway approaches. [Added 9-26-2013]
Figure 7.16.1: Off-Street Parking Design Standards
A. Nonconforming curb cuts. Curb cuts lawfully made prior to the effective
date of this section which do not meet the standards of this chapter
shall be considered nonconforming and may be maintained unless
§ 7-16.08B(4) or (5) is applicable.
B. No curb cut or driveway approach shall be made to a public street or
right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City. Issuance of
such permits shall be made only in accordance with the following
regulations:
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions apply:
APPROACH — An area improved for vehicular traffic on a public
street right-of-way which connects the traveled portion of the
street with a driveway.
§ 7-16.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16.08
1:273
CURB CUT — That section of curb removed to permit ingress
from the pavement to the adjacent property and shall be measured
between the points of tangency of the opening radii with the
normal street curbing.
OPENING — The point of connection of the driveway and approach
at the street right-of-way line. Its width and location shall be
determined by extending the driveway line to the street right-ofway
line.
SITE — All contiguous land under the same ownership or one whole
lot in the case of land for which a recorded plat exists.
STREET FRONTAGE — The length of property abutting one or
more streets.
(2) Number of openings. The number of openings listed in the chart
below shall be the maximum for any site, lot or parcel.
Total Street Frontage
Up to 100
linear feet
101 to 200
linear feet
201 linear feet or
over
Number of
openings
1 2 2 for the first 200
linear feet
1 for each additional
600 linear feet of
total street frontage
thereafter
(3) Design criteria. Curb cuts and driveway approaches shall comply
with City of Lapeer design standards and Construction
Specifications.
(4) Traffic hazards. Any openings which pose or constitute a
pedestrian or traffic hazard may be ordered closed, modified, or
relocated by the City. The City shall give the property owner
affected by this provision a reasonable time to comply with any
order of the City to close, modify, or relocate said opening.
(5) Useless curb cuts. If at any time a curb cut ceases to be functional,
the curb shall be replaced and the approach removed by the
adjoining owner. If a useless curb cut is not replaced by curbing in
accordance with City Specifications, and if the approach is not
removed, said work may be done by the City and the cost thereof
shall be charged to the property owner and may be collected by the
City in any manner allowed by law.
§ 7-16.08 LAPEER CODE § 7-16.08
1:274
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
§ 7-17.01. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to regulate signs, to minimize outdoor
advertising, and to protect public safety, health and welfare; minimize
abundance and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction,
and loss of visibility; promote public convenience; preserve property values;
and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the City.
The requirements contained herein are intended to be content neutral. The
following objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount
of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction,
illumination, and other aspects of signs in the City in order to:
A. Protect the public right to receive messages, including religious,
political, economic, social, philosophical and other types of information
protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
B. Maintain and improve the image of the City by encouraging signs of
consistent size which are compatible with and complementary to
related buildings and uses, and harmonious with their surroundings.
C. Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to
motorists and nonmotorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of
signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces
desired uniform traffic flow, and creates potential for accidents.
D. Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs, to meet the
purpose of these requirements and serve the public interest, should be
for identification of an establishment on the premises, and not for
advertising special events, brand names or off-premises activities, as
these can be advertised more appropriately by other methods.
E. Eliminate potential conflicts between business signs and traffic control
signs, which could create confusion and hazardous consequences.
F. Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without
excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and
placement of signs.
G. Prevent placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs of
adjacent uses.
H. Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with other land uses.
I. Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to
structural deficiencies or disrepair.
J. Prohibit portable commercial signs in recognition of their significant
negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics.
§ 7-17.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.02
1:275
§ 7-17.02. Signs not requiring a permit.
A sign of the following type shall be permitted on all parcels in the City
without the issuance of a sign permit, subject to all other requirements of
this article:
A. Device signs. Permanent signs on vending machines, ATMs, gas station
pumps, or other containers indicating only the contents or purpose of
such devices, provided that the sign area of each device shall not
exceed three square feet and there are no more than one sign per
device.
B. Directional signs. The sign shall bear no advertising other than logos.
C. Flags. Flags, provided there shall be no more than three flags per lot,
the maximum size of each flag shall be 50 square feet, and the flag poles
comply with relative height limitations.
D. Employment signs. "Help wanted" signs soliciting employees for the
place of business where posted, provided that the maximum area for all
such signs shall not exceed six square feet.
E. Enclosed signs. Any sign that is located completely within a building
and is not visible from the outside.
F. Historical signs. Plaques or signs designating a building or premises as
a historic structure or premises not to exceed six square feet.
G. Identification signs. Signs for the sole purpose of designating an
assigned house number, owner name, occupant, or building name.
Identification signs shall not be counted in the total sign area allowed
on the premises; however, such signs in excess of one square foot in
surface display area may be allowed as part of the total sign area
otherwise allowed by this chapter.
H. Incidental signs. Small signs, emblems, or decals informing the public
of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. The total of all
such incidental signs shall not exceed two square feet.
I. Nonconforming signs. Legal nonconforming signs existing on the
effective date of the adoption of the chapter. Removal of the sign shall
constitute an elimination of the nonconforming status.
J. Noncommercial message sign. A political sign shall not exceed eight
square feet per side and a total of 16 square feet in a residential
district. A political sign shall not exceed 16 square feet per side and a
total of 32 square feet in a nonresidential district. The maximum height
of a political sign is six feet. The sign shall not be placed within a side
yard setback area, as required under the Zoning Ordinance in the
district in which the property is situated.
(1) There shall be only one noncommercial message sign not
pertaining to a specific event allowed per lot or parcel. If related to
§ 7-17.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.02
1:276
§ 7-17.03. Temporary signs.
The following regulations shall be applicable to all temporary signs placed
or situated at any place other than inside a "building" as defined in this
chapter. All temporary signs shall be in accordance with Table 7.17.1.
a specific event, the sign must be removed within 10 days of
the event. The ten-day removal does not include political signs
placed between a primary election prior to a general election for
those primary winners standing the general election. The owner of
the property or the person in charge thereof shall be responsible
for the removal of the signs. Election signs shall not be erected,
posted, affixed or placed no earlier than the filing deadline for an
office. [Amended 12-7-2015]
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the foregoing,
noncommercial message signs not exceeding four square feet in
total area are permitted as window signs (i.e., as signs placed on
the inside of windows of a structure so as to be visible from outside
the structure).
(3) Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, a sign
permitted in this chapter as an on-premises advertising sign may
contain a lawful noncommercial message, except for traffic signs,
railroad crossing signs, danger or other emergency signs, and
directional signs.
K. Public signs. Public signs, authorized signs by a government body or
public utility, including traffic signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, warnings of a hazard, and similar signs.
A. Projection into right-of-way. No temporary sign shall be strung across
any public right-of-way nor shall any temporary sign project beyond the
property line except as authorized by the City Commission.
B. Removal. Temporary signs shall be removed promptly at the end of the
display period provided for above.
C. Damaged signs. Any temporary sign found by the Building Official to be
in a torn, damaged or unsafe condition must be removed by the owner
within three days after his receipt of notice to do so from the Building
Official.
Table 7.17.1: Temporary Sign Regulations
Type of Sign Maximum Size
Maximum
Height
Maximum
Number
Permitted Duration and Other
Requirements
Temporary Signs Not Requiring a Permit
Community
special event
signs
Discretion of the Building Official and
considering the following:
May be installed up to 3 weeks prior
to event and may remain no more
than 30 days in total
§ 7-17.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.03
1:277
Table 7.17.1: Temporary Sign Regulations
Type of Sign Maximum Size
Maximum
Height
Maximum
Number
Permitted Duration and Other
Requirements
• May include ground or wall signs,
banners, or similar displays
• If located over a public street, sign must
be at a height that does not conflict with
vehicular traffic and must be approved by
the City Commission
Garage sale
signs in
residential
districts
5 square feet 4 feet 1 per lot, 2 on
corner lot (1
facing each
street)
Shall be erected no more than 10
business days before and removed
within 1 business day after the sale
Real estate: sale
or lease of
individual
residential
dwelling or lot
5 square feet 4 feet 1 per lot, 2 on
corner lot (1
facing each
street)
Shall be removed within 14 days of
sale closing, or the lease or rental of
the premises. Sign may not be
illuminated.
Temporary Signs Requiring a Permit
Discretion of the Building Official and
considering the following:
Banners and
pennants
• Must be securely attached to a building
or structure
May be erected 2 times per calendar
year, for a maximum of 30 days each
time
1. Shall be removed from premises
within 30 days after issuance of
the occupancy permit or
temporary occupancy permit.
Construction
signs
64 square feet 15 feet 1 per lot, 2 on
corner lot (1
facing each
street)
2. In the case of renovations (e.g.
addition to a building) or
maintenance or repair (e.g.
roofing or siding), rather than
the construction of a new
building, the construction sign
may have a maximum sign area
of 16 square feet.
Grand opening
special sale and
promotional
signs
16 square feet Wall sign not
higher than
building
1 per lot, 2 on
corner lot (1
facing each
street)
May be erected for a maximum of 15
consecutive days every 6 months
Real estate:
development,
sale or lease
signs
64 square feet 10 feet 1 per lot, 2 on
corner lot (1
facing each
street)
Remove within 7 days after all units
or lots sold or leased
§ 7-17.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.04
1:278
§ 7-17.04. Prohibited signs.
Table 7.17.2: Prohibited Signs
Any sign not expressly permitted.
String lights. Spinners, strings of light bulbs, pennants, or streamers,
hung overhead to draw attention to a business or its merchandise on
display. In no case does this restrict the use of string lights for holidays or
religious events.
Moving or animated signs. Except as otherwise expressly provided, no
sign shall contain any moving or animated parts nor have the appearance
of having any movement or animation. No sign shall employ any flashing,
moving, oscillating, blinking, or variable-intensity light or intermittent
lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals, or
police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, or lights so bright as to be
blinding or distracting to a vehicle driver.
Inflatable signs. Signs that are comprised in part or wholly of a balloon
or any other inflated object or character.
Obsolete signs, as defined.
Off-premises signs (other than billboards), as defined. [Amended
5-17-2012]
Pole signs, as defined. [Amended 5-17-2012]
Portable or movable signs, as defined, except where expressly
permitted in this article.
Signs that obstruct access. Signs which obstruct free access or egress
from a required door, window, or other required exit.
Signs that obstruct view of road signs. Signs that obstruct any
approved traffic control device, road sign, or signal from view; interfere
with sight distance necessary for traffic safety; or distract from visibility
of existing traffic signs or devices.
Signs that confuse traffic.
1. Any sign which makes use of the words "stop," "look," or "danger," or
any other words, phrases, symbols, or characters, in such a manner as
to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
2. Signs which in any way simulate or could be confused with the
lighting of emergency vehicles or traffic signals; there shall be no red,
yellow, or green illumination on any sign located in the same line of
vision as a traffic control system, nor interference with vision
clearance along any highway, street, or road or at any intersection of
two or more streets.
Illegal signs. Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained.
Snipe signs. Signs attached to a utility pole, fence or affixed to a tree
except as may otherwise be permitted by this article.
§ 7-17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.04
1:279
Table 7.17.2: Prohibited Signs
Roof signs. Signs shall not be erected on any part of a building's roof
unless there is no practical available wall area on the front of the building
to permit the allowed wall sign, in which case the Planning Department
may grant an administrative waiver.
Road furniture signs. Signs on street furniture, such as benches and
trash receptacles, not including commemorative plaques or engravings
not larger than 1/2 square foot.
Fire hydrants. Any sign not attached to a building and erected within 10
feet of a fire hydrant.
Signs in public right-of-way or on City-owned property. Unless
otherwise provided in these regulations, no sign, except those established
by the City of Lapeer, Lapeer County, state or federal governments shall
be located in, project or overhang into any public right-of-way or
dedicated easement, or elsewhere on City-owned property except with the
consent of the City.
Motor vehicle signs.
1. It shall be unlawful to park, place or store a vehicle or trailer on which
there is a motor vehicle sign on private or public property for the
purpose of advertising a business or products or for the purpose of
directing people to a business or business activity.
2. Presumption. There shall be a presumption that this subsection has
been violated if the motor vehicle sign is visible from a street and one
or more of the following circumstances exist:
a. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is
unregistered or not operable;
b. The motor vehicle sign is larger in any dimension than or extends
beyond any surface of the vehicle or trailer to which it is attached;
c. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is
parked or stored in a public right-of-way or an area not designed,
designated, or commonly used for parking;
d. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is
regularly parked or stored in a "front yard" or "side yard," as such
terms are defined in this Zoning Ordinance, that abuts a street,
when there are other areas of the property designed, designated,
or available for the parking or storage of the vehicle or trailer that
are not visible from the street or do not abut streets; or
e. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is
regularly parked or stored within 50 feet of a street, when there
are other areas of the property designed, designated, or available
for the parking or storage of the vehicle or trailer that are more
distant from the street or not visible from the street.
§ 7-17.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.04
1:280
Table 7.17.2: Prohibited Signs
3. Rebuttal of presumption. The presumption set forth in Subsection 2c
in this table, above, may be rebutted by evidence showing all of the
following:
a. The vehicle is temporarily parked in a particular location in the
course of conducting personal activities or business activities that
involve the loading or unloading of goods for customers, providing
services to off-site customers, conducting off-site business, or
engaging in work breaks;
b. The activities in Subsection 1 in this table, above, are being
actively undertaken during the period of such parking;
c. The activities in Subsection 1 in this table, above, require the
presence of the vehicle for purposes of transporting equipment,
people, supplies and/or goods necessary for carrying out such
activities; and
d. The activities in Subsection 1 in this table, above, are not, other
than incidentally, related to advertising, identifying, displaying,
directing, or attracting attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location.
Unsafe signs. Any sign or sign structure which the Building Official has
determined:
1. Is structurally unsafe;
2. Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment;
3. Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of blocking views;
4. Is capable of causing electric shock to a person who comes in contact
with it;
5. Is unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained;
6. Is located in public street or utility right-of-way, except where
expressly permitted herein;
7. Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts, missing
letters, or nonoperational lights; or
8. Does not meet applicable requirements of any adopted City Building
Code.
Search lights, as defined.
§ 7-17.05. Schedule of Sign Regulations: property used for
nonresidential purposes.
The following table includes regulations for permanent nonresidential
signs:
§ 7-17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.05
1:281
Table 7.17.3: Schedule of Sign Regulations
Type of
Sign
Maximum
Area Height Illumination
Number
Permitted/
Other
Provisions
Wall sign
(see
§ 7-17.06A)
[Amended
9-26-2013]
Total surface
area of all
wall signs
placed on the
front, side or
rear of a
building shall
not exceed
the lesser of
10% of the
area of the
front face of
the building
or tenant
space, or 3
square feet
for each
lineal feet of
building
frontage or
tenant space
Must not
exceed
maximum
building
height in
district.
Must not be
higher than
wall upon
which it is
attached.
Bottom of
sign must be
at least 8 feet
above ground
level or
sidewalk.
Permitted Must not
extend beyond
the ends of the
wall on which
it is attached.
Sign may not
be more than
12 inches
thick,
measured from
the wall on
which it is
attached.
Awnings
and
canopies
Lettering may
cover
maximum of
1/3 of awning
or canopy.
Lettering
shall not
project
above, below
or beyond the
physical
dimensions of
the awning or
canopy.
Bottom of
awning or
canopy must
be at least 7
feet above
ground level
or sidewalk.
Not permitted
under awning
or canopy,
except for gas
station
canopy.
Buildingmounted
lighting may
indirectly
illuminate the
area above or
below the
awning or
canopy.
Individual
letters shall
not be larger
than 9 inches
from top to
bottom.
Directional
signs
4 square feet
per sign
4 feet
maximum
Permitted Determined by
City Building
Official
§ 7-17.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.05
1:282
Table 7.17.3: Schedule of Sign Regulations
Type of
Sign
Maximum
Area Height Illumination
Number
Permitted/
Other
Provisions
Monument
signs (see
§ 7-17.06B)
Areas zoned
CBD-1 or
CBD-2: 20
square feet
per side; 40
square feet
total.
Other areas:
56 square
feet per side;
112 square
feet total.
8 feet
maximum
Permitted 1 per each side
of parcel facing
a street
Poster panel
signs
(sandwich
signs, Aframes)
(see
§ 7-17.06C)
7 square feet
per side;
14 square
feet total
3.5 feet
maximum
Not permitted Only permitted
in the CBD-1
and CBD-2
Zoning
Districts
Business
center sign,
including
multiple
tenant
commercial
or shopping
centers and
multiple
tenant office
buildings
[Amended
9-26-2013]
64 square
feet per sign
face;
128 total
square feet
for both sides
Areas zoned
CBD-1 or
CBD-2: 10
feet
maximum.
Other areas:
16 feet
maximum.
Permitted 1 per business
center.
Individual
businesses are
not allowed to
have individual
monument
signs.
Window
signs
Not more
than 25% of
surface of
window
N/A Not
permitted,
except for
LED sign
N/A
§ 7-17.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.05
1:283
Table 7.17.3: Schedule of Sign Regulations
Type of
Sign
Maximum
Area Height Illumination
Number
Permitted/
Other
Provisions
Projecting
signs (see
§ 7-17.06D)
8 square feet
per side;
16 square
feet, total
Must not be
higher than
wall upon
which it is
attached.
Bottom of
sign must be
at least 8 feet
above ground
level or
sidewalk.
Permitted Only permitted
in the CBD-1
and CBD-2
zoning
districts.
1 per business,
provided not
within 20 feet
of another
projecting sign.
Rear entry
signs
Wall sign: 6
square feet;
Projecting
sign: 6 square
feet per side;
12 square
feet total.
Bottom of
sign must be
a minimum of
8 feet above
the ground or
sidewalk
Permitted 1 per business
Marquee
signs (see
§ 7-17.06E)
10% of the
wall, up to
maximum of
100 square
feet
Must not
exceed
building
height in
district.
Must not be
higher than
building.
Bottom of
sign must be
at least 8 feet
above ground
level or
sidewalk.
Permitted 1 per parcel
§ 7-17.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.05
1:284
Table 7.17.3: Schedule of Sign Regulations
Type of
Sign
Maximum
Area Height Illumination
Number
Permitted/
Other
Provisions
Billboards
(see
§ 7-17.06F)
175 square
feet per side;
350 square
feet total
See
§ 7-17.06F(2).
Permitted Only allowed in
the I-2 Zoning
District.
Must be on
property
fronting an
expressway or
state trunk line
highway.
Interstate
corridor
signs (see
§ 7-17.06G)
[Added
4-17-2017]
200 square
feet per side
(total signage
= 400 square
feet) with a
maximum of 2
sides
permitted.
250 square
feet for two
businesses
and an
additional 50
square feet
for each
business
(tenant)
thereafter
and not to
exceed 400
square feet
each side.
20 feet for
single tenant.
30 feet for
multiple
tenant
Permitted -
internal and
concealed
only.
Spotlighting
is not
permitted.
1 per every
1,000 linear
feet, up to 2
sign structures
per lot/parcel
within 200 feet
of I-69.
Must be on
property which
is adjacent to
the I-69 rightof-
way.
Electronic
or manual
changeable
message
signs (see
§ 7-17.06H)
24 square
feet
Per type of
sign as listed
above
Permitted 1 per parcel
§ 7-17.06. Additional provisions for Schedule of Sign Regulations in
Table 7.17.3.
§ 7-17.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.06
1:285
A. Wall signs.
(1) Materials required. All wall signs of a greater area than 50 square
feet shall have a surface or facing of noncombustible material.
(2) Limitation on placement. No wall sign shall cover wholly or
partially any wall opening.
(3) Supports and attachments. All wall signs shall be safely and
securely attached to structural members of the building by means
of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws. In no case shall any
wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails.
B. Monument signs. [Amended 5-17-2012]
(1) Material required. Every monument sign over 50 square feet in
total surface area shall have a surface or facing of noncombustible
material.
(2) Letters, etc. to be secured. All letters, figures, characters or
representations in cutout or irregular form, maintained in
conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall
be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure.
(3) Anchorage and support. All monument signs shall be securely built,
constructed and erected upon posts sunk at least 42 inches below
the surface of the ground and embedded in concrete. A lightninggrounding
device shall be provided.
(4) Base. A monument sign must be mounted on a solid base
constructed of masonry or other similarly durable material that
matches or complements the material on the main building. The
base must be at least 75% of the sign width, not to exceed 12 feet
wide by three feet thick.
C. Poster panel (sandwich board, A-frames) signs. Poster panel signs may
be placed only within the CBD-1 and CBD-2 Zoning Districts at the
public entrances to retail, personal service or restaurant businesses, on
either private property or the public sidewalk, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Clearance for pedestrians. The sign shall be located a minimum of
two feet from the edge of the curb and must be located so that at
least a five-foot wide sidewalk is maintained between the sign and
the building wall for pedestrian traffic flow and safety.
(2) Number. There shall be only one sign permitted for each building
address for which there is provided a separate entrance, regardless
of the number of tenants in the building.
(3) Storage. Each sign shall be placed outside only during the hours
when the business is open to the general public, and shall be stored
indoors at all other times. Any sign which is found to be not in
§ 7-17.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.06
1:286
compliance with this requirement may be confiscated by City Code
Enforcement officials. A second violation will result in loss of the
sign permit for a period of one year.
(4) Hazard. A portable sidewalk sign shall not occupy or obstruct the
use of any fire lane or required off-street parking. Any sign which
creates a visual or safety hazard may be ordered to be removed by
the Police Chief.
(5) Maintenance. All sign frames shall be constructed of a
weatherproof material and shall be kept in good repair.
(6) Businesses not fronting on Nepessing Street. Directional poster
panel signs for downtown businesses not fronting on Nepessing
Street are permitted to be placed on Nepessing Street corners
subject to the following provisions:
(a) One directional sidewalk sign is allowed per corner,
representing multiple businesses if necessary.
(b) The sign shall be placed in a location that does not interfere
with other signage or features in the vicinity.
(c) All other provisions of the Sign Ordinance shall be complied
with.
(7) Permit. No poster panel sign shall be placed on display without the
owner first obtaining a permit from the City of Lapeer.
(8) Quality. Hand-lettered or stenciled sign faces are prohibited, with
the exception of restaurant daily specials. All sign faces shall be
professionally created in conformance with the specifications for
sidewalk signs adopted by the City of Lapeer Downtown
Development Authority.
D. Projecting signs.
(1) Construction. Every part of a projecting sign, with a total surface
area greater than 10 square feet, shall be constructed of
noncombustible material.
(2) Movable parts to be secured. Any movable part of a projecting sign,
such as the cover of a service opening, shall be securely fastened
by chains or hinges.
(3) Thickness limitation. The distance measured between the principal
faces of any projecting sign shall not exceed 18 inches.
(4) Projection over public property. No projecting sign may project
beyond the property line unless approved by the City.
(5) Bracing, anchorage and supports. Projecting signs of a greater
total surface area than 10 square feet or 50 pounds in weight shall
not be attached to nor supported by frame buildings nor the
§ 7-17.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.06
1:287
wooden framework of a building. All projecting signs shall be
thoroughly secured to the building by iron or other metal anchors,
bolts, supports, rods or braces.
E. Marquee signs.
(1) Material required. Every marquee sign, including the upright
supports and braces thereof, shall be constructed entirely of
noncombustible materials.
(2) Bracing, anchorage and supports. Every marquee sign shall be
thoroughly secured to the building by iron or metal anchors, bolts,
supports, rods or braces.
F. Billboards.
(1) Minimum lot size. Such signs shall be allowed on premises with a
minimum total area of one acre and a minimum dimension of 200
feet on any one side (based on the deed or recorded legal
description).
(2) Height. Such signs shall comply with the height limitations and
with the front, rear, and side setback provisions of the I-2 zoning
district.
G. Interstate corridor signs (ICS). [Added 4-17-2017]
(1) Placement. All Interstate Corridor Signage (ICS) must be located
along Interstate-69 (I-69) and shall be no closer than a distance
that is equal to or greater than the height of the sign (20 feet to 30
feet) and set back from the interstate right-of-way (ROW). An ICS
20 feet tall or less must maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet
from the I-69 ROW. The interstate ROW includes all entrance and
exit ramps on to I-69. Setbacks from the I-69 ROW may be more
restrictive as deemed necessary by the Michigan Department of
Transportation (MDOT). An ICS must be within 200 feet of the
property line that borders the interstate ROW unless deemed
otherwise by MDOT.
(2) Additional permitting. MDOT may require permitting for any sign
structures that are within 3,000 feet of an interstate, freeway, or
highway; as regulated by the Michigan Highway Advertising Act
(Act 106). It is recommended that such permitting be applied for
through MDOT before applying for a sign permit through the City
of Lapeer. If MDOT does not require a permit for the proposed sign,
documentation stating such shall be provided and submitted with
the sign application to the City of Lapeer.
(3) Location. An ICS can only be applied for on properties that are
zoned B-2. The property must border the I-69 ROW. An ICS is an
additional sign structure for properties that meet the standards of
§ 7-17.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.06
1:288
this section and are not considered to be part of a cumulative total
for overall signage allowed on an applicable piece of property.
(4) Setbacks. An ICS must be more than 300 feet from all residentially
zoned properties, including properties adjacent to the subject
parcel and/or across a public ROW.
(5) Proximity. An ICS shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet apart from each
sign with no more than two per lot. ICS placement must maintain a
minimum of 500 feet apart from all other ICS structures on
adjacent properties or across a public ROW.
(6) Accessory. All ICS and sign structures are accessory to a building
or use on the same property. At least one building or structure that
houses a principal business or use must be located on the same
property as the interstate corridor sign.
(7) Multi-tenant. A ICS that advertises two or more businesses. Square
footage and height may be increased on an ICS (per Table 7.17.3)
by allowing multiple tenants to advertise. The following
requirements apply to signs hosting third-party tenants:
(a) Participating tenants of an existing or proposed ICS structure
must apply for a sign permit through the Building Department
with a valid lease for signage space and/or written permission
from the CIS structure owner.
(b) The tenant of an ICS must be advertising a business or use of a
location for a legal licensed business on property within the
City of Lapeer and adjacent to the I-69 ROW property line,
except as prohibited in this section. Tenants on adjacent
properties that do not share a property line along the I-69 ROW
must be all of the following:
[1] A legally licensed business or use in the City of Lapeer, no
more than 3,000 feet from the I-69 ROW.
[2] A business or use that shares a property line with the
property the sign is located on. The following areas have
been designated to allow for tenant signage and not to
advertise or promote a business that is separated by a
public ROW from the ICS structure. Signage of a business
on an ICS must be located in these quadrants on a
structure within the same quadrant as listed below:
[a] South of Turrill Road, north of I-69, and east of M-24
up to 3,000 feet from the ICS within the City limits.
[b] North of I-69 up to 3,000 feet from the ICS within the
City limits, west of Baldwin Road and east of the
country drain, Farmers Creek.
§ 7-17.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.06
1:289
[c] South of I-69 up to 3,000 feet from the ICS, east of
M-24 up to 3,000 feet of the ICS within the City limits.
(c) Tenant signage of an ICS must be designated for a separate
business. A business or product sold within a building sharing
a common entrance without any separation from the primary
business does not constitute a permitted tenant for additional
signage. For example: a store that sells a brand may not
advertise that brand separately outside of the two-hundredsquare-
foot requirement.
(d) The closest ICS structure must be used whenever possible or, if
no space is available, an ICS structure within 3,000 of the
tenant's business can be used for the tenant's sign as it
complies with the quadrants depicted in § 7-17.06G(7)(b). It is
required that businesses sharing a common vehicular entry
should share an ICS structure whenever possible to limit
confusion of the particular location of the business.
(8) Design. ICS shall only be one or two-sided. V-shaped signs, similar
to typical billboard designs, are permitted, given both sides are
visible and legible from the interstate ROW and not exceeding a
ninety-degree angle. The void/back of a V-shaped sign and the back
of a one-sided sign must be of acceptable materials that match the
base or exterior/visible materials of the main sign structure.
Supporting structure (poles, beams, cross-bracing, etc.) for the ICS
shall be enclosed within the sign structure and material cladding.
(9) Proportions. An ICS shall not be less than five feet in height and
cannot exceed more than 30 feet in width, as measured across the
face of the sign.
(10) Base. Any ICS structure that has signage more than 18 inches
above grade must provide a designated base between the bottom(s)
of the display signage that extends to grade. The base shall be clad
with permitted materials that match or complement the main
building(s) that the sign structure is designed to be used for. The
base must, at a minimum, meet the width of the display signage.
(11) Materials. Noncombustible, durable materials are required on all
ICS structures. Materials similar to finished metal, stone, brick or a
combination of such are examples of materials that meet this
requirement. Materials that rust, stain, fade, oxidize, peeling and/
or crack as a result of the natural environment shall provide
information and apply such prevention measures as necessary or
be discouraged.
(12) Protrusions. Lettering and other materials to be secured to an ICS
shall be designed to deter the buildup of debris, snow, bird nests,
and other foreseen maintenance issues that could cause
obstructions or safety issues and compromise the stability and
functionality of the sign and sign structure over time. Curved
§ 7-17.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.06
1:290
surfaces of protruding elements are required. Any vertical or
horizontal surface attached to the face of an ICS shall protrude
no more than two inches beyond the face of the sign structure or
surface.
(13) Safety. A business advertising on any ICS is prohibited to use
images, colors, lighting and/or materials that would be considered
to be a distraction to motorists and other types of transportation.
Materials that are susceptible to variations of fatigue [as noted
above in Subsection G(11), Materials, and Subsection G(12),
Protrusions] pose a safety hazard, and it is required that
documentation of preventive measures be listed as part of the
submission of the ICS permit as it pertains to wind speeds, snow
load, corrosion and/or other engineering and stability factors.
H. Changeable message signs.
(1) Such sign shall be part of a monument sign only and shall be
subject to the area, height, and placement requirements for a
ground sign in such location as otherwise permitted under this
chapter.
(2) Changeable message signs are not allowed on property in a
residential zoning district or on property zoned Central Business
District.
(3) The changeable message portion of such sign shall not exceed 24
square feet, and the remainder of the sign shall be of a permanent
character as otherwise required under this chapter. [Amended
5-17-2012]
(4) In addition to the general requirements for sign maintenance, all
changeable copy signs shall bear a legible message, other suitable
display or be left blank. Electronic devices, when not in use, are to
be left blank and unlighted. Any lighted or electronic changeable
message sign in which the electrical or lighting components are
operating in an erratic, broken or damaged fashion shall be turned
off or removed.
(5) The sign shall not include animation and the message on the sign
may change a maximum of four times per minute. At all other times
the sign message and background must remain constant.
(6) Exceptions:
(a) Reader boards owned by government entities, public agencies,
and community organizations displaying community
information are exempt from the area limitations set forth in
Subsection H(1) above. Such signs must comply with all other
applicable provisions in this chapter.
§ 7-17.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.06
1:291
§ 7-17.07. Signs in residential districts.
(b) Electronic signs of private and parochial schools (public
schools are exempt by statute) shall be exempt from the above
provisions.
(c) Time and temperature displays are exempt from Subsection
H(1) above.
A. Signs in residential areas not requiring a permit. Ground and wall type
signs are permitted in residential zoning districts as defined in this
chapter without a permit and subject to the following conditions:
(1) Sign advertising the rental, sale or lease of the property upon
which it is located, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Not more than four feet in height nor more than five square
feet in area, including attachments.
(b) No sign may be erected within a public right-of-way, nor in
such manner on private property as to create a sight restriction
for automotive traffic.
(c) No such sign shall be lighted or otherwise artificially
illuminated.
(d) All such signs shall be removed within two weeks after the
consummation of a lease or sales contract covering that
property.
(e) There shall not be more than one such sign per lot.
(2) Dwelling nameplate. For each dwelling unit, one nameplate not
exceeding two square feet in area indicating name of occupant.
Such sign shall not contain advertising of any nature.
B. Signs in residential areas requiring a permit. Ground and wall type
signs are permitted in residential zone districts as defined in this
chapter with a permit and shall satisfy the following conditions:
(1) Sign advertising the lots and/or buildings erected in any
subdivision or multiple-family development. It shall be permissible
for a real estate broker or builder to erect one sign not to exceed a
total surface area of 64 square feet nor an overall height of 10 feet,
the lower edge of which shall not be less than 18 inches above the
surrounding ground level, to advertise the lots and/or building
erected in any one subdivision, provided that said real estate
broker or builder owns, has listed for sale or has the owner's
permission to sell a minimum of 10 lots in said subdivision. No such
sign or billboard shall be erected or maintained within 100 feet of
any occupied residence unless the written consent of the owner
and occupant of such residence is first obtained.
§ 7-17.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.07
1:292
§ 7-17.08. Parking area signs.
Signs in areas designated as P District or accessory to parking areas as
defined or required by this chapter shall meet the following requirements:
(2) Single-family and multiple-family residential developments. Any
person owning or operating any single-family or multiple-family
residential development may erect a monument sign in accordance
with the provisions of § 7-17.06B, bearing the name of the
development, such sign not to exceed 24 square feet in area and
not to exceed an overall height of six feet above the ground level,
which sign shall be made of noncombustible material and may be
lighted during the hours of darkness, and which shall contain no
advertising or information other than the name of the residential
development and status of occupancy. No more than one sign may
be erected for each development entrance. [Amended 9-26-2013]
(3) Signs accessory to churches, schools or nonprofit institutions.
[Amended 9-26-2013]
(a) Churches, colleges, schools, buildings housing governmental
functions and utilities of the City, county or state or any
subdivision thereof, are permitted to erect a monument sign in
accordance with the provisions of § 7-17.06B. Such signs, when
of a permanent nature, shall be constructed of noncombustible
material and shall meet all the requirements of this chapter,
except as provided hereafter:
[1] There shall be not more than one sign.
[2] Such signs shall be set back from the lot line at least 1/3 of
the distance from the lot line to the nearest building, but
need not be set back more than 100 feet from the property
line.
[3] No sign shall exceed 20 square feet in area, unless the sign
is located more than 50 feet behind the property line, then
said sign may be increased by five additional square feet
for each additional 10 feet of setback, but in no event shall
such sign exceed 50 square feet in area.
[4] Maximum height shall be eight feet.
[5] The sign may include an electronic message board area in
accordance with § 7-17.06H, provided that the sign is
located along a major thoroughfare.
(b) In the case of such signs in nonresidential zoning districts, the
signs must comply with the requirements for the district in
which they are located.
§ 7-17.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.08
1:293
§ 7-17.09. General requirements for all signs.
A. One wall or ground sign may be erected to designate each entrance to
or exit from a parking area; each sign shall be not more than four
square feet in area.
B. One wall or ground sign designating the conditions of use shall be
permitted for each parking area; each such sign shall be limited to a
maximum area of nine square feet, but shall be screened from adjoining
property.
A. Wind pressure and dead load requirements. Ground, projecting, wall
and marquee signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a
wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of surface
area and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required
elsewhere in the City Building Code.17
B. Illumination. All illumination shall be concentrated on the area of the
sign or landscape feature so as to prevent glare upon the street or
adjacent property. No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical
means or devices, and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the
National Electrical Code. Any signs shall be of a wattage of not to
exceed 60 watts per bulb. No lights shall be permitted in excess of 60
watts per bulb, and in no instance shall such light be located as to be
hazardous to traffic.
C. Obstructions to doors, windows and fire escapes. No sign shall be
erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any
door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a
stand pipe or fire escape.
D. Signs not to construct a traffic hazard. No sign shall be erected at the
intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and
clear vision or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or
color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or which makes use of the
words "Stop," "Look," "Danger" or any word, phrase, symbol or
character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
E. Clear vision area. No sign shall be located within, project into, or
overhang the corner clearance area as defined in § 7-14.05 of this
chapter.
F. Face of sign shall be smooth. No nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted
to protrude from the front of any sign. This shall not exclude, however,
the use of block letters, electrical reflectors, or other devices which may
extend over the top and in front of the advertising structure.
G. Measuring sign height.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 8, Buildings and Building Regulations.
§ 7-17.08 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.09
1:294
(1) The permitted height of all signs supported by the ground shall be
measured from the level of the ground, finished surface, adjacent to
the sign.
(2) Sign height shall not be measured from an area of the ground that
has been built up or constructed in a manner that would have the
effect of allowing a higher sign height than permitted by these
regulations (e.g., the height of signs erected on a berm shall be
measured from the finished grade adjacent to the berm).
H. Measuring sign area. [Amended 9-26-2013]
(1) Sign area shall be measured as the square footage of the sign face
and any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of
the display or used to differentiate it from the background against
which it is placed.
(2) When a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements
printed, painted or mounted on a wall of a building without any
distinguishing border, panel or background, the calculation for sign
area shall be measured by enclosing the most protruding edges of
the sign elements within a parallelogram or rectangle.
(3) The area of a double-faced monument sign shall be computed using
only one face of the sign, provided that: the outline and dimensions
§ 7-17.09 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.09
1:295
§ 7-17.10. Legal nonconforming signs.
of both faces are identical; and the faces are back to back so that
only one face is visible at any given time.
A. Any sign legally existing at the time of adoption of these regulations
which does not comply with all provisions shall be considered a legal
nonconforming sign and may be permitted to continue if the sign is
properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the community. [Amended 5-17-2012]
B. Subject to exceptions below, any legal nonconforming signs may be
continued in operation and maintained after the effective date of these
regulations, provided that the signs shall not be: [Amended
5-17-2012]
(1) Structurally altered so as to extend their useful life;
(2) Expanded;
(3) Moved to another location on the original site or on a different site;
(4) Reestablished after damage of more than 50% of the value at the
time of such damage or destruction;
(5) Modified in any way that would increase the degree of
nonconformity of such sign.
C. When a sign or sign structure is removed or destroyed, replacement
signs and sign structures must comply with the current standards,
except for the purpose of sign maintenance or repair: [Added
5-17-2012]
(1) A nonconforming sign or sign structure may be removed
temporarily to perform sign maintenance or sign repair, not to
exceed 50% of the current market value of the existing sign
structure.
(2) In order to preserve the nonconforming sign status, the person
removing the sign must inform the Building Official in writing
before the sign is removed. If the responsible party fails to provide
written notification, any re-erected sign will be considered a new
sign.
D. Abandonment or obsolescence of a nonconforming sign shall terminate
immediately the right to maintain such a sign.
(1) An obsolete sign and its supporting structure shall be removed by
the property owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is
located when the business which it advertises is no longer
conducted on the premises within 10 days after written notice from
the Building Official.
§ 7-17.09 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.10
1:296
§ 7-17.11. Administration.
(2) A sign which is in conformity with the other provisions of these
regulations may remain in place if such sign is obscured by the use
of a blank panel attached within the frame of the sign and shall be
permitted to remain for a period not to exceed 120 days.
(3) Where a successor to an inactive business agrees, within 30 days of
the date of written notice by the Building Official, to maintain the
sign as provided for by these regulations, this removal requirement
shall not apply, provided that the existing sign and structure
conforms to all current sign requirements.
E. All portable signs, except those specifically permitted by these
regulations, that exist on the effective date of these regulations, shall be
removed immediately upon the enactment of these regulations.
F. Any illegal nonconforming signs that exist on the effective date of these
regulations shall be removed immediately upon the enactment of these
regulations and shall be replaced by signs that conform to these
regulations.
A. No sign, permanent or temporary, shall be erected, structurally altered
or relocated, except as otherwise provided in these regulations, without
review and approval from the City of Lapeer Building Department.
B. Application. The application, on a form provided by the City of Lapeer
Building Department, shall contain the proposed location of the sign,
the name and address of the sign owner and of the sign erected, the
name and address of the owner of the business and of the property if
different from that of the sign owner, drawings and/or sketches showing
the design and location of the sign, the estimated cost of construction
and any other information as the Building Official may require to ensure
compliance with these regulations and with other ordinances of the
City.
C. Staking of signs proposed location. The location of a proposed sign shall
be staked by the property owner. The Building Department will use the
staked location to determine compliance with required setbacks set out
in these regulations before issuing a sign permit.
D. Permit required. For all signs requiring a permit, a sign permit
application shall be applied for with the City of Lapeer Building Official.
The Building Official will approve a sign permit application that clearly
conforms to the requirements of these regulations. If the sign is
situated in the public right-of-way, the applicant must obtain a license
from the City and must possess adequate liability insurance.
E. Fees. All permit fees for signs shall be as established by the Lapeer City
Commission.
§ 7-17.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17.11
1:297
§ 7-17.12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Building Official in
connection with any dimensional or location provision of these regulations
may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of the decision
or order.
F. Nullification. A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for
which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months
after the date of the permit.
G. Exceptions. The following shall not require a sign permit:
(1) The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved
painted or printed sign, on a theater marquee and on similar
approved signs which are specifically designed for the use of
replaceable copy.
(2) Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or
repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a structural change is
made.
H. Certificate of compliance. All signs shall require a final inspection and
the issuance of a certificate of compliance from the Building
Department. The property owner shall notify the Building Department
immediately upon erecting the sign to request the final inspection.
§ 7-17.11 LAPEER CODE § 7-17.12
1:298
ARTICLE XVIII
Site Plan Review
§ 7-18.01. Intent.
§ 7-18.02. Uses requiring review.
Prior to the establishment of a use, addition to an existing use, or the
erection of any building in a zoning district, a site plan shall be submitted
and approved by the City in accordance with the procedures of this article,
and the development requirements of this and other applicable ordinances.
A. Site plan review is required to provide the City of Lapeer with the
opportunity to review the proposed use of a site in relation to
surrounding uses, planned future development, accessibility,
pedestrian and vehicular circulation, street traffic, spatial
relationships, off-street parking, public utilities, general drainage,
environmental characteristics and other site elements which may affect
the public health, safety, and general welfare, and its relationship and
harmony with City ordinances and plans.
B. It is further the intent of this article to require the eventual upgrade of
existing sites that do not conform with current standards of this article
and ensure that the arrangement, location, design and materials within
a site are consistent with the character of the City and the goals and
design guidelines in the Master Plan.
A. Site plan and administrative site plan reviews and approvals shall be
required for the activities or uses listed in Table 7.18.1. Approvals are
obtained from the Planning Commission, City Commission, Planning
Department or Building Official depending upon the nature of the
proposed construction or use. Where City Commission approval is
required, it shall be based upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
B. All applications for site plan or administrative site plan approval shall
be reviewed by the Planning Department for compliance with the
standards of the respective departments.
C. Activities and uses that are exempt from site plan/administrative site
plan approval may require a building permit, zoning permit or sign
permit.
(1) Any change in use of an existing building or site requires a zoning
permit. The zoning review process may identify additional review
requirements.
(2) All construction or building modification is subject to City building
permit requirements in accordance with Article XXI,
Administration and Enforcement.
§ 7-18.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18.02
1:299
D. Site preparation work shall not commence until site plan approval has
been received and the required permits have been issued.
Table 7.18.1: Plan Review Requirements
New
Construction Expansion Change in Use
Single-family
dwelling on an
existing lot
Zoning and/or
building
permits
Zoning and
building permits
Zoning permit
Multiple-family
development
Site plan
approval and
building permit
Site plan
approval and
building permit
Zoning permit
Commercial,
industrial, or
institutional
Site plan
approval and
building permit
Major expansion:
site plan
Minor expansion:
administrative
site plan
Also, building
permit
Zoning permit
Special land
use (SLU)
SLU and site
plan approval
SLU and site
plan approval
SLU (if
applicable) and
site plan
Planned unit
development
Procedures for approval of PUDs are outlined in
Article XII, Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
Subdivision or
condominium
Procedures for approval of subdivision plats and
condominiums are outlined in Chapter 6, Land
Division, and Chapter 10, Condominiums,
respectively, of the Code of the City of Lapeer
Parking lot Site plan
approval
Major expansion:
site plan
Minor expansion:
administrative
site plan
Zoning permit
Residential
accessory
structures and
uses
Zoning and/or
building
permits
Zoning and
building permits
Zoning permit
Commercial,
industrial, or
institutional
accessory uses
or structures
Zoning and/or
building
permits
Administrative
site plan and/or
building permit
Zoning permit
§ 7-18.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-18.02
1:300
§ 7-18.03. Site plan and administrative site plan review procedures.
Site plans and administrative site plans must be submitted in accordance
with the following procedures and requirements:
Table 7.18.1: Plan Review Requirements
New
Construction Expansion Change in Use
Essential
service
N/A N/A N/A
Signs Sign permit Sign permit N/A
Landscaping Site plan
approval
Administrative
site plan
N/A
A. Submittal. The application shall be submitted by the owner of an
interest in the land for which site plan approval is sought, or the
designated agent of the owner, or with a statement signed by the owner
granting permission from the property owner for the application. The
application shall include the following:
(1) A complete application form, with original signatures.
(2) Proof of ownership.
(3) A written use statement.
(4) The required fee, as established by the City Commission.
(5) A complete site plan that includes the information as detailed in the
site plan application. Information requirements may be waived by
the Planning Commission if they determine they are not necessary
to verify compliance with this chapter's requirements.
B. Administrative review. The process for administrative review of a site
plan shall involve submittal of the site plan and required application
form and fee to the Planning Department. The Planning Department
shall review the site plan in accordance with the same standards used
by the Planning Commission for a full site plan. Information
requirements may be waived by the Planning Department if the
Department determines they are not necessary to verify compliance
with this chapter's requirements. The Planning Department shall make
a report of administrative reviews to the Planning Commission.
C. Planning Commission review.
(1) Application and review. Following Planning Department review, site
plans requiring Planning Commission approval shall be placed on
the agenda of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall review the application, together with the reports and
§ 7-18.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18.03
1:301
recommendations from the Planning Department and other
reviewing departments and agencies, as appropriate.
(2) Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall make
a determination based on the requirements and standards of this
chapter and Planning Department review letter to approve,
approve with conditions, postpone a decision, or deny approval of
the plan. If approved, any conditions shall be made part of the
motion to approve and documented in the Planning Commission's
minutes, a copy of which shall be provided to the applicant.
D. Recording of site plan review action. The site plan shall be revised to
reflect any conditions of approval and submitted to the Planning
Department. Copies of the approved site plan will be filed with the
Planning Department, including digital files of the approved plan.
E. Electronic drawings. Digital files of the approved plans shall be
submitted to the Building Department. The files shall be compatible
with the City's geographic information system (GIS) software.
Information on acceptable data formats are available from the Planning
Department. Acceptable data formats are ESRI geobase (preferred),
DXF, or DWG. Digital files shall contain information which references
either government corners or existing public right-of-way intersections
in distance and direction from the project area. All digital files will be
created at a one-to-one scale. Feature or element information within the
digital files shall be isolated by both feature groups (files) and layers/
levels to meet the City's level specification. Any other information
provided within the digital files shall be layer isolated from data
included in the City's specification and shall include a written
description of both the layer name and the information contained on the
layer(s). Digital information provided to the City shall be delivered in a
format compatible with the Microsoft Windows operating system.
Acceptable delivery media shall be CD-RW, or Zip disk.
F. Other agency approvals. The applicant shall obtain all other necessary
agency permits from other appropriate agencies, including, but not
limited to, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ),
Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and other federal,
state and county agencies, as applicable. Copies of applications for all
applicable outside agencies shall accompany submission of the
application and site plan to the City and approvals shall be obtained
prior to the issuance of building permits, and before any substantial
development activity takes place.
G. Engineering review. Following Planning Commission approval of a site
plan, the City shall make a full review of the engineering plans. A
building permit shall not be issued without the approval of the City.
H. Building permit. An application for a building permit may be submitted
following final approval of the site plan, or sketch plan and engineering
§ 7-18.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-18.03
1:302
§ 7-18.04. Standards for site plan approval.
Based upon the following standards, the Planning Commission may deny,
approve, or approve with conditions the site plan:
plans. The applicant is responsible for obtaining all other applicable
City, county, or state permits before a building permit is received.
I. As-built drawings. Digital files of as-built drawings shall be submitted to
the City meeting the format requirements noted in Subsection E above.
J. Property maintenance. The owner of a property shall be responsible for
maintaining the property on a continuing basis as required by the
approved site plan until the property is razed, until new zoning
regulations supersede the regulations upon which site approval was
based, or until a new site plan approval is sought. Any physical changes
to the site shall require approval of the City under the requirements of
this chapter. This maintenance requirement includes healthy
landscaping, walls, fences, pavement, pavement markings, signs,
building exterior, drainage facilities and all other elements of a site. Any
property owner who fails to maintain a property in compliance with an
approved site plan shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and a
nuisance per se.
A. Use. The proposed use must be permitted in the zoning district and
meet all of the applicable use standards.
B. Site design characteristics. All elements of the site plan shall be
designed to take into account the site's topography; the size and type of
lot; the character of adjoining property; the type and size of buildings;
and the traffic operations of adjacent streets. The site shall be
developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or
improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this article.
The site shall be designed to conform to all provisions of this article.
C. Building design. The building design shall relate to the surrounding
environment in regard to texture, scale, mass, proportion and color.
High standards of construction and quality materials will be
incorporated into the new development in accordance with the
requirements of § 7-15.01, Building appearance.
D. Preservation of significant natural features. The landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
and soil removal, alteration to the natural drainage courses, and the
amount of cutting, filling and grading. Insofar as practical, natural
features and the site topography shall be incorporated into the
proposed site design.
E. Site access, circulation and parking. Safe, convenient, uncongested and
well-defined vehicular circulation within and to the site shall be
provided.
§ 7-18.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18.04
1:303
(1) Access to the site shall be designed to minimize conflicts with
traffic on adjacent streets, particularly left turns into and from the
site. All driveways shall meet the design and construction
standards of the City and/or Lapeer County, as applicable. Cross
circulation in the form of shared driveways, service drives or
parking lot connections shall be provided with adjacent uses where
required.
(2) The number, design and location of access driveways and parking
lot design elements including number of spaces required and
loading/unloading requirements, shall comply with the provisions
of Article XVI, Parking, Loading, Access and Circulation
Requirements.
(3) Properties along M-24 must conform to Article XI, M-24 Overlay
District.
F. Emergency vehicle access. All buildings and site circulation shall be
arranged to permit emergency vehicle access by practicable means to
all buildings and areas of the site. Vehicle circulation shall meet turning
radius requirements set by the fire department. Fire lanes shall be
designated on the site and posted with signage by the developer/
property owner at the developer's/property owner's expense prior to
occupancy. Fire hydrants, fire-suppression systems, fire detection and
fire extinguishers shall be provided as required by the fire department.
G. Traffic impact. The expected volume of traffic to be generated by the
proposed use shall not adversely affect existing streets and traffic
patterns. Street access shall minimize excessive vehicle traffic on local
streets to reduce the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent
property. To determine traffic impact, the Planning Commission may
require a traffic study based on the criteria in the United States
Department of Transportation guide "Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies:
A Recommended Practice for Michigan Communities."
H. Other general development requirements. The standards set forth in
Article XV, General Site Development Requirements, § 7-15.04, shall be
complied with for various site design elements including (but not
necessarily limited to) the following:
(1) Landscaping, landscape buffers and greenbelts.
(2) Pedestrian circulation.
(3) Exterior lighting.
(4) Waste receptacles.
(5) Mechanical equipment and utilities.
I. Utilities and stormwater management. Public water supply and sewer
facilities shall be available or shall be provided for by the developer as
§ 7-18.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-18.04
1:304
§ 7-18.05. Conditions of site plan approval.
§ 7-18.06. Validity of approved plans.
part of the site development. All utilities and stormwater management
facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
J. Other agency reviews. The applicant shall provide documentation of
compliance with other appropriate agency review standards, including,
but not limited to, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
(MDEQ), Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and other
federal, state and county agencies, as applicable.
K. Hazardous materials. Sites that include storage of hazardous materials
or waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals shall be designed to prevent spills and
discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the ground,
groundwater or nearby surface water bodies. These areas shall be
designed to meet all applicable state and federal regulations and
incorporate basic management practices for the handling of hazardous
materials. Uses that involve the storage of large quantities of hazardous
or combustible materials shall be located and designed to ensure no
threat to nearby uses and residents is present.
L. Other studies. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to
require other studies and materials be submitted to confirm compliance
with the standards of this section including, but not limited to, traffic
impact studies, market studies, environmental assessments or utility
capacity analysis.
A. As part of an approval of any site plan, the Planning Commission may
impose any additional conditions or limitations as may be necessary to
ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land
use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and
facility loads caused by the land use or activity.
B. Conditions may also be imposed to protect the natural environment and
conserve natural resources and energy; to ensure compatibility with
adjacent uses of land; and to promote the use of land in a socially and
economically desirable manner. Such conditions shall be considered
necessary by the Planning Commission to ensure compliance with the
review standards, and necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this
article.
C. The conditions imposed on approval of a site plan run with the property
and not with the owner of such property.
D. A record of conditions imposed shall be recorded in the minutes
attached to the approved site plan and maintained by the City. The
conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the site
plan is approved by the Planning Commission.
§ 7-18.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18.06
1:305
§ 7-18.07. Amendment to approved plans.
Amendments to the approved site plan may occur only under the following
circumstances:
A. Start of construction. Site plan approval is valid for a period of one year
from the date of approval. Building permits must be issued and physical
construction must commence within the one-year period.
B. Expiration of site plan approval. In cases where construction authorized
by a site plan approval has not commenced within one year of site plan
approval or granting of an extension, the site plan approval shall
automatically become null and void and all rights thereunder shall
terminate.
C. Extensions. Upon written application prior to expiration, the Planning
Commission may authorize an extension of the time limit of the site plan
approval for up to an additional one year. The extension shall be based
on evidence from the applicant that the development has a likelihood of
commencing construction within the extension period. The Planning
Commission may require compliance with any amendments to the
Zoning Ordinance since the site plan was originally approved.
A. Minor changes. Prior to making any change to an approved site plan/
administrative site plan, the applicant or property owner shall notify the
Planning Department of any desired change. The Planning Department
shall review the request and determine whether the requested change
is minor or major. The following shall be considered minor changes:
(1) Movement of a building or buildings by no more than five feet,
provided all setback, parking, landscaping and other site
requirements are still met.
(2) Plantings approved in the landscape plan may be replaced by
similar types and sizes of landscaping which provides a similar
screening effect on an equal or greater basis.
(3) Trees to be preserved that were damaged or lost during
construction may be replaced by trees of a similar species, with two
new trees required for each tree replaced.
(4) Improvements to site access or circulation, such as deceleration
lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths, but not the
addition of new driveways.
(5) Changes of building materials or design, fencing, screening, or site
amenities which will result in a higher-quality development, as
determined by the Planning Department.
(6) Changes required or requested by the City, county, state or federal
agency for safety reasons or for compliance with applicable laws
§ 7-18.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-18.07
1:306
that do not alter the basic design, compliance with the standards of
approval, nor any specified conditions of the approved site plan.
(7) Situations the Planning Department deems similar to the above
that do not alter the basic design, compliance with the standards of
approval, nor any specified conditions of the approved site plan.
B. Major changes. All other changes not considered minor shall be
considered a major change requiring a new application for site plan
review.
§ 7-18.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18.07
1:307

ARTICLE XIX
Special Land Use Review
§ 7-19.01. Intent.
This article is intended to provide regulations for special land uses, which
may be compatible with permitted uses in zoning district, under specific
locational and site criteria. This article provides standards for the Planning
Commission to determine the appropriateness of a given special land use
covering factors such as: compatibility with adjacent zoning, location,
design, size, intensity of use, impact on traffic operations, potential impact
on groundwater, demand on public facilities and services, equipment used
and processes employed. Establishment or major expansion of any special
land use requires a special land use approval under this article.
§ 7-19.02. Procedures.
A. Application. A public hearing shall be scheduled before the Planning
Commission upon submission and review of a special land use
application and either a site plan meeting the requirements of Article
XVIII, Site Plan Review, or if a full site plan is determined to be
unnecessary by the Planning Department, a plot plan with all
information needed to determine compliance with ordinance
requirements.
B. Optional preliminary review. At the option of the applicant, a
preliminary sketch plan may be submitted to the Planning Department
for circulation to Planning Commission for review prior to final special
land use and site plan review. This option is recommended for special
land uses that are anticipated to be controversial, on large sites, on
sites that are adjacent to residential uses, and complex mixed-use or
commercial developments. The purpose of this meeting is to allow the
applicant to introduce the plan concept, and receive comments or
direction from the Planning Commission on the sketch plan and special
land use or the need for additional material to evaluate the impacts of
the use, such as a traffic or environmental study. No formal action shall
be taken.
C. Impact assessment. An impact assessment may be required by the City;
the analysis shall be carried out by qualified individuals and may
include, but need not be limited to, the impact on: natural features,
stormwater management, surrounding land uses, public facilities/
services, public utilities and traffic.
D. Planning Commission review.
(1) Review. The Planning Commission shall review the special land use
application and related documents, any specific conditions
required for the use in Article XIII, Use Requirements, and the site
plan review standards of § 7-18.04, Standards for site plan
approval.
§ 7-19.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19.02
1:309
(2) Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the special land use application in accordance with the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006).18 Notice of
public hearing shall be provided for in accordance with § 7-21.07,
Public hearings.
(3) Decision.
(a) The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with
conditions or deny the special land use request and site plan. If
the application is determined to be incomplete or more
information is required, then the Planning Commission may
either:
[1] Table the request and direct the applicant to prepare
additional information or revise the plan.
[2] Return the request for additional staff review or analysis.
[3] Deny the request.
(b) If the plan revisions are determined to be significant by the
Planning Commission, they may elect to conduct another
public hearing.
E. Conditions.
(1) In considering the special land use, the Planning Commission may
impose conditions or limitations that it deems necessary to fulfill
the spirit and/or purpose of this chapter. The conditions imposed
with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be
recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain
unchanged unless the original process is followed. Conditions
imposed shall do all the following:
(a) Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety,
and welfare as well as the social and economic well-being of
those who will use the land use or activity under consideration,
residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the
proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
(b) Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and
purposes that are affected by the proposed use or activity.
(c) Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance; be related to the standards established in this
chapter for the land use or activity under consideration; and be
necessary to ensure compliance with those standards.
(2) Conditions of any approval are attached to the land and will remain
through subsequent owners, except an expiration date for the
18.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 7-19.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-19.02
1:310
§ 7-19.03. Appeals and waivers.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to hear appeals
of the Planning Commission's decision to approve or deny a special land
use, nor to grant variances to any conditions imposed on special land use
approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals may hear requests for variances to
dimensional or site design requirements.
§ 7-19.04. Review standards.
Prior to approving a special land use application, the Planning Commission
shall require that the following general standards, in addition to the specific
standards noted for individual uses in Article XIII, Use Requirements, be
satisfied. The proposed use or activity shall:
§ 7-19.05. Amendments, expansions and change in use.
special land use may be specified if the special land use is
considered to be temporary in nature.
A. Be compatible and in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies
of the Lapeer City Master Plan.
B. Promote the intent of this chapter and the zoning district in which the
use is proposed.
C. Be constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible with
the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and so as not
to change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed.
D. Be served adequately by public facilities and services, such as traffic
operations along roads, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
water and sewage facilities and primary and secondary schools.
E. Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment or
conditions of operation that, in comparison to permitted uses in the
district, will be detrimental to the natural environment, public health,
safety or welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, odors or other such nuisance.
A. Major amendments. Any person or agency who has been granted a
special land use permit shall notify the Planning Department of any
proposed amendment to the approved site plan of the special land use
permit. A major amendment to a special land use permit shall require
submittal of a new application for special land use and follow the review
procedures contained in this chapter. The Planning Department shall
determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a minor or
major amendment based on the following standards:
(1) Changes that increase the building's usable floor area, occupancy
load or capacity by more than 25%.
§ 7-19.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19.05
1:311
§ 7-19.06. Restrictions on resubmittal of special land use request.
No application for a special land use permit which has been denied wholly
or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed
conditions relating to all of the reasons noted for the denial found to be valid
by the Planning Commission. A resubmitted application shall be considered
a new application.
§ 7-19.07. Validity of permit.
(2) Parking lots are expanded by more than 25%.
(3) The use is expanded to occupy an additional 25% or more land
area.
(4) The change will result in a 25% or more increase in traffic
generation based upon the latest edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual.
(5) The change will result in a 25% or more increase in the demand for
public water or sewer.
(6) The standards set forth in § 7-18.07, Amendment to approved
plans.
(7) Other similar types of changes deemed by the Planning
Department to be "major."
B. Minor amendment. Minor amendment to an approved special land use
does not require submittal of a new application for a special land use,
but may require submittal of a site plan or sketch plan following the
requirements of Article XVIII, Site Plan Review.
C. Change in use. Change to another special land use shall require
submittal of a new application for special land use and follow the review
procedures contained in this article.
D. Separate approval. A separate special land use permit shall be required
for each use which requires special land use review on a lot.
A. Start of construction. Special land use approval is valid for a period of
one year from the date of Planning Commission approval. A building
permit must be issued and physical construction on structures must
commence within that period.
B. Expiration of special land use permit. Where actual construction of a
substantial nature of structures authorized by a special land use permit
has not commenced within one year of issuance, and a written
application for extension of the approval has not been filed as provided
below, the special land use permit shall become null and void and all
rights thereunder shall terminate.
§ 7-19.05 LAPEER CODE § 7-19.07
1:312
§ 7-19.08. Revocation of approved special land use.
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to revoke any special
land use approval after the applicant has failed to comply with any of
the applicable requirements of this article, other applicable sections of
this chapter, or conditions of the special land use approval. Prior to any
action, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing following
the notification process for the original approval. The applicant shall be
provided an opportunity to present information and to answer questions.
The Planning Commission may revoke any previous approval if it finds that
a violation exists and has not been remedied.
C. Extensions. Upon written application filed prior to the termination of
the one-year period as provided above, the Planning Commission may
authorize a single extension of the time limit for a further period of not
more than one year. Such extension shall be granted only based on
evidence from the applicant that the development has a reasonable
likelihood of commencing construction within the one-year extension.
The Planning Commission may require compliance with any
amendments to the Zoning Ordinance since the special land use was
originally approved.
§ 7-19.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19.08
1:313

ARTICLE XX
Nonconformities
§ 7-20.01. Intent.
§ 7-20.02. Class A and Class B nonconforming uses or structures.
Although it is the intent of this chapter to discourage the continuation
of nonconforming uses and structures, it is recognized that allowing the
continuation of certain nonconformities may be appropriate. To address
these circumstances, the Zoning Ordinance establishes procedures for the
Planning Commission to designate specific nonconforming uses or
structures as "Class A." Such uses or structures will have less stringent
standards for expansion or resumption.
A. It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming lots,
structures, or uses to continue until they are removed but not to
encourage their survival.
B. For definitions and illustrations of nonconforming lots, structures, and
uses, see Article XXIV, Definitions.
A. Class A nonconforming uses or structures.
(1) Effect of Class A designation.
(a) Class A nonconforming uses may be reestablished if the
structure housing it is damaged or destroyed.
(b) Class A nonconforming uses may be reestablished when
otherwise meeting the criteria in § 7-20.07, Standards for
determining abandonment. The Class A nonconforming use
may not be reestablished if it is replaced with a conforming
use.
(c) Class A nonconforming uses, structures housing
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures may be
expanded or improved, after review and approval by the
Planning Commission.
(d) Class A nonconforming structures may be rebuilt if the
structure is damaged or destroyed.
(e) Rights granted nonconforming uses and structures listed
above are contingent on compliance with any standards
imposed by the Planning Commission as part of the Class A
designation, including compliance with any approved site plan.
(2) Class A designation process.
(a) An applicant for Class A designation shall submit a request in
writing to the Planning Department.
§ 7-20.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20.02
1:315
§ 7-20.03. Nonconforming lots.
(b) Notice of a public hearing shall be provided as outlined in
§ 7-21.07 of this chapter.
(c) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
Class A designation.
(d) The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with
conditions or deny the request for Class A designation.
(e) The Planning Commission may impose conditions on an
approval. The condition may include compliance with a site
plan of the site.
(3) Standards for approval of Class A designation. In order to approve
a use for Class A designation, the use or structure must have been
lawful at its inception. In addition, the following criteria shall be
used by the Planning Commission in evaluating a use to determine
if continuation of the use or structure would be appropriate:
(a) Continuance of the use or structure does not significantly
depress property values of nearby properties.
(b) Continuance of the use or structure would not be contrary to
the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit of the chapter.
(c) No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the
provisions of this chapter with which the use or structure does
not conform.
(d) The property cannot be reasonably used as currently zoned.
(4) Revocation of Class A designation.
(a) Revocation of a Class A designation may be initiated by the
Planning Department or the Planning Commission.
(b) Revocation of Class A designation shall comply with the
procedures outlined in § 7-20.02A(2) of this chapter.
(c) Class A designation may only be revoked if the nonconforming
use or structure violated a condition of approval.
B. Class B nonconforming uses or structures. All nonconforming uses or
structures, not designated Class A, shall be Class B, nonconforming
uses or structures. Class B nonconforming uses and structures shall
comply with all the provisions of this chapter relative to nonconforming
uses and structures set forth hereinafter.
A. Single-family dwellings. In any district in which single-family dwellings
are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions
of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date
§ 7-20.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-20.03
1:316
§ 7-20.04. Nonconforming uses of land.
Except as provided under the provisions of § 7-20.02, where, at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that
is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted
or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply
even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width,
or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard
dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width or both,
of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such
lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Changes in nonconforming lots. A nonconforming lot may not be
modified in a way that increases its nonconformity.
C. Contiguous nonconforming lots. Where two or more nonconforming lots
of record are adjacent and under the same ownership as of the date of
this chapter, they shall be considered one parcel and may not be divided
except in compliance with this chapter.
D. Determining lots of record. The City Assessor shall have the power to
make "Lot of Record" determinations in accordance with the following:
(1) Upon application of any person claiming to be the owner of the
legal or equitable title to a parcel of land which was the subject to a
deed or land contract, not recorded in the Office of the Register of
Deeds on the effective date of this chapter, the City Assessor is
authorized to determine whether an owner is entitled to have the
parcel treated as a "Lot of Record" in accordance with § 7-20.03A of
this chapter.
(2) The City Assessor shall allow the parcel to be treated as a "Lot of
Record" when he/she finds by a preponderance of the evidence that
the instrument purporting to transfer title to the parcel of said
owner was executed prior to the effective date of this chapter. In
making his/her determination, the Assessor is authorized to
consider all matters it deems relevant, including but not limited to
the tax roll of the City, the relationship of the parties to the
purported transfer, the degree of formality of the purported
document of transfer, and the testimony of the applicant and his
witnesses.
(3) Such a determination shall have only the effect of equating such an
owner with the owner of a lot of record and shall not relieve such
owner from complying with the other conditions set forth in this
chapter.
§ 7-20.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20.04
1:317
§ 7-20.05. Nonconforming structures.
Except as provided under the provisions of § 7-20.02, where a lawful
structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of
the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. Expansion. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased,
nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. Expansion
includes the addition of accessory structures, including signs.
B. Moving use. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
C. Abandonment. A use that the ZBA has determined is abandoned
following the standards in § 7-20.07 of this chapter shall not be
reestablished and any new use must comply with the Zoning Ordinance.
D. Change in use. A nonconforming use of land may be changed to another
nonconforming use of land use that the ZBA has determined is not more
nonconforming than the current use following the standards in
§ 7-20.08 of this chapter and does not require expansion of the area of
land used for the use. A nonconforming use that changes to a
conforming use may not revert back to a nonconforming use.
E. Medical marihuana nonconforming use. [Added 2-19-2018]
(1) No marihuana facility operating or purporting to operate prior to
February 19, 2018, shall be deemed to have been a legally existing
use, nor shall the operation of such marihuana facility be deemed a
legal nonconforming use under this chapter.
(2) A property owner shall not have vested rights or nonconforming
use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with this
chapter or any amendment thereto.
(3) Discontinuation of a state medical marihuana facility license shall
constitute prima facie evidence that a nonconformity has been
discontinued.
A. Definition of structure. For the purpose of this section:
STRUCTURE — Includes both permanent physical improvements such
as buildings and fences, and other improvements such as driveway,
parking spaces and landscaping.
B. Expansion or alteration. No nonconforming structure may be enlarged
or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. An increase in
nonconformity would be a change that increases the bulk of the
§ 7-20.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-20.05
1:318
§ 7-20.06. Nonconforming uses of structures and land.
Except as provided under the provisions of § 7-20.02, if a lawful use of a
structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be permitted
in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be
structure encroaching on setbacks or exceeding maximum height or lot
coverage requirements. Nonconforming structures may be enlarged or
altered in a way which does not increase its nonconformity. (See Figure
20-1.)
C. Moving structure. Should such structure be moved for any reason for
any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for
the district in which it is located after it is removed.
D. Destruction of structure. Should such structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than 60% of its replacement costs, exclusive
of the foundations, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. This provision does not apply to
nonconforming single-family homes, which may be replaced even if
completely destroyed, provided the new structure does not increase the
nonconformity. Construction to repair or replace a nonconforming
structure must commence within one year of its destruction.
§ 7-20.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20.06
1:319
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
§ 7-20.07. Standards for determining abandonment.
If the Planning Department identifies a legal nonconforming use that they
believe has been abandoned, they shall submit the property to the ZBA
for a determination of abandonment. The ZBA shall hold a public hearing,
following notice as outlined in § 7-21.07 of this chapter. The ZBA shall
determine whether or not intent to abandon the nonconforming use was
demonstrated based on a preponderance of the following factors:
A. Expansion or alteration. No existing structure devoted to a use not
permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally
altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in
the district in which it is located.
B. Extending use. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout
any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for
such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of
this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any additional
land outside such building.
C. Change in use. A nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
land in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of
land use that the ZBA has determined is not more nonconforming than
the current use following the standards in § 7-20.08 of this chapter and
does not require expansion of the area of land used for the use. A
nonconforming use that changes to a conforming use may not revert
back to a nonconforming use.
D. Abandonment. A use that the ZBA has determined is abandoned
following the standards in § 7-20.07 of this chapter shall not be
reestablished and any new use must comply with the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Destruction of structure. Where nonconforming use status applies to a
structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the
structure to an extent of more than 60% of its replacement costs,
exclusive of the foundations shall eliminate the nonconforming status of
the land. Construction to repair or replace a structure housing a
nonconforming use must commence within one year of its destruction.
A. Reports such as from the building inspection or health department
indicating the property is or has not been suitable for occupation.
B. Disconnection of utilities.
C. Evidence that the use was relocated to a new site.
D. Evidence of a "going out of business" sale.
E. Signs advertising the business has been removed.
§ 7-20.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-20.07
1:320
§ 7-20.08. Standards for allowing change in nonconforming use.
A property owner may request approval from the ZBA to change a
nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. The ZBA shall hold a
public hearing following notice as outlined in § 7-21.07 of this chapter. The
ZBA shall approve the request if it determines that the proposed use is not
more nonconforming than the current use based on the following factors:
§ 7-20.09. Repairs and maintenance.
§ 7-20.10. Status of uses requiring special land use approval.
A use established legally without special land use approval which now
requires SLU approval due to a text change or rezoning is a nonconforming
use until it receives SLU approval. Any existing use approved as a special
exception previously under this chapter shall be deemed a conforming use.
F. The use has been discontinued for one year, except where government
action such as road construction has prevented access to the premises,
or where a clear intent to discontinue has not been demonstrated.
G. Removal of the equipment or fixtures necessary for the operation of the
nonconforming use.
H. Request by the property owner for changes in their property tax
designation inconsistent with the nonconforming use.
I. Other actions by the property owner or lessee that demonstrates an
intent to abandon the nonconforming use.
A. The similarity of zoning districts each use is permitted in and whether
they are permitted by right or by special land use (SLU).
B. The anticipated off-site impact of each use due to traffic, hours of
operation, and generation of noise, dust or odors or general intensity of
the proposed use.
A. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use,
work may be done in any period of one year on ordinary repairs, or on
repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing
to an extent not exceeding 50% of the assessed value of the building,
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time
of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.
§ 7-20.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20.11
1:321
§ 7-20.11. Change of tenancy or ownership.
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any
existing nonconforming uses of land, of structures or of structures and land
in combination.
§ 7-20.12. Purchase or condemnation.
In order to accomplish the elimination of nonconforming uses and
structures which constitute a nuisance or are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, the City of Lapeer, pursuant to Section 208,
Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended,19 may, but is not required to, acquire
by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, private property for the purpose
of removal of nonconforming uses.
19.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3208.
§ 7-20.11 LAPEER CODE § 7-20.12
1:322
ARTICLE XXI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 7-21.01. Purpose.
It is the intent of this article to establish the roles and responsibilities
of those involved in administration of this Zoning Ordinance, to provide
for issuance of zoning permits, to establish rules for enforcement of this
chapter and to establish penalties for its violation.
§ 7-21.02. Responsibilities in Zoning Ordinance enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by Planning
Department. The Planning Department may delegate its responsibilities for
administration or enforcement with the approval of the City Commission.
The table below outlines the other roles and responsibilities of the Planning
Department, Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), City
Commission and City Clerk under this chapter.
Table 7.21.1: Administration and Enforcement Authority
Planning Department
Primary responsibility for administration of this chapter
Interpret the ordinance as needed to enforce the Zoning Ordinance
Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to the
chapter
Review and approve zoning permits, change of use
or for any improvements other than for singlefamily
dwellings and accessory structures on
existing lots
Determine if a use not specifically defined is
similar to another permitted use (§ 7-2.08)
Zoning Compliance
Conduct inspections for zoning compliance
Accept applications for site plans, special land use requests, rezonings,
text amendments, variances, appeals of administrative decisions and
interpretations
Review site plans for compliance, determine type
of review required, and forward to staff and
Planning Commission as needed
Maintain copies of approved site plans
Site Plan Review (per
Article XVIII)
Review minor changes to site plan for approval
Conduct optional preliminary review of special
Special Land Use (per land use requests
Article XIX) Review proposed amendments of special land use
requests and classify as major or minor
§ 7-21.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.02
1:323
Table 7.21.1: Administration and Enforcement Authority
Review applications for Class A nonconforming
status
Initiate revocation of Class A nonconforming
designation
Prepare recommendation on change in
nonconforming use
Nonconforming Lots,
Uses, and Structures
(per Article XX)
Submit determination of abandonment to ZBA
Authority to grant extensions on parking lot completion requirement
(§ 7-16.05)
Authority to require performance guarantees (§ 7-21.06)
Maintain record of ZBA interpretations (§ 7-22.05)
Determine the precise location of boundary lines between districts
Prepare recommendations on proposed rezoning and text amendments
Undertake other responsibilities as identified in this chapter or delegated
by the City Manager or City Commission
Building Official
Review and approve applications for zoning permits for fences (§ 7-15.03)
Review and approve applications for zoning permits for signs (§ 7-17.01)
Require removal of unsafe signs (Table 7.17.2)
Review and approve zoning permits for single-family dwellings and
accessory structures on existing lots
Conduct inspections for zoning compliance
Undertake other responsibilities as identified in this chapter or delegated
by the City Manager or City Commission
Planning Commission
Review and approve site plans, and major amendments to site plans
Hold public hearings for, review and approve special land use requests,
amendments and revocations
Hold public hearings and make recommendations on map and text
amendments to Zoning Ordinance
Hold public hearings for, review and approve requests for Class A
Nonconforming status
Approve change of nonconforming use to another nonconforming use
Consult with Planning Department on initial interpretation of Zoning
Ordinance text and map
Grant exceptions to landscaping provisions [§ 7-15.02B(2)]
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 7-21.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-21.02
1:324
Table 7.21.1: Administration and Enforcement Authority
Review and decide requests for variances
Review and decide appeals of administrative decisions
Review request for interpretations from the Planning Department and
Planning Commission or hear appeals of initial determinations by
Planning Department and Planning Commission
Make determination of abandonment (§ 7-20.07)
City Commission
Approve appointment of ZBA members
Approve appointment of Planning Commission members
Establish fee schedule for permits and reviews
Approve text and map amendments to Zoning Ordinance
Initiate amendments to the Zoning Ordinance
City Clerk
Receive request from any utility, railroad, or airport that wishes notice of
zoning amendments [Sec. 306(2) of PA 110].20
Maintain file of zoning ordinance and all amendments [Sec. 401(7) of PA
110].21
Receive petition to rescind zoning ordinance and determine adequacy of
petition [Sec. 402(2) and (3) of PA 110].22
Handle any performance guarantees deposited [Sec. 505(1) of PA 110].23
Receive protest petition [Sec. 403(1) of PA 110].24
Handle posting and mailing all public notices
§ 7-21.03. Zoning permits.
A. Permit required.
(1) A zoning permit must be obtained from the Planning Department or
Building Official as applicable before:
(a) Any construction is undertaken;
(b) Any structure is moved;
(c) A structure is moved on to any parcel.
20.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3306(2).
21.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3401(7).
22.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3402(2) and (3).
23.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3505(1).
24.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.340(1).
§ 7-21.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.03
1:325
(2) A zoning permit must be obtained from the Planning Department
before any change in the use of any land or structure or change in
occupancy is undertaken.
(3) For use requiring site plan approval, that approval takes the place
of a zoning permit. For structures or improvements that require a
building permit, the zoning permit may be incorporated into the
building permit, but structures such as fences or small accessory
buildings that do not require a building permit still require a zoning
permit.
B. Application. A zoning permit shall be applied for in writing on an
application form provided by the City. The application will include a plot
plan of the subject parcel adequate to determine compliance with this
chapter.
C. Standards for permit issuance.
(1) A zoning permit shall be issued by Planning Department or
Building Official whenever the proposed use:
(a) Complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Any necessary Planning Commission, ZBA, City Commission, or
other local, state or federal approvals have been obtained.
(c) When a structure shall be moved, the site from which the
structure has been moved shall be graded level and all debris
shall be cleared away.
(2) A permit shall not be refused when conditions imposed by this
chapter are complied with by the applicant despite violations of
contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may
occur upon the granting of said permit.
D. Approval process.
(1) The Planning Department/Building Official shall make a decision
within five business days of receiving a complete zoning permit
application.
(2) The Planning Department/Building Official shall issue the zoning
permit or a letter explaining the reason(s) for denial of the
application.
(3) A structure requiring a zoning permit shall not be issued a building
permit until the zoning permit has been issued.
(4) The Planning Department/Building Official shall maintain a record
of all zoning permit applications.
(5) The Planning Department/Building Official shall inspect the site
prior to issuing final zoning approval. A building certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Official until
§ 7-21.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-21.03
1:326
§ 7-21.04. Enforcement procedures.
compliance with the zoning permit has been verified by the
Building Official. In the case of multi-unit structures such as
shopping centers, zoning approval and certificate of occupancy
may be granted on an individual unit basis, provided any project
wide improvements such as parking lots or entrances have been
completed in compliance with the chapter.
E. Expiration. A zoning permit shall expire one year after the date of
issuance unless the applicant has been issued a building permit. For
zoning permits that do not involve construction such as a permit
approving the change in the use of a building, the permit shall expire
one year after the date of issuance unless the proposed use has been
commenced within that period.
F. Revocation of permits. Any zoning permit issued in error or pursuant to
an application containing any false statements shall be void. The
Building Official shall revoke a zoning permit for failure to comply with
the terms of the permit.
A. Reporting violations. The Planning Department shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any and all building or land use activities
considered possible violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
communicated to the Planning Department. Variation or deficiencies
from an approved site plan shall be considered a violation of this
chapter. Commencement of an investigation into a violation is based
upon a complaint received verbally or in writing. Violations reported to
the Planning Department and/or their assigns shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures below.
B. Inspection and enforcement procedure. If the Planning Department
receives a complaint or identifies a potential violation, the following
procedures shall be followed:
(1) Inspection of violation. The Planning Department, Building Official,
or ordinance enforcement officer, as appropriate, shall inspect each
alleged violation of this chapter within 10 working days of receipt
of a complaint.
(2) Correction period; requirements of notice. If a violation is
determined to have occurred, a notice of the violation shall be sent
in writing by certified mail addressed to the owner and/or occupant
of the property where the violation exists. If the occupant or owner
of the premises is unknown or cannot be located, notices shall be
given by posting a copy of said notice upon a conspicuous part of
the property where the nuisance is identified as being located and
by mailing a copy of said notice by certified and first-class mail,
addressed to the owner or party of interest at the address shown on
the current tax records. The notice shall specify the location and
nature of the violation and shall indicate that the owner, occupant
§ 7-21.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.04
1:327
§ 7-21.05. Fees.
The City Commission shall set all fees for permits and reviews required
under this chapter. The fees will be set by resolution. The City Commission
may revise the fees from time to time as they determine necessary. The City
Commission may also establish procedures for establishing escrow fees to
cover the cost of review of applications.
§ 7-21.06. Performance guarantees.
A performance guarantee may be required to ensure compliance with any
conditions imposed as part of zoning approval. The guarantee shall be
in a form acceptable to the City such as a cash deposit, certified check,
irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond.
or person otherwise responsible, is required to abate the violation
within 21 days. The time frame may be increased to a maximum of
60 days. The notice will advise the applicant's right to appeal the
administrative decision within 21 days of the date of the letter. For
projects under construction, the Planning Department may issue a
stop-work order if the violation requires such, or if the violation has
been previously noticed and has not been remedied.
(3) Noncompliance with order. A violation not corrected within the
specified time shall be referred to the City Attorney. The City
Attorney may undertake enforcement using the remedies outlined
in § 7-21.08 below.
(4) The Planning Department/Building Official may refuse to issue new
zoning permits to a person who has failed to correct violations or to
any person representing a firm, which has failed to correct
violations of this chapter. A zoning permit may also be withheld if
violations are identified on site upon application.
A. Calculation of guarantee. The guarantee shall equal 110% of the value
of the improvement as calculated by the City or its consultants. The
guarantee shall include a schedule of costs assigned to the different
improvements. If multiple guarantees are required for the same
project, each will be treated separately.
B. Deposit of guarantee. The guarantee shall be deposited with the City
prior to authorization for the work to proceed.
C. Release of funds. Monies may be released by the City to the applicant in
proportion to work completed on the different elements after inspection
of work and approval of the Planning Department. Any partial release of
funds shall be less than 10%, which shall be retained by the City until
all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved
by the Building Official and Planning Department.
D. Delay in improvements. In instances where all improvements, as
required in this section, are not completed, and a temporary certificate
§ 7-21.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-21.06
1:328
§ 7-21.07. Public hearings.
Notice of public hearings required under this chapter shall comply with the
following requirements:
of occupancy is requested, the estimated cost of the remaining
improvement shall be verified by the City, particularly with respect to
any delay to another construction season. If the estimated cost has
changed, then a revised guarantee, acceptable to the City, shall be
filed with the Clerk covering such improvements before a temporary
certificate of occupancy is issued.
A. Published notice. The City Clerk shall give notice of the public hearing
by publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City at least 15 days before the date of the public hearing.
B. Mailed notice. For hearings involving specific parcels of property, such
as rezonings or variance requests, the City Clerk shall give notice of the
public hearing by mail or personal delivery to the owners of the
property that is the subject of the public hearing, as well as to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the
property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the
property, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in
the City of Lapeer. Notification need not be given to more than one
occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than
one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons,
one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. If a
single structure contains more than four dwelling units or other distinct
spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given
to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to
post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The notice
shall be mailed or personally delivered not less than 15 days before the
hearing. The notice requirements of this subsection do not apply to
rezonings consisting of 11 or more adjacent parcels.
C. Notice to adjacent jurisdiction. For hearings involving specific parcels
of property, where the parcel is within 300 feet of the City boundary, the
City shall mail a notice to the Planning Commission Chairperson of the
adjacent municipality at least 15 days before the public hearing.
D. Notice content. Notices required under the provisions of this section
shall contain the following information:
(1) Describe the nature of the request.
(2) Where the request involves a specific parcel of property, the notice
will include a listing of all existing street addresses within the
property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no
such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no
street addresses, the tax parcel ID of the property and description
of its location shall be used.
§ 7-21.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21.07
1:329
§ 7-21.08. Violations.
(3) State when and where a copy of the request can be viewed.
(4) State when and where the request will be considered.
(5) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
A. Municipal civil infraction. Any person, firm, corporation, or anyone
acting on behalf of any person, firm, or corporation, who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall fail to comply with any
of the required conditions of the ZBA or the Planning Commission shall
be guilty of a municipal civil infraction as described in Chapter 62, Civil
Infractions, of the Code of the City of Lapeer. For the purposes of
Chapter 62, Planning Department staff shall be an authorized official.
B. Nuisance per se. Any building or structure which is used, erected,
altered, razed, or converted or any use of any premises which is begun
or changed and in violation of any provision of this chapter, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance per se.
C. Restore or replace. In addition to the other remedies available under
this chapter, an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government that violates this section may be
ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource
unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated,
neglected, or demolished.
D. Cumulative rights and remedies. The rights and remedies provided
herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided
by law.
E. Other remedies. The City Commission may institute injunction,
mandamus, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent,
enjoin, abate or remove any unlawful erection, alteration, maintenance
or use. The rights and remedies herein provided are civil in nature and
in addition to criminal remedies.
F. Compliance required. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt
the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
G. Stop-work order. Any person who shall continue any work in or about
the structure or premises after having been served with a stop-work
order, except such work as such person is directed by the Planning
Department to perform in order to remove violations or unsafe
conditions shall be in violation of this chapter. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
H. Each day a violation of the Zoning Ordinance continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
§ 7-21.07 LAPEER CODE § 7-21.08
1:330
ARTICLE XXII
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 7-22.01. Membership of Zoning Board of Appeals.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) which shall
perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Article VI of
Act 110 of 2006, as amended,25 and in such a way that the objectives
of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial
justice done. The Board shall consist of six members appointed by the City
Commission. Appointments shall be as follows: two members appointed for
a period of one year; two members appointed for a period of two years; and
two members appointed for a period of three years, respectively; thereafter,
each member to hold office for a full three-year term. In addition, the
City Commission may appoint two alternate members who may be called
upon to serve in the absence of a regular member, or for the purpose of
reaching a decision on a case in which a regular member has abstained for
reasons of conflict of interest. Any vacancies in the Board shall be filled by
appointment by the City Commission for the remainder of the unexpired
term. The ZBA shall annually elect its own Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Secretary. The compensation of the appointed members of the Board of
Zoning Appeals may be fixed by the City Commission.
§ 7-22.02. Procedures.
A. Applications. Application for variance, appeal, interpretation or
changes in nonconforming uses shall be submitted to the Planning
Department at least 20 days prior to the ZBA meeting at which it will be
heard. Application fees shall be established by the City Commission as
provided for in § 7-21.05 of this chapter.
B. Notice. Notice of the hearing of an appeal, variance, or other matter
before the ZBA shall comply with § 7-21.07 of this chapter.
C. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and
at such times as the ZBA may determine.
(2) The ZBA shall not conduct business unless a majority of the regular
or alternate members of the ZBA are present.
(3) All meetings of the ZBA shall be open to the public.
(4) The City Clerk or their representative shall keep minutes of the
ZBA proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its findings, decisions, evidence presented at
the hearing, proceedings at hearings and other official actions, all
of which shall be filed as soon as they are available in the office of
25.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3601 et seq.
§ 7-22.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22.02
1:331
the City Clerk and shall be a public record. Copies of the decisions
of the Board of Appeals shall be furnished to the City Commission
and Planning Commission.
(5) The ZBA shall adopt rules of procedure for the operation of the
Board and the conducting of hearings.
(6) The chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
D. Zoning Board of Appeals decision.
(1) Following the hearing on an issue brought before them, the ZBA
may only reverse an administrative decision or grant an applicant's
request by a majority vote of the members of the ZBA.
(2) In making a decision on a request, the ZBA shall state the basis for
their decision, including any findings of fact and how those facts
relate to the standards used by the ZBA in making their decision.
(3) The ZBA shall return a decision upon each case within 60 days of
the filing of a complete request application unless an extension is
agreed to by the applicant.
E. Conditions.
(1) The ZBA may place conditions on an affirmative decision when such
conditions:
(a) Would ensure that public services and facilities affected by a
proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating
increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or
activity.
(b) Would protect the natural environment and conserve natural
resources and energy.
(c) Would ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land.
(d) Would promote the use of land in a socially and economically
desirable manner.
(2) In determining appropriate conditions, the ZBA shall ensure that:
(a) There is a rough proportionality between the costs to the
developer to provide an improvement and the impact to be
mitigated.
(b) There is a reasonable connection between the condition
imposed and the impact it is mitigating.
(3) Performance guarantees. The ZBA may require performance
guarantees as a condition of approval as authorized in § 7-21.06 of
this chapter.
§ 7-22.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-22.02
1:332
§ 7-22.03. Powers of Zoning Board of Appeals.
The ZBA shall have the authority to:
§ 7-22.04. Variances.
F. Appeal of Zoning Board of Appeals decision. Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the ZBA in granting or denying a request may appeal the
decision to Circuit Court.
G. Resubmission. An applicant may not resubmit an application for one
year following a decision, unless a change in circumstances or new
facts relevant to the decision are presented.
A. Grant variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. Interpret the Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning Map.
C. Permit a legal nonconforming use of land or structures to be changed to
another nonconforming use under the procedures contained in
§ 7-20.08 of this chapter.
A. The ZBA shall have the power to authorize variations to any
requirement of this chapter which can be expressed in terms of
numbers. The ZBA may not authorize a use variance.
B. If a variance which is granted is not utilized within one year of its
granting, the variance shall be considered null and void and an
application must be refilled if it is desired at a future date.
C. If a variance is denied, the ZBA shall not reconsider the same request,
or a similar request that could have been granted during the original
consideration, within a period of one year.
D. A variance which is legally utilized and maintained runs with the
property and any subsequent owners who legally continue the variance
under its original or amended terms.
E. In consideration of all variances, the ZBA shall review each case
individually as to its compliance with each of the following standards
and may only approve variance requests which comply with all of the
following:
(1) The standard for which the variance is being granted would
unreasonably prevent the owner from using property for a
permitted purpose or would render conformity unnecessarily
burdensome;
(2) The variance would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as
to other property owners in the zoning district and a lesser
relaxation of the standard would not provide substantial relief and
be more consistent with justice to others;
§ 7-22.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22.04
1:333
(3) The problem is due to circumstances unique to the property and
not to general conditions in the area;
(4) The problem that resulted in the need for the variance was not
created by the applicant or previous owners of the property; and
(5) Issuance of the variance would still ensure that the spirit of the
ordinance is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done.
F. Sign variances may be granted for any one of the following conditions:
(1) The applicant has demonstrated a variance is needed due to a
practical difficulty on the site, such as varied topography,
horizontal or vertical road curvature, or presence of structures or
desired trees that limits visibility of a sign on the premises
compared to similar sites with conforming signs in the same zoning
district;
(2) A variance is warranted due to the relatively large size of the site,
frontage or building in comparison to other establishments in the
same zoning district;
(3) A variance would significantly improve the conformity of an
existing sign; or
(4) The variance would permit a sign with historic significance to be
retained.
G. To grant a sign variance for one of the conditions specified above in
Subsection F, all of the following standards must also be met:
(1) The inability to conform with the regulations is due to a practical
difficulty or unique condition that includes more than mere
inconvenience or mere inability to attain a supposed higher
financial return;
(2) That the alleged practical difficulties or unique condition, or both,
are exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person
requesting the variance, and result from conditions which do not
exist generally throughout the City;
(3) That allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being
done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by the
regulations, the individual practical difficulties that will be suffered
by a failure to grant a variance, and the rights of others whose
property would be affected by the allowance of the variance, and
will not be contrary to the public purpose and general intent of
these regulations;
(4) The variance granted is the minimum necessary to allow the
applicant to enjoy the same rights as other establishments in the
§ 7-22.04 LAPEER CODE § 7-22.04
1:334
§ 7-22.05. Interpretation. [Amended 5-17-2012]
The Planning Department and the Planning Commission are responsible
for interpreting this chapter as part of their responsibility as the primary
administrators of the chapter. They may request the ZBA to interpret
provisions of this chapter as outlined below. Each such interpretation shall
establish the precedent for future treatment of the issue being addressed.
To achieve the objective of consistent enforcement of this chapter, whenever
an interpretation question arises which has been addressed previously by
the ZBA, the earlier interpretation shall apply without requiring further
action by the ZBA. The Planning Department shall keep a concise record of
all interpretations made by the ZBA to facilitate such reference.
§ 7-22.06. Appeals.
These appellate procedures are instituted to hear and decide appeals from
and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official or body charged with the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance.
same zoning district, have a reasonable outlet for free speech and
meet the intent of the sign regulations; and
(5) The variance will not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
A. The ZBA may classify any activity which is not specifically mentioned in
Articles III through XI for any zoning district as a use by right or special
use, provided that said classification shall be consistent with the
classification of similar uses and with the purpose and intent of each
zoning district. In carrying out this interpretation, the ZBA may not
interpret a specific use as being included in a broader class of uses if
that specific use is listed separately in other zoning districts.
B. The ZBA may determine the off-street parking and loading space
requirements of any use for which these requirements are not
determinable by the Planning Commission as provided for in Article
XVI.
C. The ZBA may interpret any portion of this chapter when the Planning
Department is unable to clearly determine its intent or effect.
A. An appeal shall be filed with the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and with the ZBA, through the zoning administration specifying the
grounds for the appeal.
B. Applications for appeals of administrative actions shall be submitted to
the Planning Department within 30 days of the date of such actions.
C. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the ZBA all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is
taken.
§ 7-22.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22.06
1:335
D. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the ZBA
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with them, that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in their opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case, proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted
by the ZBA, or by the Circuit Court, on application, on notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
E. The ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirements or determination appealed from and in making an
order, requirement, decision or determination, shall have the powers of
the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 7-22.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-22.06
1:336
ARTICLE XXIII
Amendment
§ 7-23.01. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to identify the procedures for initiation and
review of text and map amendments to this Zoning Ordinance and provides
standards for approval of the proposed amendments.
§ 7-23.02. Initiation of amendments.
Proposed amendments to the text of the ordinance or Zoning Map may be
initiated by:
§ 7-23.03. Application.
A. The City Commission by motion.
B. The Planning Commission by motion.
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals by motion.
D. Owner of a parcel, for that parcel; or someone else with approval of the
owner or under the terms of a purchase agreement, by application.
A. Application by a resident or property owner for an amendment shall be
submitted to Planning Department at least 20 days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which the public hearing on the request will be
held.
(1) The application for the amendment shall include:
(a) Name, address, and phone number of applicant.
(b) Signature of owner of the subject parcel if not the applicant,
proof of their approval of the request or a copy of a purchase
agreement on the property.
(c) Street address and tax ID number.
(d) The current zoning of the subject parcel.
(e) The proposed zoning of the subject parcel.
(f) A copy of the deed for the subject property or its legal
description.
(g) A traffic study as required by § 7-18.04G.
(h) The fee established by the City Commission.
(2) Requests to rezone two or more noncontiguous parcels require
separate applications.
§ 7-23.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23.03
1:337
§ 7-23.04. Public hearing.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any zoning
amendment initiated before action on the amendment is taken by the City
Commission.
§ 7-23.05. City Commission.
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City
Commission shall undertake consideration of the proposed rezoning or text
amendment.
B. Amendments initiated by the City Commission, Planning Commission or
ZBA shall be submitted to Planning Department at least 20 days prior to
the Planning Commission meeting at which the public hearing on the
request will be held and shall consist of a copy of the motion passed
initiating the request and any associated information. No fee shall be
required.
C. Amendment applications shall be submitted to the City departments for
review and comment as determined appropriate by the Planning
Department prior to the Planning Commission public hearing.
A. Notice requirement. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as
required in § 7-21.07 of this chapter.
B. Additional notice requirement. In addition, mailed notice will be
provided to each electric, gas, and pipeline public utility company, each
telecommunication service provider, each railroad operating within the
district or zone affected, and the airport manager of each airport, that
registers its name and mailing address with the City Clerk for the
purpose of receiving the notice of public hearing.
C. Planning Commission hearing and recommendations. After conducting
the required public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to approve or deny the proposed amendment to the
chapter. The Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendation
along with a summary of comments received at the public hearing.
A. If they wish to, the City Commission may hold a public hearing on the
amendment. If they choose to hold a public hearing, the City
Commission must meet the notice requirements outlined in § 7-21.07.
B. If the City Commission proposes any changes to the amendments they
may, at their option, send the changes back to the Planning Commission
for their review.
C. If a property owner submits a request to the City Clerk by certified mail
to be heard regarding a proposed amendment, the City Commission
must provide an opportunity for that person to speak on the amendment
prior to making a decision.
§ 7-23.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-23.05
1:338
§ 7-23.06. Standards for approval.
In reviewing any proposed amendment, the Planning Commission and City
Commission shall consider the following:
D. An amendment to the Zoning Ordinance requires approval by a majority
of the members of the City Commission, not just a majority of the
members attending the meeting.
E. Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements of
this subsection, an amendment to a zoning ordinance which is the
object of the petition shall be passed only by a 2/3 vote of the City
Commission. The protest petition shall be presented to the City
Commission before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall
be signed by one of the following:
(1) The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included in the
proposed change.
(2) The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included within an
area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of
the land included in the proposed change.
(3) Publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20% land
area requirement.
F. Following adoption of the zoning amendment, one notice of adoption
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
within 15 days of adoption. The notice shall include:
(1) A summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment or the actual
text of the amendment.
(2) The effective date of the ordinance. This date may be as few as
seven days after the publication of the ordinance.
(3) The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be
purchased or inspected.
A. In the case of a proposal to amend the Zoning Ordinance text, the City
shall find:
(1) The change is necessary to clarify a provision of the ordinance;
(2) The change is necessary to correct a mistake in the ordinance;
(3) The change is necessary to implement a goal or policy of the City
Master Plan; or
(4) The change is necessary to improve administration of the
ordinance or to better serve the community.
(5) In addition to one or more of the above findings, the Planning
Commission must determine that the requested amendment is
§ 7-23.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23.06
1:339
§ 7-23.07. Conditional rezoning.
consistent with the City Master Plan or that a mistake in the plan or
changes in conditions or City policy have occurred that are relevant
to the request. If the Planning Commission recommends approval
of a request that is not in compliance with the current plan due
to a mistake or change in conditions or policy, it shall immediately
initiate an amendment to the plan to address the identified mistake
or change.
B. In the case of a proposed Zoning Map amendment (rezoning), the City
shall find one of the following:
(1) The requested amendment is in compliance with the City Master
Plan or that a mistake in the plan or changes in conditions or City
policy have occurred that are relevant to the request. If the
Planning Commission recommends approval of a request that is not
in compliance with the current plan due to a mistake or change in
conditions or policy, it shall immediately initiate an amendment to
the plan to address the identified mistake or change.
(2) The property cannot be reasonably used as it is currently zoned and
the proposed request represents the most suitable alternative
zoning classification based on the City Master Plan.
A. Intent. It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would
be in the best interests of the City, as well as advantageous to property
owners seeking a change in zoning classification, if certain conditions
could be proposed by property owners as part of a request for a
rezoning. It is the intent of this section to provide a process consistent
with the provisions of Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act
(PA 110 of 2006)26 by which an owner seeking a rezoning may
voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of
land as part of the rezoning request.
B. Application and offer of conditions.
(1) An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions
relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning
is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the
application for rezoning is filed or may be made at a later time
during the rezoning process.
(2) The required application and process for considering a rezoning
request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering
rezoning requests made without any offer of conditions, except as
modified by the requirements of this section.
26.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3405.
§ 7-23.06 LAPEER CODE § 7-23.07
1:340
(3) The owner's offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses
or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning
district.
(4) Approval of a conditional rezoning does not guarantee approval of
any special land use which may be required as part of the
conditional rezoning project. Review of special land use must
follow the procedures outlined in Article XIX before development
can begin.
(5) Approval of a conditional rezoning does not guarantee approval of
any variance which may be required as part of the conditional
rezoning project, and review of the variance must follow the
procedures outlined in Article XXII before development can begin.
(6) Approval of a conditional rezoning does not guarantee approval of
any site plan which may be required as part of the conditional
rezoning project, and review of the site plan must follow the
procedures outlined in Article XVIII before development can begin.
(7) The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of
rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or additional
conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner. An owner may
withdraw all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final
rezoning action of the City Commission, provided that, if such
withdrawal occurs after the Planning Commission's public hearing
on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application
shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a new public
hearing and a new recommendation, with notice as required by this
article.
C. Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission, after public
hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in
§ 7-23.06 of this chapter, may recommend approval, approval with
recommended changes or denial of the rezoning; provided, however,
that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are
acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner.
D. City Commission review. After receiving the Planning Commission's
recommendation, the City Commission shall deliberate upon the
requested rezoning and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning
request. The City Commission's deliberations shall include, but not be
limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in
§ 7-23.06 of this chapter. Should the City Commission propose
amendments to the proposed conditional rezoning and amendments are
acceptable to and offered by the owner, then the rezoning application
shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing
and a new recommendation, with notice as required by this article.
E. Approval.
§ 7-23.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23.07
1:341
(1) If the City Commission finds the owner's rezoning request and offer
of conditions acceptable, the offered conditions shall be
incorporated into a formal written statement of conditions,
provided said conditions conform with this section. The statement
of conditions shall be incorporated into the ordinance adopted by
the City Commission.
(2) The statement of conditions shall:
(a) Be prepared as a notarized affidavit prepared and signed by
the owner.
(b) Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains.
(c) Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of
conditions runs with the land and is binding upon successor
owners of the land unless otherwise specified by this section.
(d) Include any diagram, plans or other documents submitted that
are necessary to illustrate the implementation of the statement
of conditions.
(e) Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the
subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that
they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained
within the statement of conditions.
(3) Upon the rezoning taking effect, the Zoning Map shall be amended
to reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation
that the land was rezoned with a statement of conditions. The
Zoning Map shall also include a listing of all lands rezoned with a
statement of conditions.
F. Compliance with conditions.
(1) Any person who establishes a development or commences a use
upon land that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously
operate and maintain the development or use in compliance with
all of the conditions set forth in the statement of conditions. Any
failure to comply with a condition contained within the statement of
conditions shall be deemed a nuisance per se and shall constitute a
violation of this Zoning Ordinance and be punishable accordingly.
(2) No permit or approval shall be granted under this chapter for any
use or development that is contrary to an applicable statement of
conditions.
G. Time period for establishing development or use. Unless another time
period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the subject land, the site
plan for approved development shall be submitted within two years
after the rezoning took effect. In cases where a site plan is not required,
the approved use of land or buildings must have commenced within one
year unless another time period is specified in the ordinance rezoning
§ 7-23.07 LAPEER CODE § 7-23.07
1:342
the subject land. These time limitations may upon written request be
extended by the City Commission if:
(1) It is demonstrated to the City Commission's reasonable satisfaction
that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use
will commence within the period of extension and proceed
diligently thereafter to completion; and
(2) The City Commission finds that there has not been a change in
circumstances that would render the current zoning with
statement of conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in
the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning
policy. All applicable project completion deadlines in this chapter
related to site plans, special land use and variances shall apply.
H. Reversion of zoning. If approved development and/or use of the rezoned
land does not occur within the time frame specified under Subsection G
above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as
set forth in Section 405(2) of PA 110.27 The procedure for considering
and making this reversionary rezoning shall be the same as applies to
all other rezoning requests.
I. Subsequent rezoning of land. When land that is rezoned with a
statement of conditions is rezoned to a different zoning classification or
to the same zoning classification but with a different or no statement of
conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to
Subsection H or otherwise, the statement of conditions imposed under
the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. If a
statement of conditions has been recorded, upon the owner's written
request, the City Clerk shall record with the Lapeer County Register of
Deeds a notice that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect.
J. Amendment of conditions.
(1) During the time period for commencement of an approved
development or use specified pursuant to Subsection G or during
any extension granted by the City Commission, the City
Commission shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement
of conditions.
(2) The statement of conditions may be amended in the same manner
as was prescribed for the original rezoning and statement of
conditions.
K. City right to rezone. Nothing in the statement of conditions or in the
provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the City from
rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a statement of
conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be
conducted in compliance with this chapter and the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act.28
27.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3405(2).
§ 7-23.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23.07
1:343
L. Failure to offer conditions. The City shall not require an owner to offer
conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of
conditions shall not affect an owner's rights under this chapter.
28.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 7-23.07 LAPEER CODE § 7-23.07
1:344
ARTICLE XXIV
Terminology
§ 7-24.01. Interpretation.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules for the interpretation of the
text of this chapter, to define certain words and terms, and to provide for the
interpretation of this chapter by adoption of a technical dictionary. Certain
words and terms which may not appear in this chapter, but which have
special application may be defined in other articles to which they apply.
§ 7-24.02. Word usage.
A. If the meaning of this chapter is unclear in a particular circumstance,
the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall construe the provision to carry
out the intent of this chapter if such can be discerned from other
provisions of this chapter or law.
B. All words and phrases used in this chapter shall be construed and
understood according to the common preferred usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
C. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense, words
used in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural
number shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates
and stipulates the contrary.
D. The words "person," "proprietor," "property owner," and "operator"
shall include any recognized form of legal entity.
E. The words "property," "lot," "parcel," "real estate," "premises," "plot"
and "land" shall be interpreted to mean real property as delineated and
described by legal documents and instruments.
F. The word "road" shall also mean "highway," "street," "alley," "drive,"
"cul-de-sac," or other public thoroughfare.
G. The word "building" shall include the word "structure."
H. The words "used" or "occupied," when applied to any land or building,
shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or
"designed to be used or occupied."
I. The words "shall" and "required" are always interpreted as mandatory
and never as permissive or discretionary.
J. The word "may" shall be interpreted as permissive or discretionary.
K. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the conjunctions
noted below shall be interpreted as follows:
§ 7-24.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.02
1:345
§ 7-24.03. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building or structure located on the same
lot as the principal building or structure, the use of which is incidental or
secondary to the principal building or use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building or portion of a building
which is customarily and naturally incidental to, subordinate to, and
devoted exclusively to the principal use of the land or building and located
on the same lot with the principal use.
ADDITION — A structure added to the existing structure after the
completion of the existing structure which extends or increases the floor
area, or height of a building or structure.
ADULT CARE FACILITY, STATE-LICENSED — Any structure constructed
for residential purposes that is licensed by the State of Michigan pursuant
to Public Act 218 of 1979.29 These acts provide for the following types of
residential structures:
(1) "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events shall apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events may apply singularly or in any combination.
(3) "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination.
L. In computing the number of days, the first day is excluded and the last
day is included. If the last day of any period during which an
application, filing, or request is required to be made to the City or other
governmental agency is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period
is extended to include the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday.
ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME — A facility with the
approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults who are provided
supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and
board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more
consecutive weeks for compensation.
A.
ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME — A facility with
approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to
be provided supervision, personal care, and protection, in addition to
room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for
two or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
B.
29.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 400.701 et seq.
§ 7-24.02 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:346
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility other than a private residence,
which provides care for more than six adults for less than 24 hours a day.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES — Includes adult bookstores or video
stores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters,
adult motels, adult nightclubs, and massage parlors. These terms and
related terms shall have the following additional meanings:
ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME — A private residence with the
approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with
foster care for 24 hours a day for five or more days a week and for two
or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee
must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence.
C.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein cash-operated, credit-operated, coin-operated or slugoperated
or electronically, internet or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices
are maintained to show images and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
"sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, VIDEO STORE, or NOVELTY STORE — A
commercial establishment which offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration, as one of its principal business purposes, any one or
more of the following:
Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video matter or photographs, cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representation which depict or
describe sexually explicit activities or specified anatomical areas;
or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with sexually explicit activities; or
(2)
Items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia depicting, displaying,
advertising or packaged as sexually explicit activities or depict or
describe specified anatomical areas.
(3)
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that
do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials
depicting or describing sexually explicit activities or specified
anatomical areas, and still be characterized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty or retail store or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment
from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store
or adult video store, so long as the establishment falls within the
definition of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store as set forth above.
(4)
B.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:347
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment, whether or not alcohol is served, which regularly
features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of restricted nudity;
Live performance which are characterized by the partial exposure
of specified anatomical areas; or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of sexually explicit activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(3)
C.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides or
other photographic reproductions which are regularly
characterized by the depiction or description of sexually explicit
activities or specified anatomical areas; and which advertises the
availability of this adult type of material by means of a sign, visible
from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines,
pamphlets or leaflets, radio, internet or television;
(1)
Permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing sexually
explicit activities or displaying specified anatomical areas for
electric transmission over the World Wide Web;
(2)
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
10 hours; or
(3)
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
(4)
D.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, compact discs, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of sexually explicit activities or specified
anatomical areas.
E.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
the performance of sexually explicit activities. This definition does not
include a theater which features occasional live nude performances
F.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:348
with serious literacy, artistic or political value and which has no adverse
secondary effects.
ADULT USE BUSINESS or SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An
adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty or retail store, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude modeling studio and/or a sexual encounter
establishment or any business determined by the Building Official,
City Manager, and/or the Director of Public Safety, to be an adult
use because of the similarities in the characteristics and activities
of the business with regulated adult business uses, such as nudity,
semi-nudity, exposure of sexually explicit activities and/or specified
anatomical areas. The definition of "adult use business" or "sexually
oriented business" shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized
sexual therapy.
G.
ENTERTAINER — A person who performs some type of activity or pose
with the intent of allowing others to witness that activity or pose.
H.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration in any form, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who
agrees or offers to privately perform as an entertainer, including, but
not limited to, the modeling of lingerie, the removal of clothing and the
performance of a dance or skit. Under this definition, "privately" shall
mean a performance for an individual or that individual's guests.
I.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association that furnishes,
offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.
J.
ESTABLISHMENT — As used in relation to any adult use the term shall
mean any of the following:
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business
as a new business;
(1)
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
(2)
(3) The location or relocation of any sexually oriented business.
K.
LICENSEE — The individual listed as an applicant on the application of
a sexually oriented business license, or a person whose name appears
on a license to operate an adult use business.
L.
MANAGER — An operator, other than a licensee, who is employed
by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of
employees, or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the sexually
oriented business.
M.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:349
MASSAGE — The treating of external parts of the body for remedial or
hygienic purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with the hands or with the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations
commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances
that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is
provided shall pay any consideration whatsoever therefor. For purposes
of this chapter, the term "bodywork" shall mean massage.
N.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person appears in a
state of nudity or displays specific anatomical areas, and is provided
money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
This includes modeling studios that provide for nude modeling on an
occasional basis, but it does not include a modeling studio whose
primary function is to provide art classes as part of a college, university
or educational institution and which is certified by the State of
Michigan.
O.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts.
P.
OPERATOR — As used in relation to any adult use, the term shall mean
the owner, licensee, manager or person in charge of any premises.
Q.
PEEP BOOTH — An adult motion-picture theater with a viewing room
or cubicle of less than 150 square feet of floor space.
R.
PREMISES — As used in relation to any adult use, the term shall mean
any premises that requires registration as a sexually oriented business
license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
S.
PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSE —
The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its stock-intrade
or interior floor space, meaning at least 30% of the floor area;
(1)
The receipt of 50% of more of its revenues from the sale of the
items listed above; or
(2)
The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its advertising
expenditures to the promotion of the sale, rental or viewing of
books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, film, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs,
slides or other visual representations, items, materials, gimmicks,
or paraphernalia which are characterized by the depiction,
description, display, advertising or packaging of sexually explicit
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(3)
T.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:350
AGRICULTURE — The use of land for tilling the soil, raising tree or field
crops, or animal husbandry as a source of income.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers a place
where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of sexually explicit activities or the exposure of specified
anatomical areas for any form of consideration, including, but not
limited to:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the same or opposite sex;
(1)
Activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity; or
(2)
Permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed
performing sexually explicit activities or displaying specified
anatomical areas for recording or transmission over the World
Wide Web or any other media.
(3)
U.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but
not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
(2)
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated;
Any activity intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust,
passions or sexual desires;
(4)
The display of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence; or
(5)
The display of excretory function as part of or in connection with
any of the activity set forth in Subsection V(1) through (5) of this
definition, above.
(6)
V.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Any of the following:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or pubic hair, buttock, or female breast or breasts of any
portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above
the top of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or
(1)
Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, even if opaquely and
completely covered.
(2)
W.
SIGNIFICANT OR SUBSTANTIAL PORTION — Thirty percent or more
of the term modified by such phrase.
X.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:351
ALTERATION — Any modification, remodeling, change or rearrangement in
the structural or supporting members such as bearing walls, columns, or
girders, as well as any change in the doors or windows which affect the
means of egress which is undertaken without adding to the floor area height
or physical size of the building or structure.
AMBULANCE SERVICE STATION — The transport via ambulance for
medical emergencies that may operate 24 hours.[Added 11-19-2018]
ANIMAL —
ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY — See "nursing home."
ATTACH — To fasten or physically join an item to a structure such as
attaching an antenna to a tower or joining two structures together, such as
attaching a garage to a house.
AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof containing
facilities for washing more than two automobiles, using production line
methods. The use of personnel for one or more phases of this operation in
conjunction with or without complete automatic or mechanical devices does
not alter its classification. For the purpose of this chapter, coin-operated
devices operated on a self-service basis shall be construed to be the same.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR — The general repair, engine rebuilding,
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as
DOMESTIC (PET) — An animal that is commonly considered capable
of being trained or is capable of adapting to living in a human
environment and which is not likely to bite without provocation nor
cause death, maiming or illness to human beings, including bird
(caged), fish, rodent (bred, such as a gerbil, rabbit, hamster or guinea
pig), cat (domesticated), lizard (nonpoisonous), and dog. Exotic animals
and animals bred, raised or boarded for commercial purposes shall not
be considered domestic animals.
A.
EXOTIC — Any animal from a species which is not commonly
domesticated or kept as livestock, or which is not native to the State
of Michigan, or a species which is of wild or predatory character,
or which because of size, aggressive or vicious characteristics would
constitute an unreasonable danger to human life or property if not
kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner, including
any hybrid animal that is part exotic animal including elephants,
rhinoceroses, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, cheetahs, cougars,
jaguars, lynx, mountain lions, puma, badgers, bears, bobcats, coyotes,
snakes, crocodiles, alligators, seals, sharks, wolves and primates such
as baboons, orangutans, chimpanzees, monkeys and gorillas.
B.
LIVESTOCK — Any of various bird or animal breeds, domesticated so
as to live and breed in a tame, docile, tractable condition useful to
man, including horses, ponies, mules, donkeys, cattle, sheep, goats,
buffaloes, llama, ostriches, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys and swine.
C.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:352
body, frame or fender-straightening and repair; overall painting and
undercoating of automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR — Repairs other than major repair,
including engine tune-up, muffler shops, shock absorber replacement
shops, undercoating shops and tire stores.
AUTOMOBILE SALE — Any business establishment that sells or leases new
or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, or
motorcycles or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. Automobile
sales may include an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either on-site
or at a nearby location and may provide on-site facilities for the repair and
service of the vehicles sold or leased by the establishment.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A place for the dispensing, sale or
offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together
with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not
including major automobile repair.
BASEMENT or CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly below
and partly above grade, and having at least half its height below grade.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A use within a detached single-family dwelling in
which transient guests are provided a sleeping room, breakfast and access
to bathing and lavatory facilities in return for payment.
BOARDING — The provision by prearrangement of meals and lodging for a
definite period of time for compensation in a residential dwelling.
BREWPUB — A restaurant that prepares handcrafted natural beer as an
accessory use intended for consumption on the premises. Production
capacity shall be limited to not more than 5,000 barrels per year. Such
accessory use may occupy up to 30% of the gross floor area of the
restaurant.
BUILDABLE AREA — The space remaining within a lot after the minimum
setback and open space requirements of this chapter have been met.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:353
BUILDING — A combination of material, whether portable or fixed, forming
a structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls affording a
facility or shelter for use or occupancy by persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional buildable area within
which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by
regulations governing building setbacks, maximum height, and bulk.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of the City Building Code,30 or his/
her duly authorized representative.
BUILDING PERMIT — An authorization issued by the Building Official to
move, erect or alter a structure within the City.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the primary use
of the lot upon which it is situated.
BUS PASSENGER STATION — Any premises for the transient housing
or parking of motor driven buses, and the loading and unloading of
passengers.
CAMPGROUND — Shall be as defined in Section 12501 of Public Act No.
368 of 1978 (MCLA § 333.12501 et seq.).
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 8, Buildings and Building Regulations.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:354
CANOPY STRUCTURE — Any overhead protective structure which is
constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians/vehicles to pass under.
CEMETERIES — A privately or publicly owned property which provides
perpetual care of grounds used solely for the interment of human beings or
customary household pets.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A written document received from the
Building Official stating that the City Building Code, as amended, and this
chapter have been complied with as they apply to the construction of a
building or structure and the use of a lot and that the building may now be
occupied for its declared purpose.
CHANGE OF USE — A use of a building, structure or parcel of land, or
portion of a building, structure or parcel of land, which is different from the
previous use in the way it is classified in this chapter.
CHILD-CARE FACILITIES — Facilities for the care of children under 18
years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state under Michigan Public
Act 116 of 197331 and the associated rules promulgated by the State
Department of Human Services. Such organizations shall be further defined
as follows:
CHILD-CARE OR DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, other than a private
residence, receiving one or more preschool or school-age children for
care for periods less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or
guardians are not immediately available to the child. Child-care center
or day-care center includes a facility that provides care for not more
than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care
per day. The facility is generally described as a child-care center, daycare
center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool,
play group, before or after-school program, or drop-in center. Childcare
center or day-care center does not include a Sunday school, a
vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted
by a religious organization where children are attending for not more
than four hours per day for an indefinite period or for not more than
eight hours per day for a period not to exceed four weeks during a
twelve-month period; a facility operated by a religious organization
where child care is provided for not more than three hours while
persons responsible for the children are attending religious services; a
program that is primarily supervised, school-age-child-focused training
in a specific subject, including, but not limited to, dancing, drama,
music, or religion, only during the time the child is involved in
supervised, school-age-child-focused training; a program that is
primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities for school-age
children, sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or
hobby group, including, but not limited to, youth groups, scouting, and
school-age recreational or supplementary education programs, open
only during the time the child is engaged in the group athletics or social
activities, and if the school-age child can come and go at will.
A.
31.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 722.111 et seq.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:355
CHURCH, LARGE-SCALE — A religious institution with a seating capacity
of 500 people or more in its sanctuary or main area of assembly or more
than 250 parking spaces.
CITY BUILDING CODE — The duly adopted building code of the City.32
CHILD-CARE INSTITUTION — A child care facility that is organized
for the purpose of receiving minor children for care, maintenance,
and supervision, usually on a twenty-four-hour basis, in a building
maintained for that purpose, and operating throughout the year. An
educational program may be provided, but the educational program
shall not be the primary purpose of the facility. Child-care institution
includes a maternity home for the care of unmarried mothers who
are minors and an agency group home, that is described as a small
child-caring institution owned, leased, or rented by a licensed agency
providing care for more than four but less than 13 minor children.
Child-care institution also includes institutions for mentally retarded
or emotionally disturbed minor children. Child-care institution does
not include a hospital, nursing home, or home for the aged licensed
under Article 17 of the Public Health Code, a boarding school licensed
under Section 1335 of the Revised School Code, a hospital or facility
operated by the state or licensed under the Mental Health Code, or an
adult foster care family home or an adult foster care small group home
licensed under the Adult Foster Care Licensing Act in which a child has
been placed under that Act.
B.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A private home in which up to six minor
children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than
24 hours a day, including children related to the caregiver by blood,
marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an
unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
C.
FOSTER FAMILY HOME — A private home in which at least one but
not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult
member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed
in the household under the Michigan Adoption Code, are given care and
supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or
more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
D.
FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME — A private home in which more than
four but less than seven children, including children related to the
caregiver by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household
under the Michigan Adoption Code, are provided care for 24 hours a
day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
E.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A private home in which more than six but
not more than 12 children are given care and supervision for periods
of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian,
including children related to the caregiver. It includes a home that gives
care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar
year.
F.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:356
CITY COMMISSION — The legislative body of the City.
CITY ENGINEER — The person designated by the City to carry out day-today
engineering responsibilities.
CLINIC — See "medical office."
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development where structures are
arranged in closely related groups. Units are typically of the same type or
design character, and built at higher densities in certain areas of a site while
preserving the natural features in others on the same site.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — Any place where four or more dogs, cats, or
other animals over three months of age are kept, raised, sold, boarded,
bred, shown, treated, or groomed.
COMMERCIAL USE — An activity carried out as a use of property for
financial gain including, but not limited to retail sales, repair service or
salvage operators, business offices, food service, entertainment, and
brokerages related to the purchase, sale, barter, display, or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise or personal services or the maintenance of
service offices or recreation or amusement enterprise or garage/basement
sales operating more than 12 days during any one twelve-month period.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — A vehicle having a gross vehicle weight
greater than one ton designed for transportation of commodities,
merchandise, produce, freight, animals, or passengers, including buses.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES — Licensed
telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication
services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to
the general public.
CONDOMINIUM — The ownership of a dwelling unit and the space
enclosed by the description thereof as contained in the master deed for the
complex or project, established in conformance with the provisions of the
Condominium Act (MCLA § 559.101 et seq.).
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition
or removal of any building or structure; and/or the excavation, filling, and
grading of a lot.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS ESTABLISHMENT — A parcel of land,
building or structure, or a portion of a parcel of land, building or structure,
used to store trucks, excavation equipment, supplies, tools or materials
utilized by construction contractors, subcontractors, and builders.
CONVALESCENT HOME — See "nursing home."
DAY CARE — See "child care."
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 8, Buildings and Building Regulations.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:357
DECORATIVE TILT-UP PANELS — Poured concrete panels enhanced with
color and texture, shapes and other fenestration that form the exterior walls
of buildings.
DEMOLITION — The purposeful razing, destruction, or disassembly of a
building or structure.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per unit of lot area. See "lot
area."
DETENTION — A system, which is designed to capture stormwater and
temporarily contain it until it drains to another location at a controlled rate.
DETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management facility, either natural
or man-made, which captures and temporarily holds runoff directed into it
until the water drains to another location at a controlled rate.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter measured at a
height of 4.5 feet above the natural grade.
DISTRICT, ZONING — An area of land for which there are uniform
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, density of
development, yard requirements and height regulations, and other
appropriate regulations.
DITCH — A man-made channel constructed for drainage or irrigation
purposes.
DRAINAGE — The collection, conveyance, or discharge of groundwater and/
or surface water.
DRAINAGE AREA — The contributing watershed, which is expressed in
acres or square miles.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — A business establishment whose method of
operation involves the delivery of a service or product directly to a patron
inside a vehicle, typically through a service window or other appurtenance
to a building, where vehicles are queued within a stacking area or approach
to the service window or facility.
DRIVEWAY — A private path of travel over which a vehicle may be driven
which provides access from parcels of land to a public or private road.
GROSS — A figure which equals the total number of dwelling units on a
lot divided by the total number of acres included in the lot.
A.
NET — A figure which equals the total number of dwelling units on a
lot divided by the total number of acres included in the lot, excluding
all open bodies of water, land within the one-hundred-year floodplain,
public rights-of-way and areas within overhead utility line easements.
For purposes of calculating maximum density, only 25% of the acreage
determined to be wetlands protected by the Wetland Protection, PA 59
of 1995 (MCLA § 324.30301 et seq.), shall be calculated toward the
total site acreage. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:358
DWELLING — A detached building or portion of a building designed or
used exclusively as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more
persons, not including accessory buildings or structures, either attached or
detached. In the case of a mixed occupancy where a building is occupied
in part as a dwelling, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling
for purposes of this chapter and shall comply with the chapter provisions
relative to dwellings.
EARTH CHANGE — Any human activity which removes ground cover,
changes the slope or contours of the land, or exposes the soil surface to the
actions of wind and rain. Earth change includes, but is not limited to, any
excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative
roots.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — A public or private accredited
kindergarten through 12th grade school, college, trade, or business school,
nursery school, preschool, or day-care center, and/or related administrative
offices, excluding a maintenance garage.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public or quasi-public franchised utilities or municipal
departments or commissions of underground, surface, or overhead gas,
electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communication, supply or disposal systems. These may include, but are not
necessarily limited to: mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables,
fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles, and other similar
equipment, and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal
departments or commissions or for the public health or general welfare.
Essential services shall not include buildings other than such buildings
that are primarily enclosures or shelters of the above essential service
equipment. Cellular telephone or communications towers as defined by this
article shall not be considered essential services.
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, sand, gravel, peat, muck, barrow, shale, limestone, clay or other
mineral or organic substances, other than vegetation, from water or land,
whether exposed or submerged.
APARTMENT — An apartment is an attached dwelling unit with
common walls, contained in a building with other apartment units
which are commonly reached off of a common stair landing or walkway.
A.
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion of a building, designed
exclusively for human occupancy providing complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
B.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A single building with abutting walls containing
two or more residential dwelling units.
C.
SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family.
D.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:359
EXISTING USE — The use of a parcel of land or a structure at the time of
the enactment of this chapter.
EXPANSION —
FAMILY —
FARM — Real property which is used for agriculture or horticulture,
comprising at least 20 contiguous acres and including all necessary
buildings and structures. All of the contiguous neighboring or associated
land operated as a single unit on which bona fide farming is carried on
directly by the owner-operator, manager or tenant farmer, by his own labor
or with the assistance of members of his household or hired employees.
Farms may be considered as including establishments operated as bona fide
greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, poultry farms and
apiaries.
FENCE — An unroofed structure of definite height and location constructed
of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other material or combination
of materials serving as a physical barrier, marker, or enclosure.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land which on the basis of available floodplain
information is subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An Official Map of a community,
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of waters;
An addition to an existing building or structure which extends or
increases the floor area, or height of a building or structure.
A.
An extension of a use over a larger portion of a building, structure or
area of land.
B.
An individual or group of two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, together with foster children and servants of
the principal occupants who are domiciled together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
A.
A collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling
unit whose relationship is of a continuing, nontransient domestic
character and who are cooking and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, halfway house, lodge, coterie,
organization, group of students, or other individual whose domestic
relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature, is for an anticipated
limited duration of school term or during a period of rehabilitation or
treatment, or is otherwise not intended to be of a permanent nature.
B.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:360
or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of land adjacent to a lake or stream identified as
the flood hazard area on the FIRM.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas designated in the flood insurance study which must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of all horizontal areas of the several floors of
a building or dwelling unit, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls, or from the center line of walls separating dwelling units. Unenclosed
porches, courtyards, patios and cellars shall not be considered as part of
floor area, except when utilized for commercial or industrial purposes.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The area within the perimeter of the
outside walls of the building under consideration, without deduction for
hallways, stairs, closets/storage rooms, thickness of walls, columns, or
other features.
A.
USABLE FLOOR AREA (UFA) — That area used for or intended to be
used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons,
clients or customers.
Such floor area which is used or intended to be used for hallways,
stairways, elevator shafts, utility or sanitary facilities or the storage
or processing of merchandise shall be excluded from this
computation of usable floor area.
(1)
Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal
areas of each story of a structure measured from the internal faces
of the exterior walls.
(2)
B.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:361
FRONTAGE — That part of a lot (a lot line) abutting on a street or way.
FUNERAL HOME AND MORTUARY ESTABLISHMENT — A building or part
thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain space
and facilities for: embalming and the performance of other services used
in the preparation of the dead for burial; the performance of autopsies and
other surgical procedures; the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other
related funeral supplies; the storage of funeral vehicles; and facilities for
cremation. Where a funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also
be permitted.
GARAGE — An accessory building or portion of a main building designed
or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar
vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory.
GARAGE SALE — Any sale of personal effects, jewelry, or household items,
furnishings and equipment belonging to the owner or occupant of the
property held in any district by the owner, occupant or his personal
representative.
GOLF COURSE — A lot or portion of a lot used for the playing of golf and
shall include pitch-and-putt courses but shall not include driving ranges,
miniature golf courses, or other similar commercial enterprises.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:362
GRADE — The average elevation of the natural ground surface of a parcel
of land, or the finished surface of ground after the development, filling, or
excavation of a parcel of land.
GRADING — Any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or any
combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition.
GREENBELT — A landscaped area between the property line and the front
yard building or parking setback line.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature
and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-ofseason
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GROUND COVER — Grasses or other plants grown to keep soil from being
blown or washed away.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Commercial vehicles with a gross vehicle weight
in excess of 10,000 pounds, and excavating, grading, road building,
earthmoving, demolition, loading and similar equipment.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade within 20 feet of the structure to the highest
point of the structure, or as otherwise provided in this chapter.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the established
grade to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck of
mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of
gable, hip and gambrel roofs. When the terrain is sloping, the ground level
is measured at the wall line.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:363
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation customarily conducted in a dwelling
unit that is clearly an incidental and secondary use of the dwelling. A home
occupation may also be commonly known as cottage industry, home-based
business, home marketing network, or home interactive distribution or
marketing, but shall not be construed to include day care or state-licensed
residential care facilities.
HOSPICE — A freestanding licensed facility which provides palliative and
supportive medical and other health services to meet the physical,
psychological, social, spiritual, and special needs of terminally ill patients
and their families in a group residential setting.
HOSPITAL — A facility providing health services primarily for in-patient
medical or surgical care of the sick or injured and including related facilities
such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central
service facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities.
HOTEL — A building or part of a building, with a common entrance, or
entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily
for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services
are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk
service, and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail
lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:364
HUMAN OCCUPANCY — A building or portion of a building primarily used
or intended to be used for individuals to congregate for any purpose and
which is equipped with means of egress, light, and ventilation facilities in
accordance with the state construction code, excluding a building or portion
of a building incidental to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on
which the building is located, or a building used exclusively for the purpose
of storage in which there are no employees or occupants.
IMPERVIOUS — The ground condition (e.g., roads, parking lots, sidewalks,
and rooftops) which does not allow percolation or infiltration of
precipitation. The condition causes water to accumulate on the surface
resulting in increased runoff.
INDUSTRIAL USE — A structure, building, or parcel of land, or portion
thereof utilized or inherently designed to be utilized for the purpose of
production, manufacturing, processing, cleaning, testing, rebuilding,
assembly, distribution, finishing, constructing, or printing of goods or
products, and related research and development facilities.
JUNK — Any abandoned, discarded, unusable, or unused objects or
equipment including, but not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans, implements, parts of motor vehicles, machinery, cloth,
rubber, bottles, any metals, boxes, cartons or crates.
JUNKYARD — An outdoor area where waste, used or secondhand materials
are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking
yards and includes any open area of more than 200 square feet for storage,
keeping or abandonment of junk.
KENNEL — Any place where four or more dogs, cats, or other animals over
three months of age are kept, raised, sold, boarded, bred, shown, treated,
or groomed.
LAND USE — A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
LIGHTING — The following words, terms and phrases related to lighting,
when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
FLOODLIGHT — Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector
or refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a
particular direction.
A.
GLARE — A direct light emitted by a lamp, luminous tube lighting or
other light source.
B.
LAMP — The component of the luminaire that produces the actual light,
including luminous tube lighting.
C.
LIGHT FIXTURE — The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an
assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A light fixture also
includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting.
D.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:365
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT — A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land under one ownership
described within fixed boundaries, of sufficient size and configuration to
meet the site development requirements of this chapter and having access
to a public road. The word "lot" shall include plot or parcel. A lot need not be
a lot of record. A lot may also mean a portion of a condominium project, as
regulated by Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCLA § 559.101 et seq.), designed
and intended for separate or limited ownership and/or use.
LIGHT POLLUTION — An artificial light which causes a detrimental
effect on the environment, enjoyment of the night sky or causes
undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties.
E.
LIGHT TRESPASS — The shining of light produced by a luminaire
beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.
F.
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting system including the lamp and
light fixture.
G.
LUMINOUS TUBE LIGHTING — Gas-filled tubing which, when
subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color
characteristic of the particular gas used, e.g., neon, argon, etc.
H.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES — Outdoor artificial illuminating devices,
outdoor fixtures, lamps and other similar devices, permanently installed
or portable, used for floodlighting, general illumination or
advertisement.
I.
SEARCHLIGHT — A powerful light or lights equipped with a reflector
to produce a bright beam or beams.
J.
SHIELDED FIXTURE — Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed
so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the
horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from
which light is emitted, e.g., "shoebox-type" fixtures. A luminaire
mounted in a recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure such
that the surrounding structure effectively shields the light in the same
manner is also considered fully shielded.
K.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:366
LOT AREA — The total area within the described lot lines of a parcel of
land, excluding road right-of-way or the submerged area of any river or lake
at the shoreline or ordinary high-water mark. Regulated wetlands may be
included within the area of a lot, provided at least 75% of the minimum
required lot area shall be buildable upland area.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the area of lot that contains buildings
and structures measured as a percent of the entire lot area.
LOT DEPTH — The average distance from the front lot line to the rear lot
line measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — The dimension of a lot measured along the public road
right-of-way line or easement.
LOT LINE — The boundaries of a lot which divide one lot from another lot
or from a public or existing private road or any other publicly owned parcel
of land.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line of a length equal to or greater than the
minimum lot width as required in this chapter, which is also the road rightof-
way line on interior lots which front a public or private road, in the case
of a corner lot each of the lot lines abutting a road right-of-way shall be
considered a front lot line.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:367
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a
line 20 feet entirely within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance
from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the lot line opposite the
shortest front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, as
measured at the front yard setback line.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection, or upon parts of the same street forming an interior angle of
less than 135°.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH OR DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — Any interior lot having
frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner
lot. All yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards,
and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation, when connected to
required utilities and including plumbing, heating and electrical systems
contained therein.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:368
MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT or MANUFACTURED HOME
PARK — A parcel of land under the control of a person upon which are
located three or more manufactured homes a continual, nonrecreational
basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of
whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure,
enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to
the occupancy of a mobile home.
MARIJUANA or MARIHUANA — The term as defined in the Public Health
Code, MCLA § 333.1101 et seq.; the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL
§ 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA
§ 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCLA § 333.27901 et
seq.[Added 2-19-2018]
GROWER — A licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state
that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale
to a processor or provisioning center.
A.
LICENSEE — A person holding a state operating license issued under
the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et
seq.
B.
MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITY — An enterprise at a specific
location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA§ 333.27101 et seq.,
including a marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana
provisioning center, marihuana secure transporter, or marihuana safety
compliance facility. The term does not include or apply to a "primary
caregiver" or "caregiver" as that term is defined in the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act, MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
C.
OUTDOOR PRODUCTION — The growing of marihuana in an expanse
of open or cleared ground or in a greenhouse, hoop house, or similar
nonrigid structure that does not utilize any artificial lighting, including
but not limited to electrical lighting sources.
D.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, limited-liability partnership, limitedliability
limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity.
E.
PROCESSOR — A licensee that is a commercial entity located in
Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts
resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for
sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center.
F.
PROVISIONING CENTER — A licensee that is a commercial entity
located in Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower or
processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered
qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary
caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property
where marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients
or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by
G.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:369
MASTER PLAN — The plan authorized by PA 33 of 2008 the Michigan
Planning Enabling Act33 and serving as the policy basis for zoning and
community development decisions in the City.
MEDICAL OFFICE, CLINIC — A facility operated by one or more physicians,
dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for
the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis.
MINI-WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings of a controlledaccess
and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual,
compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the storage
of customers' goods or wares.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit constructed on-site and composed
of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and
transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent
foundation.
MORTUARY — See "funeral home."
MOTEL — A series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units
containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for
overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall
cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle.
MOVIE THEATER, MULTI-SCREEN — A complex structure with multiple
movie theaters in which each theater is capable of showing moves
independent of the others in the complex. Structurally, theaters are grouped
in a manner that allows them to share box or ticket offices, parking
facilities, lobby area, rest rooms, concession stands, signs and marquee
displays, and other service and maintenance facilities.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building, either publicly or privately owned,
which is located on any lot that is open to the public, including meeting
halls, libraries, clubhouses, museums, cultural societies, visual and
performance arts buildings, government buildings, and community
a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the
caregiver in accordance within the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act,
MCLA § 333.26421 et seq., is not a provisioning center for purposes of
this article.
SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY — A licensee that is a commercial
entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered
primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for
tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results,
and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility.
H.
SECURE TRANSPORTER — A licensee that is a commercial entity
located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana
between marihuana facilities for a fee.
I.
33.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3801 et seq.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:370
buildings that are administered by nonprofit cultural, educational or
religious organizations.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lapeer, Michigan.
NEWSPAPER OFFICES AND PRINTING PLANTS — A commercial printing
operation, including administrative offices, involving a process that is
considered printing, imprinting, reproducing, or duplicating images and
using printing methods, including but not limited to offset printing,
lithography, web offset, flexographic, and screen process printing.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A platted lot that conformed with all City
zoning requirements at the time of recording of such plat, which no longer
conforms to the zoning regulations and requirements for lot area, lot width,
or both; or a lot outside a recorded plat that conformed with all City zoning
requirements at one time, and which has not been subdivided or reduced in
size subsequent to the time it did conform to this chapter, which no longer
conforms with the zoning requirements for lot area, lot width, or both.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:371
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building or portion of a building
lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived or amendments, and which does not conform to the
provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which lawfully occupied a building or
land at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived
or the effective date of an amendment to this chapter that does not conform
to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:372
NUISANCE — An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or
practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or
repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across
a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the
generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things,
such as, but not limited to:
NURSING HOME — A home for the aged or infirm in which three or more
persons not of the immediate family are housed or lodged and are furnished
with meals, personal assistance and a range of nursing and limited medical
care including any of the following: assisted living, supportive care, skilled
or specialized care, continuing care, and/or dementia care; but not to
include hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the
diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.
OCCUPY — The residing of an individual or individuals overnight in a
dwelling unit, or the installation, storage, or use of equipment, merchandise
or machinery in any institutional, commercial, agricultural, or industrial
building.
A. Noise.
B. Dust.
C. Smoke.
D. Odor.
E. Glare.
F. Fumes.
G. Flashes.
H. Vibration.
I. Shock waves.
J. Heat.
K. Electronic or atomic radiation.
L. Objectionable effluent.
M. Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night.
N. Passenger traffic.
Invasion of nonabutting street lot frontage by traffic ("cut-through"
traffic).
O.
P. A burned-out structure.
Q. A condemned structure.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:373
OFF-STREET PARKING LOT — A facility providing off-street vehicular
parking spaces and drives or aisles for the parking of more than three
vehicles.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land, or a portion of
a parcel, or an area of water or combination of land and water designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of the residents of a particular
development, the subdivision or of the general public.
OWNER, PROPERTY — The owner of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate in the premises, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee
of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or any other person, or his/
her duly authorized agent, sole proprietorship, partnership, association,
limited liability company, or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a
building, structure, or real property.
PARKING SPACE — An area of definite length and width, said area shall be
exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be
fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.
PARKING STRUCTURE — A covered structure or portion of a covered
structure that provides two or more levels of parking for motor vehicles.
PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by an authorized
official, empowering the holder thereof to perform a specified activity which
is not prohibited by law, but not allowed without such authorization.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Establishments that perform
services on the premises, such as, but not be limited to, tailors, beauty
and barbershops, tattoo parlors, day spas, hair salons, interior decorators,
photographers, physical therapy, massage therapists, or professional
medical/mental counseling services.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) — The use of a parcel of land which
is planned and developed as a single entity containing the various uses,
structures, open spaces, and other elements and which is designated and
developed under one owner or organized group, as provided for in this
chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The City of Lapeer Planning Commission as
established by the City of Lapeer City Commission under provisions of the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as amended.34
PLANT NURSERY — A parcel of land utilized for the purpose of growing
ornamental trees, shrubbery, house plants, flowers, or perennial ground
covers from seed or seedlings for the purpose of retail or wholesale trade.
PRACTICABLE — Available and capable of being done after taking into
consideration cost, existing technology and logistics.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant purpose to which a parcel
of land is devoted as distinguished from an accessory use.
34.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:374
PRIVATE CLUB or LODGE HALL — Private clubs or recreation facilities for
which a membership charge may be made and which are open only to bona
fide members and their guests. A private club or lodge hall or similar facility
may not be open or available to members of the general public.[Amended
5-17-2012]
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — A building or structure for groups of people to gather
for an event or regularly scheduled program. Places of public assembly
include but are not limited to arenas, religious institutions, lecture halls,
banquet facilities, and similar facilities.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — A system of pipe owned and maintained by a
governmental unit used to carry human, organic and industrial waste from
the point of origin to a point of treatment or discharge.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — A waterworks system which provides water for
drinking or household purposes to persons other than the supplier of water,
except those waterworks systems which supply water to only one living unit,
or as further defined in Public Act No. 399 of 1976, as amended (MCLA
§ 325.1001 et seq.).
RECREATION AREA, PRIVATE, NONCOMMERCIAL — A private
recreational facility or community center for use solely by the residents and
guests of a particular residential development, planned unit development,
or residential neighborhood, including indoor and outdoor facilities. These
facilities are usually proposed or planned in association with development
and are usually located within or adjacent to such development.[Amended
5-17-2012]
RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL — Any commercial establishment
which receives a fee in return for provision of some recreational activity
to the general public, including but not limited to driving ranges, golf
courses, swimming pools, water parks, tennis courts, outdoor racquetball
courts, motorized cart and motorcycle tracks, and batting cages.[Amended
5-17-2012]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or equipment intended for
temporary or periodic use for recreational or leisure pursuits. Such vehicles
shall include boats, airplanes, special purpose automobiles, floats, rafts,
trailers, snowmobiles, camping or travel trailers, motorized homes,
detachable travel equipment of the type adaptable to light trucks, and other
equipment or vehicles of a similar nature.
REHABILITATION — The upgrading of an existing building or part of an
existing building which is in a dilapidated or substandard condition.
REPAIR — The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building
or structure for the purpose of maintenance.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHMENT — A structure or
group of structures used primarily for research, development, or controlled
production of high-technology electronic, industrial, or scientific products
or commodities or laboratories conducting educational or medical research
or testing applied and developmental research, where product testing is an
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:375
integral part of the operation and goods or products may be manufactured
as necessary for testing, evaluation, and test marketing.
RESTAURANT — Any use that includes the sale of food and/or beverages to
a customer in a ready-to-consume state.
RESTORATION — The reconstruction or replication of an existing building's
original architectural features.
RETAIL BUSINESS — A commercial enterprise that provides goods and/
or services directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for
immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser.
RETENTION — A system, which is designed to capture stormwater and
contain it until it infiltrates the soil or evaporates.
RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management facility, either natural or
man-made, which does not have an outlet, which captures and holds runoff
directed into it.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A public or private strip of land acquired or utilized by
reservation, dedication, easement, prescription, purchase or condemnation
and permanently established for the passage of persons, vehicles, railroads,
water, utility lines, and similar uses.
RUNOFF — The portion of precipitation which does not infiltrate or
percolate into the ground, but rather moves over the land, eventually
reaching a water body, wetland, or low area.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — An apparatus capable of receiving
communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in
planetary orbit.
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — A use that involves the sale of food,
beverages, and/or desserts in disposable or edible containers or
wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption off the premises.
A.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A use that involves delivery of prepared
food so as to allow its consumption within a motor vehicle or elsewhere
on the premises, but outside of an enclosed building.
B.
C. DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT — See "drive-through facility."
STANDARD RESTAURANT — A standard restaurant is a use that
involves either of the following:
The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to
customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building.
(1)
The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and
is subsequently consumed by the customers within a completely
enclosed building.
(2)
D.
LOUNGE/TAVERN — A lounge or tavern is a type of restaurant that
is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages. The
preparation and sale of food or snacks to customers may be permitted.
E.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:376
SEDIMENT — Any solid particulate matter which has been moved from the
site of origin by erosion, is being transported by water, is in suspension in
water, or has been deposited in a water body, wetland or floodplain.
SETBACK — The minimum required horizontal distance measured from the
front, side, or rear lot line, as the case may be, which setback describes an
area termed the setback on a lot or parcel required by this chapter for the
district in which it is located.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of retail and other commercial
establishments that is planned, owned, and managed as a single property.
SIGN — Any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, pictures or
trademarks erected on or otherwise affixed to a building, wall board, plate
or any other structure, or on a vehicle or trailer, for the purpose of
advertising or identifying an establishment, product, service, or activity.
FRONT — The minimum required horizontal distance measured from
the front lot line which describes an area termed the front setback on
a lot or parcel required by this chapter for the district in which it is
located.
A.
REAR — The minimum required horizontal distance measured from the
rear lot line which describes an area termed the rear setback on a lot
or parcel required by this chapter for the district in which it is located.
B.
SIDE — The minimum required horizontal distance measured from the
side lot lines which describes an area termed the side setback on a lot
or parcel required by this chapter for the district in which it is located.
C.
A. ABANDONED SIGN — See "obsolete sign."
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign, other than a changeable copy sign,
whereby the sign itself or the information conveyed incorporates or
involves action, motion, or the appearance of action or motion, such
as flashing lights, color changes, moving parts, reflective materials,
scrolling messages, or video-like features.
B.
AWNING SIGN — A sign affixed flat against the surface of an awning.
An awning is a retractable or fixed shelter constructed of nonrigid
materials on a supporting framework that projects from the exterior
wall of a building.
C.
BANNER SIGN — A sign made of fabric, plastic, or other nonrigid
material without an enclosing structural framework.
D.
BILLBOARD — A sign which identifies a use or advertises products and
services not available on the site or parcel on which the sign is located.
E.
BUSINESS CENTER SIGN — A sign which advertises two or more
businesses which:
(1) Are located on a single parcel of property;
F.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:377
Are connected by common walls, partitions, canopies, or other
structural members to form a continuous building or group of
buildings;
(2)
(3) Share a common parking area; or
Otherwise present the appearance of a single, contiguous business
area.
(4)
CANOPY SIGN — A sign affixed flat against the surface of a canopy. See
"canopy structure."
G.
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN — A sign on which the message is
changed mechanically, electronically or manually, including time/
temperature signs.
H.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — Temporary signs and banners,
including decorations and displays celebrating a traditionally accepted
patriotic or religious holiday, or special municipal or school activities.
I.
DAY — For the purpose of these regulations, a calendar day rather than
a business day.
J.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign which gives directions, instructions, or
facility information for the use on the lot or parcel on which the sign is
located, such as parking or exit and entrance signs.
K.
GROUND OR MONUMENT SIGN — A three-dimensional, selfsupporting,
base-mounted freestanding sign, consisting of two or more
sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message, business,
group of businesses or center name is affixed.
L.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A non-electric on-premises identification
sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant
or group of occupants.
M.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the
public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises.
Examples of incidental signs include credit card signs, signs indicating
the hours of business, no-smoking signs, signs used to designate rest
rooms, and signs providing information on business affiliations.
N.
LED SIGN — A sign in which the sign message is formed with the use
of light-emitting diodes on an otherwise blank background.
O.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign affixed flat against the surface of a theater
marquee. A marquee is a permanent structure constructed of rigid
materials that project from the exterior wall of a building.
P.
MOTOR VEHICLE SIGN — A sign measuring more than two square
feet in size that is mounted, placed, written, or painted on a vehicle or
trailer, whether motor-driven or not.
Q.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:378
NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN — A sign that is not related to or
connected with trade and traffic or commerce in general and includes
an election sign or a sign expressing an opinion or other point of view.
R.
OBSOLETE SIGN — A sign that advertises a product that is no longer
made an event that has already occurred, or that advertises a business
that has closed.
S.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which identifies a use or advertises
products and services not available on the site or parcel on which
the sign is located (e.g., billboards, garage sale signs, residential open
house signs, signs providing directions to a business).
T.
POLE OR PYLON SIGN — A permanently affixed sign which is erected
upon or supported by the ground on one or more poles, uprights or
braces.
U.
PORTABLE OR MOVABLE SIGN — A sign designed to be moved easily
and not permanently attached to the ground, a structure, or a building,
including signs with wheels, poster panel signs, signs mounted on
vehicles for advertising purposes, hot-air and gas-filled balloons,
pennants, streamers, ribbons, pinwheels, nongovernmental flags and
searchlights.
V.
POSTER PANEL SIGNS — A sign that is located outside of a business
on a daily basis for the purpose of providing the public with information
about the business (e.g., products and services offered, daily specials,
etc.). Poster panel signs include sandwich signs and "A" frame signs.
W.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, that is affixed
to any building or wall and whose leading edge extends more than 12
inches beyond such building or wall.
X.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign advertising the real estate upon which
the sign is located as being for sale, rent, or lease.
Y.
REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign that is designed to
promote the sale or rental of lots, homes, or building space in a real
estate development (such as a subdivision or shopping center) which is
under construction on the parcel on which the sign is located.
Z.
ROOF LINE — The top edge of a roof or parapet wall, whichever
is higher, but excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor
projections. The roofline is the highest point of the roof surface if a
flat roof; to the deck of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs. See "height,
building."
AA.
BB. ROOF SIGN — A sign erected above the roof line of a building.
CC. SEARCHLIGHT — See "lighting, searchlight." [Amended 5-17-2012]
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:379
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — Temporary and portable signs containing
public messages concerning noncommercial special events that are of a
religious, charitable, social or educational nature.
DD.
SUBDIVISION OR ENTRY SIGN — A permanent on-premises sign
identifying a vehicular entrance to a residential subdivision, residential
complex, or business complex.
EE.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign, banner or other advertising device
constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other light temporary
material, with or a without structural frame, or any other sign intended
for a limited period of display, but not including decorative display for
holidays or public demonstration.
FF.
WALL SIGN — A sign painted or attached directly to and parallel to the
exterior wall of a building.
GG.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign installed inside a window and intended to be
viewed from the outside.
HH.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:380
SITE — Any tract, lot, or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or
parcels, which compose an area proposed for development and/or earth
change.
SKILLED NURSING, SPECIALIZED OR SUPPORTIVE CARE FACILITY —
See "nursing home."
SOIL EROSION CONTROL — Structures, facilities, barriers, berms,
vegetative cover, basins, and/or any other installation, temporary or
permanent, which are designed to minimize and prevent erosion.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:381
STORM DRAIN — A system of open or enclosed conduits and appurtenant
structures intended to convey or manage stormwater runoff, groundwater
and drainage.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The runoff and drainage of precipitation
resulting from rainfall, snowmelt or other natural event or process.
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a basement or mezzanine as
defined herein, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next
above it, or, if there is not a floor above, then the ceiling above. A mezzanine
shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than 50% of the area of the
story underneath said mezzanine, or, if the vertical distance from the floor
next below the mezzanine to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more.
STREETS —
STREET, ARTERIAL — Roadways that are designed to carry throughtravel
movements. Principal arterials carry long distance through
movements while minor arterials move traffic between principal
arterials and minor streets. Arterial streets are identified in the City of
Lapeer Master Plan.
A.
STREET, COLLECTOR — Roadways that serve to gather traffic from
local roads and subdivisions streets of residential neighborhoods and
deliver to arterial streets. Collector streets are identified in the City of
Lapeer Master Plan.
B.
STREET, MINOR — Roadways that provide access to individual
properties and homes. They are generally short and provide connection
to collector streets. Minor streets are identified in the City of Lapeer
Master Plan.
C.
STREET, PRIVATE — A privately owned and maintained thoroughfare
including any rights-of-way and traveled surfaces which afford traffic
D.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:382
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members
of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or in the
dimensions or configurations, or of the roof and exterior walls or means of
egress.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials whether fixed or portable,
anything constructed, erected, or artificially built-up which requires a
location on or below the surface of land or water, including a part or parts
thereof and all equipment within the structure.
SUBDIVISION — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land
by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of
more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more
parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted
from the platting requirements of the Land Division Act, Public Act No.
288 of 1967, as amended.35 The term "subdivide" or "subdivision" does not
include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the
property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any
resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel
conforms to the requirements of the Act or the requirements of the City
Land Division Ordinance.
SUBDIVISION PLAT — A map or chart depicting the subdivision of land as
regulated by the Land Division Act of 1967, Public Act No. 288 of 1967, as
amended.
SWIMMING POOL — A nonporous container containing water having a
depth of greater than 24 inches or having a surface area of greater than
250 square feet, or a pool permanently equipped with a water recirculating
system or constructed of structural materials, excepting retention or
detention ponds.
TEMPORARY USE — A use or building permitted under the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance for a fixed period of time, with the intent to
circulation and principal means of access to abutting property,
including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and
other thoroughfare. A private street shall include any drive or roadway
which is not a dedicated public right-of-way, and which provides or has
the potential for providing access to two or more existing parcels and/
or main buildings.
STREET, PUBLIC — A public thoroughfare, including any rights-ofway
and traveled surfaces which afford traffic circulation and principal
means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way,
drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and other thoroughfare; except
an alley.
E.
STREET, SIDE YARD — A side yard of a corner lot, which is adjacent to
a street. [Amended 5-17-2012]
F.
35.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:383
discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time that does not involve
the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion
pictures, or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.
TRADE OR INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL — A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, industrial,
commercial, and/or trade skills such as accounting, data processing, and
computer repair. This classification excludes establishments providing
training in an activity that is not otherwise permitted in the zone. Incidental
instructional services in conjunction with another primary use shall not be
considered a business and trade school.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis which
is less than 32 feet in length and is of such a width and weight as not to
require special highway movement permits when drawn by a vehicle.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or structures are designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which land or structures are occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission given by the Zoning Board of Appeals to a
property owner to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter
which may occur when compliance with this chapter would create a
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship on the property owner.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, or road, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VETERINARY FACILITIES, CLINICS — A place where animals or pets are
given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of
such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and
shall be only incidental to such hospital use.
WALL — The vertical exterior surface of a building and the vertical interior
surfaces which divide a building's space into rooms, or a solid fence of
stone, brick, concrete or similar material.
WAREHOUSE — A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, excluding bulk storage
of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that present hazards or
conditions commonly recognized as offensive.
WATERCOURSE — An open trench either naturally or artificially created
which periodically or continuously contains moving water draining an area
of at least two acres which has definite banks, a bed and visible evidence of
a continued flow or occurrence of water.
WATERSHED — The total land area which contributes runoff, or is within
such an area, to a common outlet, such as a lake or stream. Also known as
the "drainage area."
WETLAND — Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:384
does support, wetland vegetation and/or aquatic life. Also known as a bog,
swamp, marsh, etc. (Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended).36 The Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality is the authority on the presence and
regulatory status of wetlands.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment or place of business
primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers;
to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to
other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise
for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. This is not
considered a general commercial use.
WIND GENERATOR — Equipment including a turbine, blades and tower
as well as related electrical equipment used to produce electrical power,
primarily for the needs of the consumer on site.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES — All structures and accessory
facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose
of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not
be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices, personal
communication transmission equipment and exchanges, microwave relay
towers, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile
radio service facilities.
YARD — An open space on the same land with a building or group of
buildings, which open space lies between the building or group of buildings
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
A.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), commercial wireless
telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
B.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
C.
TOWER — A self-supporting monopole structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes.
The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and
any support thereto. "Tower" does not include lattice structures or
structures supported by guy wires or cables.
D.
36.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 324.101 et seq.
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:385
and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
ZONING — The dividing of the City into districts of a number and shape
considered best suited to carry out the purposes of the zoning act and the
creation of uniform regulations throughout each individual district. Such
districts are referred to as zoning districts in this chapter.
ZONING ACT — The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006,
as amended.37
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ZBA) — The City of Lapeer Zoning Board of
Appeals created under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of
2006, as amended.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The City of Lapeer Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING PERMIT — Written approval by the Planning Department or
Building Official that is required before commencing any construction,
reconstruction, alteration of any building or other structure or before
establishing, extending or changing any use on any lot.
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
uniform depth of which is measured at right angles to the front lot line.
A.
REAR YARD — An open area extending across the full width of the lot,
the uniform depth of which is measured at right angles to the rear lot
line.
B.
SIDE YARD — An open unoccupied area between a main building and
the side lot lines, extending from the front yard area to the rear yard
area. The width of the side yard shall be measured horizontally from
and at right angles to the nearest point of the side lot line.
C.
37.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 7-24.03 LAPEER CODE § 7-24.03
1:386
Chapter 8
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 7-24.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-24.03
1:387

ARTICLE I
In General
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 8-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the City's Buildings and Building
Regulations and it is intended to be read and applied in conjunction with
the provisions of all articles within this chapter of the City Code, under
which the City of Lapeer assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code,
Act 230 of 1972, MCLA § 125.1501 et seq. (the "Act"), as amended from
time to time, throughout its corporate limits and which designates the
City's Building Official or designee as the enforcing agency to discharge the
responsibility of the City of Lapeer under the Act.
§ 8-2. Building Official.
§ 8-3. Fee Schedule.
Fees for applications, plan reviews, permits, inspections, licenses,
registrations, appeals and other charges or penalties shall be as specified in
the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule (the "Fee Schedule") approved by the City
Commission, as amended from time to time.
§ 8-4. Bonds.
Bonds shall be posted before the issuance of a building permit for new
construction, or for other construction as determined in the discretion of
the Building Official as provided in the Fee Schedule. The bonds shall
assure that the public right-of-way is consistently maintained at all times
during construction, provide a fund for payment for damages to public
property and/or utilities caused by construction, guaranty completion of
work sufficient to obtain a final certificate of occupancy, and provide a
fund for payment of outstanding and unpaid water, sewer street cleaning,
barrier erection, and any other such charges determined by the City to be
unpaid. Bonds shall be returned without the payment of interest when a
A. For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be a Building Official or
designee as designated by the City Manager. This Building Official or
designee shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and the
inspection of all work done under the provisions of the mechanical,
electrical, plumbing and building codes of the City and the safety
inspection of all premises, including structures thereon, as provided
herein.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, whenever the phrase "Building
Official," "Building Inspector" or "code official" is used in this chapter, it
shall be synonymous with the Building Official or designee.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:389
final certificate of occupancy has been issued, less any amounts required to
be used by the City in accordance with this chapter.
§ 8-5. Establishment of Construction Board of Appeals.
In accordance with the provisions of the Act, the City of Lapeer
Construction Board of Appeals is hereby established and shall perform its
duties in accordance with said Act and all applicable codes and/or statutes
as required within said Act. The Board shall propose by-laws and rules of
procedure for approval by the City Commission.
§ 8-6. Repealer.
All ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed.
§ 8-7. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in other sections or articles of this chapter,
a violation of any section, article or provision shall be considered a civil
infraction and subject to the provisions of Chapter 62, Civil Infractions, of
the Code of the City of Lapeer.
§ 8-8. through § 8-12. (Reserved)
§ 8-4 LAPEER CODE § 8-8
1:390
ARTICLE II
Address Numbering
[Adopted 4-13-1994 (Ch. 51 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 8-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health and safety by
requiring the acquisition and posting of address numbers to assist
ambulance, police, fire department and other public safety and service
agencies to locate those in need of assistance or service.
§ 8-14. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms are hereby defined:
ASSIGNED ADDRESS NUMBER — An address number which has been
designated for a site by Detroit Edison prior to the effective date of this
article or by the City Assessor after the effective date of this article.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The main building located on a parcel or lot.
Garages, pole barns, and other buildings which are normally accessory to
other structures shall not be deemed to be "principal buildings" unless they
are provided with a separate electrical meter.
PRIVATE STREET — A nonpublic street which has been approved by the
City in compliance with City ordinances. Easements and private drives shall
not be deemed to be "private streets."
§ 8-15. Address number required.
Each dwelling and each principal building within the City shall obtain and
display an assigned address number. An address number shall only be
issued for a public or private street.
§ 8-16. Application.
All applicants for building permits for construction of a dwelling or other
principal building shall also apply for an address number for the structure.
The number shall be issued by the City Assessor promptly after all required
information is provided by the applicant.
§ 8-17. Posting.
Each dwelling or other principal building on a parcel of land within the City
shall post the assigned address number. The number must be visible from
the street. Whenever a dwelling or principal building is located more than
100 feet from the center of a public or private street, or is otherwise difficult
to see from the street, the owner shall post the address number at the point
at which the driveway enters the public or private street.
§ 8-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-18
1:391
§ 8-18. Numerals. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Each posted address number shall consist of numerals at least four inches
in height for one- or two-family use and at least six inches for commercial
or industrial use and of a contrasting color to the attached surface.
§ 8-19. New construction.
Whenever a new dwelling or other principal building is constructed, the
address number shall be posted in compliance with this article at the time
construction is commenced. However, if the address number has not been
issued prior to commencement of construction, the address number shall be
posted within 24 hours after being issued.
§ 8-20. Multiple address numbers.
Developments which need individual address numbers for locations within
the site shall comply as follows:
§ 8-21. Private streets.
In the event that the dwelling or principal building is located on a private
street, there shall also be erected a road sign identifying the name of the
private street, in conformity with City street signage requirements, where
the private street enters the public street. The name of the private street
shall be reviewed and approved by the City. In the event that a private drive
or easement is upgraded to a private street, any existing numbers shall be
replaced with address numbers based on the private street location.
§ 8-22. Electrical service.
No address number or permit for a dwelling or principal building shall be
issued unless an application has been filed with Detroit Edison to acquire
access to electrical service. In lieu of a Detroit Edison service application,
A. Mobile home parks. The mobile home park shall be assigned a single
address number for the public street or road on which the park is
located. Each individual home site within the park shall be assigned a
separate address number. Home sites or lots shall be consecutively
numbered. Each internal street shall have a continuously maintained
sign indicating the range of numbers on that street.
B. Multiple-family dwellings over four units. Each individual building shall
receive an address number. Each dwelling unit within that building
shall receive a number which includes the building address number
plus a number indicating the floor and the dwelling unit.
C. Multiple-unit buildings. All other principal buildings containing more
than one unit shall receive an address number for the building. The
individual units within the building shall be given a number by the City
Assessor based upon the layout and location of the structure.
§ 8-18 LAPEER CODE § 8-22
1:392
an applicant may sign a waiver to the effect that electrical service has not
been verified.38
§ 8-23. through § 8-24. (Reserved)
38.Editor's Note: Former § 8-11, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 8-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-23
1:393

ARTICLE III
Building Code
[Adopted as Ch. 8 of the 1978 General Ordinances; amended
7-24-2008]
§ 8-25. Codes adopted. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
In accordance with the provisions of the Act, there is hereby adopted by
reference the following:
§ 8-26. Changes in code.
This section, and all changes and amendments to the prior Building Code,
are hereby deleted.40
§ 8-27. Availability of code. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Complete copies of codes adopted are available for public inspection at the
office of the Lapeer City Building Official.
§ 8-28. Temporary trailer.
The Building Official may issue a permit for the temporary use of a
manufactured trailer or mobile home for office, storage or business
purposes. The Building Official shall make an inspection and submit a report
A. Michigan Building Code, as amended from time to time.
B. Michigan Residential Code, as amended from time to time.
C. International Property Maintenance Code, as amended from time to
time.
D. International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as amended from time to
time.
E. International Fuel Gas Code, as amended from time to time.
F. Michigan Energy Code, as amended from time to time.
G. ICC A117 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities Standard, as
amended from time to time.
H. Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings, as amended from
time to time.39
39.Editor's Note: Former § 8-13, Agency designated, and former § 8-14, Michigan Building
Code adopted, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
40.Editor's Note: Former § 8-16, Establishment of Construction Board of Appeals, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 8-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-28
1:395
to the City Commission and such permit shall be subject to any conditions
placed on it by the City Commission. The permit shall be limited as to the
time of use of the temporary trailer, but in no case shall the time of use be
more than one year. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by
a permit fee in accordance with the schedule adopted by the Lapeer City
Commission.
§ 8-29. through § 8-30. (Reserved)
§ 8-28 LAPEER CODE § 8-29
1:396
ARTICLE IV
Electrical Code
[Adopted as Ch. 15 of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 8-31. Code adopted. [Amended 7-24-2008; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
In accordance with the provisions of the Act, there is hereby adopted
by reference the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 70) National
Electric Code, as amended from time to time, including Part 8 Rules. Said
references to the National Electrical Code, including Part 8 Rules, shall
mean the Michigan Electrical Code.
§ 8-32. Availability of code. [Amended 7-24-2008; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A complete copy of the Code adopted shall be available for public use and
inspection at the office of the Lapeer City Building Official.
§ 8-33. Effective date.
This article shall take effect at 12:01 a.m., October 27, 1983.
§ 8-34. through § 8-35. (Reserved)
§ 8-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-34
1:397

ARTICLE V
Mechanical Code
[Adopted as Ch. 34 of the 1978 General Ordinances; amended in its
entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 8-36. Code adopted.
In accordance with the provisions of the Act, there is hereby adopted by
reference the Michigan Mechanical Code, as amended from time to time.
§ 8-37. Availability of code.
A complete copy of the code adopted shall be available for public use and
inspection at the office of the Lapeer City Building Official.
§ 8-38. through § 8-39 (Reserved)
§ 8-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-38
1:399

ARTICLE VI
Plumbing Code
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 8-40. Code adopted.
In accordance with the provisions of the Act, there is hereby adopted by
reference the Michigan Plumbing Code, as amended from time to time.
§ 8-41. Availability of code.
A complete copy of the code adopted shall be available for public use and
inspection at the office of the Lapeer City Building Official.
§ 8-42. through § 8-43. (Reserved)
§ 8-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-42
1:401

ARTICLE VII
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 8-44. Code adopted.
In accordance with the provisions of the Act, there is hereby adopted by
reference the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended from
time to time.
§ 8-45. Availability of Code.
A complete copy of the code adopted shall be available for public use and
inspection at the office of the Lapeer City Building Official.
§ 8-46. through § 8-47. (Reserved)
§ 8-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-46
1:403
Chapter 9
HOUSING
§ 8-46 LAPEER CODE § 8-46
1:404
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 9-1. Short title.
Articles I through X of this chapter shall be known as the "Housing
Ordinance of the City of Lapeer" and may be cited as such.
§ 9-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Housing Ordinance is to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the people of the City by establishing minimum housing
standards for dwellings, to provide for the elimination of overcrowding, to
provide standards for sanitary conditions in and around structures used
for human habitation, to determine the responsibilities of the owners and
occupants of dwelling and to provide for the administration and
enforcement of this Housing Ordinance.
§ 9-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this Housing Ordinance shall apply to any person owning,
occupying, managing or controlling any dwelling in the City.
§ 9-4. Definitions. [Amended 4-24-1991]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and phrases shall
be construed according to the common usage of the language;
provided, however, that the technical words and phrases and such
others as may have acquired a special meaning in the law shall be
construed according to such technical or special meaning. Words
imparting the masculine shall extend to and be applied to the feminine
and neuter genders.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES — A building or structure in which the use
is incidental to that of the main building and which is located on the
same premises.
ADMINISTRATOR — The City Manager or authorized representatives
charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing this
Housing Ordinance.
ANIMAL — Any living species other than human, insect or plant.
ANNIVERSARY DATE — The date by which the requirements for
application, inspection, and certification for the annual rental
inspection shall have been met.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and
partly above grade and which has at least 1/2 of its height above grade.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:405
BASIC STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS — The parts of a building which
provide the principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety,
including, but not limited to, plated, studs, joists, rafters, stringers,
stairs, subflooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window
frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing,
masonry and all other essential components.
BOARDING HOUSE — Any dwelling occupied in any such manner that
certain rooms in excess of those used by members of the family, as
hereinafter provided, and occupied as a home or family and are leased
or rented to persons outside of the family, without any attempt provided
there or therewith for cooking or kitchen accommodations.
BUILDING MATERIAL — Includes, but is not limited to, lumber, bricks,
concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or
equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or
cement, nails, screws, fence posts and fencing.
CEILING HEIGHT — The clear vertical distance from the finished floor
to the finished ceiling.
CELLAR — That portion of a building which has at least 1/2 of its height
below grade.
CITY — The municipal corporation that is the City of Lapeer and
includes all authorized agents of the City when acting within the scope
of their authority.
DETERIORATE — To decay, decompose, or degenerate.
DETERIORATION or DETERIORATED — The fact or process of decay or
degeneration which has progressed to the point where it has resulted in
or will soon result in making a structure, object, or mechanism unsafe,
unsanitary, inoperable, unusable, or unsuitable for its intended use,
including, but not limited to, the advanced stages of rot, rust, mold,
insect ingestion, infestation, or destruction.
DWELLING — Any structure, including the yard or part thereof, used
for residential purposes, whether occupied or not.
DWELLING UNIT — A single room or rooms providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building, or a portion thereof,
designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building designed exclusively for and
occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed exclusively for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other.
§ 9-4 LAPEER CODE § 9-4
1:406
EMERGENCY — A condition of imminent danger calling for immediate
action to avoid death, injury, or illness to a human or the destruction or
severe damage of real or personal property.
EXIT — That portion of a means of egress which is separate from all
other spaces of a building or structure by construction or equipment.
EXIT ACCESS — That portion of a means of egress which leads to an
entrance to an exit.
EXIT DISCHARGE — That portion of egress between the termination of
an exit and a public way.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents,
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized
and legal pest-eliminative methods approved by the Housing Code
Official.
FAMILY — An individual or a group of two or more persons related
by birth, adoption, or marriage, together with not more than two
additional persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
FINISH SURFACES — Material used for the final covering of basic
structural elements. Finish surfaces include, but are not limited to,
ceilings, walls, wainscoting, kickboards, moldings, stops and floor
coverings.
FIRE HAZARD — A condition which may cause loss, damage, or injury
to persons or property by reason of fire, explosion, or action of the
elements.
FURRED CEILING — Any ceiling which is installed below the joists
which constitute the structural framing of the floor/ceiling assembly or
attic floor above.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
GOOD REPAIR — To be property installed, safe, stable and maintained
sufficiently free of defects or deterioration so as to be in compliance
with the applicable codes set forth in § 9-6.
GOOD WORKMANSHIP — Completing a task of construction, repair or
replacement in compliance with this Housing Ordinance.
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GUEST ROOM — Any room or rooms used, or intended to be used, by a
guest for sleeping purposes.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The net floor area within the enclosing
walls of the room excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes,
§ 9-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:407
cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures that is in compliance with the
required minimum ceiling height for a habitable room area.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room within a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. [Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls,
storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable
rooms.]
HARDSHIP — Any factor deemed by the Housing Board of Appeals to
permit variation from the provisions of the Housing Ordinance.
HOTEL/MOTEL — Any building containing six or more guest rooms,
intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out
to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.41
HOUSING BOARD OF APPEALS — A board consisting of five members
whose function is to appeal any decision by a Building Official.[Added
4-22-2010]
HOUSING OFFICIAL — The rental inspector designated by the Building
Official or by any person designated by the City Manager as a Housing
Code Official.[Amended 4-22-2010]
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around the dwelling, of any
birds, rodents, cockroaches, fleas, lice, bedbugs, or vermin.
INSPECTOR — A housing inspector or any other employee of the City
whose responsibilities include enforcement of this Housing Ordinance.
INTERIOR FIXTURES — Those interior items and hardware which
provide customary finished amenities and protection within a dwelling.
Interior fixtures include, but are not limited to, doors, door knobs,
latches, locks, hinges, handles, hooks, light fixtures, electrical outlets
or switch cover plates, vents or opening grates, railings, shelving,
cabinetry and mirrors.
JUNK — Includes any abandoned, discarded, unusable, or unused
objects or equipment including, but not limited to, furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, cans, implements, parts of motor vehicles,
machinery, cloth, rubber, bottles, any metals, boxes, cartons, or crates.
MEANS OF EGRESS — [Amended 4-22-2010]
A continuous and unobstructed path of travel from any point in
a building or structure to a public way, and consisting of three
separate and distinct parts:
(a) The exit access;
(b) The exit; and
(c) The exit discharge.
(1)
41.Editor's Note: The former definition of "housekeeping unit," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 4-22-2010.
§ 9-4 LAPEER CODE § 9-4
1:408
MOTEL — See "hotel/motel."
NATURAL PERSON — A human being.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANCY or OCCUPY — The fact or act of a human being living
or sleeping in a dwelling or unit within a dwelling, whether the human
being is physically present or temporarily absent.
OCCUPANT — A person who occupies a dwelling.
OPEN WINDOW AREA — The resulting square footage of open space to
the outdoors when a window has been opened to its maximum distance
as measured clear of the sash frame.
OWNER or OWNERSHIP — Any person holding legal or equitable title
to a property or to real improvements upon a property solely, jointly,
by the entireties, in common or as a land contract vendee. "Owner"
shall also mean any person who in fact has been empowered to act on
behalf of, or as the agent of, the owner. "Owner" shall also mean any
person who has or exercises care, custody, dominion or control over any
property.
A means of egress comprises the vertical and horizontal means of
travel and shall include intervening room spaces, doors, hallways,
corridors, passageways, balconies, ramps, stairs, enclosures,
lobbies, escalators, horizontal exits, courts, and yard.
(2)
(1) Any public nuisance known at common law or equity.
Any condition which might attract, and be dangerous to children,
whether in a dwelling, on the premises upon which a dwelling is
located, or upon an unoccupied lot near a dwelling. This includes,
but is not limited to, abandoned wells, cisterns, shafts, basements,
excavations, abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles or parts
thereof; structurally unsound fences, outbuildings or structures;
lumber, rubbish, fences, debris, vegetation, mounds of gravel, sand
or earth which might prove a hazard for inquisitive minors, and
whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health.
(2)
(3) Overcrowding a room with occupants.
(4) Lack of adequate egress.
(5) Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
(6) Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
(7) Improper disposal of garbage and rubbish.
Whatever renters air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
health, as determined by the Housing Official.
(8)
Insufficient support, inadequate sewage drainage, heating or
wiring.
(9)
§ 9-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:409
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
PREMISES — Any improved or unimproved lot or parcel of land and its
buildings and structures.
REMOTE EXIT — A required exit providing a protected way of travel to
an exit discharge which is as far removed as practical from the sleeping
area.
RENTAL DWELLING — A dwelling containing dwelling units which
are leased or rented that is not owner occupied, including consumer
housing cooperatives and limited dividend housing corporations as
defined in MCLA § 125.1411.
RENTAL UNIT — Any dwelling unit rented or leased.
RESIDENTIAL — All dwellings, structures containing dwelling and
rooming units, accessory structures and yards.
RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT — A person having his place of
residence or principal place of business in the City of Lapeer, who is
legally responsible for operating a dwelling in compliance with all the
provisions of this chapter.[Amended 4-22-2010]
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person, including but not limited to
owner, land contract holder, land contract vendee, tenant or
responsible agent, who has the responsibility to construct and/or
maintain a dwelling in compliance with this party shall be determined
from information placed on file with the Assessor's Office, Treasurer's
Office, and/or County Register of Deeds Office.
ROOMER — A person who is provided with living and sleeping, but not
for cooking purposes.
ROOMING DWELLING — A dwelling containing rooming units.
ROOMING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a rooming
dwelling used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, etc.
RUBBISH CONTAINER — A watertight container with tight-fitting lid
for the temporary storage of garbage and rubbish that is constructed of
metal, or other durable material impervious to rodents, that is capable
of being serviced without creating unsanitary conditions.
SANITARY — Free of grease, excrement, dirt, food residue, garbage,
rust or similar matter which can harbor bacteria unsafe to humans or
animals, or which produces strong odors or which provides food for, or
is an available source of food for animals or insects.
§ 9-4 LAPEER CODE § 9-4
1:410
§ 9-5. Compliance required.
All dwellings shall meet the standards set forth in this Housing Ordinance.
§ 9-6. Application of codes.
All dwellings shall be maintained safe and in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. Any alteration shall comply with current applicable state
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires a permanent location on the ground.
UNFIT DWELLING — Any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, in
whole or in part, which shall be found to have any of the following
defects:
UNSAFE — A condition which is reasonably likely to do harm to humans
or property if not corrected or stopped.
VERMIN — Rodents, birds and insects which may be destructive of real
or personal property or injurious to health.
WINDOW AREA — The area of the glazing of a window through which
light passes, including the area taken up by the window pane dividers.
YARD — All parts of a piece of property lying between a dwelling
foundation and the property lines, as well as that portion of public
property or a right-of-way lying between that piece of property and the
street curb or pavement or lying between the piece of property and the
center line of an alley.
One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or to the public.
(1)
One which lacks light, ventilation, heating, or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public as prescribed by the provisions of this chapter.
(2)
One which does not include a stove or other cooking facilities, a
refrigerator, or space for dry food storage; except, however, where
said facilities are not required by this chapter for a particular type
of dwelling unit.
(3)
One which exposes or could expose the occupants to dangerous
levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sewer gas, fuel gas,
dust, or other harmful pollutants.
(4)
One which, because of its location, exposes or could expose the
occupants to serious adverse environmental conditions, natural or
man-made, such as dangerous walks, steps, instability, flooding,
poor drainage, septic tank backups, sewage hazards, mudslides, or
excessive noise, vibration or vehicular traffic.
(5)
§ 9-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6
1:411
codes, other nationally recognized codes, or local ordinances adopted by the
City Commission.
§ 9-7. Basic structural elements.
Basic structural elements shall be in good repair and shall be adequate to
support the imposed load as required by this chapter.
§ 9-8. Foundations and supports.
Foundations, foundation walls and supporting columns shall be in good
repair and shall be adequate to support the imposed load as required by this
chapter.
§ 9-9. Basement and cellar walls and floors.
Walls and floors of basements and cellars shall be in good repair.
§ 9-10. Exterior attachments.
Exterior attachments to basic structural elements, including but not limited
to gutters, downspouts, screening, vents, antennas, awnings, and utility
connections, shall be in good repair.
§ 9-11. Drains.
All rain water shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to
cause dampness in the walls, ceiling or floors of any habitable room, or of
any bathroom or water closet compartment.
§ 9-12. Exterior surfaces.
All exterior surfaces shall be weather tight, waterproof, verminproof and
shall be kept in good and sanitary condition. Exterior surfaces which
deteriorate from exposure to the weather shall be protected by a properly
applied water-resistant paint, waterproof finish or other weatherization
treatments.
§ 9-13. Porch and split-level railing.
Any side of a floor, porch, stoop or patio which is more than three steps
above the immediate adjacent ground or floor shall be bounded by a railing
in good repair.
§ 9-14. Stairway handrails and guardrails.
All stairways with three steps or more shall be bounded by railings which
are properly installed and in good repair.
§ 9-15. Means of egress generally.
§ 9-6 LAPEER CODE § 9-15
1:412
§ 9-16. Emergency escape required. [Amended 4-22-2010]
All sleeping rooms in a dwelling unit or a rooming unit below the fourth
story shall have a minimum of one operable window or exterior door
approved for emergency egress or rescue in accordance with the following:
§ 9-17. Interior fixtures.
All interior fixtures shall be in good repair.
§ 9-18. Interior surfaces.
§ 9-19. Paint chips.
Paint chips lying on the floor of a dwelling or lying on the ground around
an occupied dwelling shall be deemed unsafe and shall be removed by the
responsible party.
A. All means of egress from any point in a dwelling to a public way shall be
maintained in good repair, available for immediate use and free of all
obstructions.
B. All egress doors shall open from the side in which egress is made
without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort when the
building or area is occupied.
C. All interior exit stairway doors shall be operable from either side.
A. Where windows are provided as a means of egress or rescue the sill
height shall not exceed 44 inches above the floor;
B. Bars, grills, or screens placed over emergency escape windows shall be
releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool, or
excessive force;
C. An emergency escape or window is not required in a one or two-family
dwelling when a door of a sleeping room discharges directly to a public
way.
D. All locking devices on exterior windows and doors of individual rental
units shall be properly installed and in good repair. All doors which
provide entry to rental dwellings from a common hall shall be provided
with a properly installed locking device in good repair without interior
keyed locks or dead bolts.
A. All floors in any room where any water faucet is present shall be
protected by some unbroken waterproof or water-resistant coating or
covering; coating or covering such as paint, tile, linoleum, or carpet.
B. Any wall in a dwelling unit or rooming unit in which a water faucet is
present shall be made of some waterproof material or shall be
completely covered by some waterproof or water-resistant coating or
covering. Such coating or covering shall be in good repair.
§ 9-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-20
1:413
§ 9-20. Bathroom facilities for dwelling units.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a toilet, a lavatory sink, and a bathtub or
shower. All such facilities shall be in good repair and shall be located within
a completely enclosed room or rooms.
§ 9-21. Bathroom facilities for rooming units.
At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be provided
for each eight roomers, or portion thereof. All such facilities shall be in good
repair and:
§ 9-22. Kitchen facilities required.
Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen or kitchenette. A kitchen or
kitchenette shall have a sink, cabinets and counter or table, all of which
shall be in good repair.
§ 9-23. Kitchen appliances required.
Every occupied dwelling unit shall contain a stove, an oven, and a
refrigerator, maintained in good repair.
§ 9-24. Prohibited location of kitchen facilities.
Kitchens, kitchenettes or kitchen facilities shall not be permitted in rooming
units.
§ 9-25. Cooking.
Food prepared or cooked indoors shall be done only in a kitchen or a
kitchenette or an area approved by the City's Mechanical Inspector or Fire
Official.
§ 9-26. Maintenance of facilities.
All materials, fixtures, equipment, appliances, or facilities required by this
Housing Ordinance or otherwise present in a dwelling shall be in good
repair.
A. Located in a completely enclosed room or rooms affording privacy
which is separate from the habitable rooms;
B. Are accessible, from a common hall or passageway, to all roomers
sharing such facilities without going outside of the dwelling; and
C. Such facilities are not more than one story removed from the roomer's
rooming unit.
§ 9-20 LAPEER CODE § 9-27
1:414
§ 9-27. Smoke detector required. [Amended 4-22-2010]
A minimum of one single station smoke detector shall be provided and
maintained in good repair, in each individual sleeping room and one single
smoke detector outside of each sleeping area and every level of a dwelling,
including the basement.
§ 9-28. Maintenance of utilities, required facilities and services.
§ 9-29. Infestation.
Every dwelling shall be kept free of uncaged rodents, uncaged birds,
cockroaches, fleas, lice, bedbugs, or vermin.
§ 9-30. Sanitation.
All rooms, room surfaces, systems, fixtures, facilities, equipment,
appliances, and furnishings shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
A. No person, except as provided in this section, shall cause any of the
following disconnected, removed or otherwise terminated or
interrupted when the utility, service, facility or equipment is being
furnished to or used by another person:
(1) Water service;
(2) Sewage service;
(3) Fuel supply;
(4) Heating equipment or facilities;
(5) Ventilation or air-conditioning facilities or equipment;
(6) Hot water facilities or equipment;
(7) Electrical facilities or equipment; or
(8) Garbage pickup service.
B. This section shall not apply to a necessary temporary interruption of
service required for maintenance, repair or replacement, nor to any
such interruption needed to act upon an emergency or unsafe
condition. Any termination or interruption of water, sewer, gas, or
electric utility service for nonpayment of bills shall be deemed to be
caused by the person who contracted with the utility for the service.
§ 9-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-30
1:415

ARTICLE II
Minimum Standards for Electrical Service
§ 9-31. Electrical system required.
Every dwelling shall have an electrical system, components and safety
devices which are properly installed and in good repair.
§ 9-32. Electrical system inspection.
If visual inspection by the Housing Code Official reveals that the wiring
system of an existing dwelling unit is inadequate or if code certification for
any reason is required or requested, the following minimum standards shall
be complied with:
A. Entrances and exits. Where two or more entrances and/or exits exist, at
least two shall be illuminated by exterior lights exterior lights shall be
controlled by interior wall switches, located for convenient and readily
accessible use.
B. Living room. The living room shall be provided with a conveniently
located wall-switch-controlled light or receptacle. The switched
receptacle may be one of the required receptacles in the room. Duplex
receptacles shall be equally spaced around the walls of the room, one
duplex receptacle on each wall, unless the spacing is more than 12 feet.
C. Kitchen. The kitchen shall be provided with illumination. The required
illumination shall be controlled by a wall switch located for convenient
and readily accessible use. A separate kitchen appliance circuit shall be
provided, supplying a minimum of three grounding-type duplex
receptacle outlets with GFI protection. Two of these receptacles shall
be readily accessible and spaced for convenient use of portable
appliances. New appliance circuits shall be twenty-ampere capacity.
[Amended 4-22-2010]
D. Bathroom. The bathroom shall be provided with illumination, controlled
by a conveniently located wall switch. A receptacle separate from a
light fixture shall be provided. The receptacle shall be not more than 30
inches of the outside edge of each basin and shall be GFI-protected.
[Amended 4-22-2010]
E. All other habitable rooms. Habitable rooms shall be provided with a
conveniently located wall-switch-controlled light or receptacle. A
minimum of two additional duplex receptacles are required, equally
spaced around the room.
F. Basement. The basement shall have a minimum of one lighting outlet in
each 200 square feet or major fraction of area for general illumination.
All enclosed areas that may be walked into (except coal bins) shall be
provided with a lighting outlet.
§ 9-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-32
1:417
§ 9-33. Evidence of electrical system inadequacy.
Any of the following shall be considered evidence in inadequacy:
G. Laundry area. Laundry areas shall be provided with illumination. This
light shall be permitted to be connected to the laundry circuit. A wallmounted
grounding-type duplex receptacle shall be provided adjacent
to the laundry equipment on a separate circuit. New laundry circuits
shall be twenty-ampere capacity.
H. Spacing heating system. Heating equipment that requires electricity for
operation of any facet shall be provided with an individual circuit. A
disconnect switch shall be provided on or adjacent to the equipment.
Exception: Thermopile-controlled furnaces
I. Stairwells. Stairwells shall be adequately illuminated. Lighting outlets
shall be controlled by wall switches. Wall switches shall be located for
convenient and readily accessible use. Switches shall not be located
where it is necessary to use darkened stair sections for their operation.
Stairwells connecting finished portions of dwelling shall be provided
multiple-switch control: One at the head, the other at the foot of the
stairwell.
J. Service and/or feeder.
(1) The service or feeder to an existing dwelling unit shall be a
minimum of three-wired, on one-hundred-ampere capacity. Service
equipment shall be dead front, having no live parts exposed
whereby accidental contact could be made. All plug-type fuses shall
be Type S.
(2) Exception: An existing properly installed fifty-five-ampere capacity,
three-wire service and feeders of 30 ampere, two-wire, are
acceptable if adequate for the load being served.
K. Existing wiring and equipment. Existing wiring and equipment shall be
in good repair. Circuit extensions made with flexible cord wiring in lieu
of permanent wiring shall be eliminated.
A. Use of cords in lieu of permanent wiring.
B. Oversizing of over-current protection for circuits, feeders or service.
C. Unapproved extensions to the wiring system in order to provide light,
heat or power.
D. Electrical overload.
E. Misuse of electrical equipment.
F. Lack of lighting fixtures, bathrooms, laundry room, furnace room,
stairway or basement.
§ 9-32 LAPEER CODE § 9-34
1:418
§ 9-34. Joint use area lighting.
Every hallway, stairway, entryway and joint use area within a dwelling
containing three or more dwelling or rooming units shall be lighted at all
times.
§ 9-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-34
1:419

ARTICLE III
Minimum Standards for Plumbing Service
§ 9-35. Water system required.
Every dwelling shall have a water system which is in good repair and free
of leaks. The water system shall connect each sink, water closet, basin,
bathtub, or shower facility present in the dwelling to the public water
supply or to a private water supply approved by the City.
§ 9-36. Hot and cold water supply. [Amended 4-22-2010]
Every sink basin, bathtub, or shower facility required by this Housing
Ordinance shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
The hot water lines shall be connected to and supplied from an approved
hot water source which is properly installed and maintained in a safe and
good working condition.
§ 9-37. Sewer system required.
Every dwelling shall have a sewage disposal system which is in good repair
and free of leaks. A sewage disposal system shall connect each sink, water
closet, basin, bathtub, shower, and floor drain to a public sanitary or
combined sewer or to a private sewage disposal system approved by the
City.
§ 9-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-37
1:421

ARTICLE IV
Minimum Standards for Heating and Mechanical Systems
§ 9-38. Heating system required.
Every dwelling shall have a heating system. Every heating system shall be
properly installed, in good repair and free of leaks and obstructions.
§ 9-39. Heat supply.
Every heating system shall provide sufficient heat to maintain a
temperature of 68° F. in every bathroom and required habitable room, as
measured three feet above the floor.
§ 9-40. Heat.
Where the heat regulator of a heating system is not within the direct control
of the occupant, the owner or responsible party shall be responsible for
maintaining the temperature within all habitable rooms and bathrooms of
occupied units at or above 68° F., as measured three feet above the floor.
§ 9-41. Mechanical systems. [Amended 4-22-2010]
A. Dryers shall be vented to the outside and maintained. Gas piping shall
be maintained so as not to create a hazard to the occupants and or the
structure.
B. Water heaters shall be installed and maintained. A water pressure relief
valve must be located within four inches of the floor for rental rehab
and within six inches of the floor for housing choice voucher
inspections.
§ 9-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-41
1:423

ARTICLE V
Residential Garbage and Rubbish Storage and Disposal
§ 9-42. Garbage and rubbish removal service; containers. [Amended
4-22-2010]
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of every dwelling to provide
garbage/rubbish removal service a minimum of once weekly.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling regulated by this chapter shall dispose of
all his garbage/rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
the rubbish facility provide by the owner.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply garbage/rubbish
containers with lids for all one-family and two-family rental dwellings.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply a dumpster for all
multiple-family rental dwellings.
(1) The dumpster shall be of a size and type approved by the Health
Officer.
(2) The dumpster shall be located within the side or rear yard and shall
be screened by an obscuring barrier from the public view.
(3) The obscuring barrier shall not be more than eight feet above
ground level and shall always be at least one foot above the height
of the dumpster.
(4) The obscuring barrier shall be constructed of materials which are
durable, weather-resistant, rust-proof, fire-resistant, and shall be
maintained in good condition by the owner or responsible party.
(5) All obscuring barriers shall meet the requirements for wind
pressure provided for in § 7-17.09A of Chapter 7, Zoning, of the
Code of the City of Lapeer.
(6) Wood or wood products, when utilized, shall be treated and/or
painted and shall be so maintained at all times. Chain-link or other
wire fence utilizing metal, plastic, or wood slats shall not be
considered an obscuring barrier for the purpose of this section.
(7) No obscuring barrier shall be used as a sign or otherwise for
advertising purposes.
§ 9-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-42
1:425

ARTICLE VI
Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements
[Amended 4-22-2010]
§ 9-43. Habitable rooms required.
Every dwelling shall have one or more habitable rooms which together
contain the habitable floor area required by § 9-44.
§ 9-44. Habitable floor area required.
§ 9-45. Sleeping room required.
§ 9-46. Ceiling height required.
A. Every dwelling unit shall have at least 150 square feet of habitable floor
area for each occupant. In no case shall any private dwelling be
occupied which does not contain at least 480 square feet of habitable
room area, nor shall it exceed the occupancy set forth by the Building
Code.
B. Every rooming unit occupied by one occupant in a rooming dwelling
shall contain at lease 80 square feet of floor area and every rooming
unit occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 45
square feet of floor area for each additional occupant.
A. Any room used as a bedroom or for sleeping purposes shall contain at
least 80 square feet of habitable floor area and a minimum of 45 square
feet of habitable floor area for each additional person who sleeps in that
room.
B. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall be located so as to
afford privacy of access not requiring passage through another
bedroom or bathroom.
A. Habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall have a ceiling height of not less
than seven feet six inches for at least 50% of the required area and may
have a sloped ceiling less than seven feet six inches in height with no
portion of the required areas less than five feet in height.
B. If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling which provides an area of
less than five feet, it shall not be considered as part of the floor area in
computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof or the
required habitable floor area.
C. Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms, and kitchens shall
have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet measured to the lowest
projection from the ceiling.
§ 9-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-47
1:427
§ 9-47. Minimum storage facilities.
Each dwelling unit shall be provided, for its exclusive use, storage in an
amount no less than 10% of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit.
There shall be direct access to the storage area without entry into another
dwelling unit. Each storage unit shall be lockable and separate for each
unit. In no instance shall existing garages be utilized for the required
storage.
§ 9-47 LAPEER CODE § 9-47
1:428
ARTICLE VII
Minimum Standards for Ventilation
§ 9-48. Windows, doors and screens.42 [Amended 4-22-2010]
All windows and exterior doors, including storm windows and doors, shall
be weathertight and in good repair. All existing screen doors and screens
shall be in good repair.
§ 9-49. Required window area ventilation required. [Amended
4-22-2010]
Each habitable room shall contain windows or skylights which have a
combined area equal to or exceeding 8% of the floor area of the room. The
required window area in a basement or cellar being used as a habitable
room shall be located entirely above grade. Bathroom ventilation shall have
a minimum of 4% openable area or mechanical ventilation in compliance
with Michigan Building Code or Michigan Residential Code.
§ 9-50. Natural lighting.
All required windows or skylights specified in § 9-49 must be maintained in
working order as to be able to open and close safely.
§ 9-51. Mechanical ventilation.
Permanently and properly installed mechanical ventilation controlled by
the occupant may be used in place of required natural ventilation in any
habitable room. Such mechanical ventilation shall be maintained in good
repair.
§ 9-52. Kitchen ventilation.
Kitchens and kitchenettes shall have a minimum of one required window
opening directly to the outdoors or be provided with mechanical ventilation.
When the kitchen is not provided with required natural ventilation,
mechanical ventilation shall be provided:
§ 9-53. Bathrooms, shower rooms and toilet rooms.
Bathrooms, shower rooms, and toilet rooms shall contain one window, not
less than three square feet in area, opening directly to the outdoors or shall
be ventilated by one of the following methods:
A. In the ceiling or wall close to the range and not more than four feet
from the center line of the range off the side or front of the range; or
B. In the wall directly above the range between wall cabinets and range,
provided a metal collector hood is installed.
42.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 9.148, Insect screens required, which was previously included
in this section, was repealed 4-22-2010.
§ 9-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-53
1:429
A. Individual vents or ducts installed in accordance with the State
Mechanical Code;
B. A skylight with not less than three square feet in area of ventilating
opening; or
C. By any system of mechanical ventilation operable by the occupant
which is capable of exhausting quantities of air as specified by the State
Mechanical Code.
§ 9-53 LAPEER CODE § 9-53
1:430
ARTICLE VIII
General Requirements and Responsibilities of Owners and
Occupants
§ 9-54. Responsibility of owners.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to keep and maintain each
dwelling so as to comply with the minimum basic requirements of this
Housing Ordinance. If the owner is prevented from complying with such
requirements by the actions of a tenant, it shall be the right of the owner
to terminate the tenancy and evict the tenant in accordance with applicable
state law.
§ 9-55. Responsibility of occupants.
Every occupant shall cooperate with the owner or responsible party and
shall be responsible for keeping and maintaining the dwelling in a safe and
sanitary condition, except for the normal wear and tear, and for meeting
the minimum requirements of this Housing Ordinance. Any occupant who
fails to comply with this section shall be subject to prosecution by the
appropriate authorities pursuant to this Housing Ordinance, and where
applicable, to eviction from the dwelling by the owner or responsible party
in accordance with state law.
§ 9-56. Keeping of animals limited.
No person shall keep, maintain or house any animal or fowl, except as
permitted in § 3-7 of the Code of the City of Lapeer.
§ 9-57. Animals in dwellings.
Animals kept or allowed within a dwelling shall not be permitted by the
occupant or responsible party to create any unsafe, odorous or unsanitary
condition or to cause any damage to the dwelling or structure.
§ 9-58. Animal nuisances.
Animals kept or allowed in a yard or in an accessory structure shall not
be permitted by the occupant or responsible party to create any unsafe,
odorous or unsanitary condition.
§ 9-59. Improvements in yards.
All improvements located in a yard, including, but not limited to walkways,
driveway, steps, fences and walls shall be in good repair.
§ 9-60. Trees, shrubs and plants.
Trees, shrubs and plant which have damaged a dwelling or which are
diseased or create an unsafe condition shall be trimmed or removed by the
responsible party.
§ 9-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-61
1:431
§ 9-61. Storage or accumulation of junk prohibited.
No person shall accumulate or permit to be accumulated junk, except in
a wholly enclosed structure provided that such storage does not harbor
vermin or pose a fire hazard to the occupants of the dwelling.
§ 9-62. Building materials.
Except as may otherwise be permitted by the holding of a specific business
license or by other City of Lapeer ordinance, no person shall store,
accumulate, or permit the storage or accumulation of any building materials
on property owned, leased, rented or occupied by him for any period longer
than reasonably necessary for the immediate use of such materials, but in
no event longer than 60 days.
§ 9-63. Partially completed dwellings.
No person shall maintain or allow to be maintained any partially completed
dwelling unless it is in the course of construction in accordance with an
existing building permit issued by the City.
§ 9-64. Securing dwellings.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any vacant dwelling
unless it is made safe by having all broken or missing panes of glass
replaced and all openings secured, or that all openings have sheathing, cut
to fit and set into the outside casings and nailed to the jamb properly.
§ 9-65. Unsafe dwelling.
§ 9-66. Unfit dwelling.
Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit, in whole or
in part, which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be
deemed to be unfit for human habitation:
A. No responsible party shall keep or maintain a dwelling that is an unsafe
condition due to, but not limited to the following:
(1) Unsanitary conditions.
(2) Inadequate exit facilities.
(3) Existence of a fire hazard.
(4) Any condition which is dangerous to human life or the public
welfare.
B. The responsible party shall make the dwelling safe by repairing or
removing it in accordance with the Housing Ordinance and other
pertinent provisions of Lapeer City ordinances.
§ 9-61 LAPEER CODE § 9-66
1:432
A. One which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infested so that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or to the public.
B. One which lacks light, ventilation, heating or sanitary facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public as prescribed by the provisions of this Housing Ordinance.
C. One which does not include a stove or other cooking facilities, a
refrigerator, or space for dry goods storage; except, however, where
said facilities are not required by this Housing Ordinance for a
particular type of dwelling unit.
D. One which exposes or could expose the occupants to dangerous levels
of air pollution from carbon monoxide, sewer gas, dust, or other
harmful pollutants.
E. One which because of its location, exposes or could expose the
occupants to serious adverse environmental conditions, natural manmade,
such as dangerous walks, steps, instability, flooding, poor
drainage, septic tank backups, sewage hazard, mud slides, or excessive
noise, vibration, or vehicular traffic.
§ 9-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-66
1:433

ARTICLE IX
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
§ 9-67. Basis of inspections.
Inspections will be made to obtain and maintain compliance with the
standards of this Housing Ordinance based upon one or more of the
following:
A. Probable cause to believe there is a violation of the standards of this
Housing Ordinance.
B. An observation by the City of a violation of the standards of this
Housing Ordinance.
C. A report or observation of a dwelling that is unoccupied and unsecured
or a dwelling that is fire-damaged.
D. The need to determine compliance with an order or notice issued by the
City.
E. Designation by the City Commission of an area where all dwellings are
to be inspected uniformly or intensively or for specific violations.
F. An emergency observed or reasonably believed to exist.
G. A request for an inspection by a responsible party.
H. Requirements of law where a dwelling is to be demolished by the City or
where ownership is to be transferred to the City.
I. Rental dwelling inspection. Except for facilities operated and
maintained pursuant to Chapter 2, Administration, Article VI, Housing
Commission, of the Code of the City of Lapeer, the Housing Official shall
inspect each dwelling unit of residential rental property in the City.
[Amended 4-22-2010]
J. Exemptions. [Amended 10-12-1994; 4-22-2010]
(1) All newly constructed rental dwelling units shall be exempt from
annual inspections for a period of two years from the issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
(2) All existing rental dwelling units which have been inspected and
certified as being in compliance of this Housing Ordinance shall be
certified for a period not to exceed two years. Compliance shall
mean that no violations of this Housing Ordinance exists that would
require a reinspection.
(3) Any exemption as set forth above may be revoked, restricted or
modified by the Housing Official for violations of this chapter. An
owner may appeal a loss of exemption to the Housing Board of
Appeals as described herein.
§ 9-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-68
1:435
§ 9-68. Reinspection. [Amended 4-22-2010]
If said dwelling unit or dwelling does not comply with the Housing
Regulations, the Housing Code Official shall notify the applicant and
reinspect the dwelling or dwelling unit for compliance within a reasonable
time considering the circumstances, but not to exceed 90 days. The method
for determining the conditions that require reinspection will be determined
on the severity of the noncompliant conditions.
§ 9-69. Fees for inspections and reinspections.
Fees for inspections and reinspections required by this chapter and all
administrative fees shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by
the City Commission of the City of Lapeer and are not subject to appeal to
the Housing Board of Appeals.
§ 9-70. Right of entry generally.
Authorized inspections inside a dwelling shall be made during reasonable
hours. Entry without the consent of an occupant or responsible party shall
require an administrative search warrant.
§ 9-71. Administrative search warrant.
If the owner or occupant fails to comply with the City of Lapeer's Housing
Ordinance inspection requests for a dwelling unit or residential rental
property, the enforcing agency shall obtain a search warrant from a court
of competent jurisdiction. The enforcing agency shall prepare the affidavit
and warrant stating:
§ 9-72. Order to repair or correct conditions.
Upon observing the existence of a violation of the standards of this Housing
Ordinance, the Housing Code Official shall issue an order to repair or
correct conditions to the responsible party. The order to repair or correct
conditions shall be issued:
§ 9-73. Order to repair or correct conditions.
The order to repair or correct conditions shall:
A. The address of the building to be inspected;
B. The nature of the inspection as defined in the Housing Ordinance;
C. The reasons for the inspections;
D. That it is issued pursuant to this § 9-71.
A. By delivering the order to the responsible party personally.
B. By sending the order by regular mail to the responsible party.
§ 9-68 LAPEER CODE § 9-73
1:436
§ 9-74. Posting an order to repair or correct conditions.
If the Housing Code Official determines that violations exist at a dwelling,
and is unable to personally serve the responsible party with an order to
repair or correct conditions, the Housing Code Official shall post an order to
repair or correct conditions in a conspicuous place on or near the affected
dwelling. The order shall state the following:
§ 9-75. Date of service of orders and notices.
A. Specify the date of the inspection.
B. Specify the address where the violation was found.
C. Include the name, telephone number and signature of the inspector.
D. Include a description and the location of each violation observed by the
inspector.
E. State that each violation is a separate punishable offense.
F. Order the responsible party to correct all listed violations by a specified
date and to contact the Building Department to determine if the
necessary work requires a permit or that the work be performed by a
licensed contractor.
G. State that reinspection will be made to determine whether all violations
have been corrected by the date specified.
H. Notify the responsible party that orders or notices issued for violations
of the following ordinance sections may not be appealed to the Housing
Board of Appeals:
(1) "Emergency orders" as stated in § 9-78.
(2) "Storage or accumulations prohibited" as stated in § 9-61.
(3) "Maintenance of utilities, required facilities and service" as stated
in § 9-28.
(4) "Securing dwellings" as stated in § 9-64.
A. The address of the dwelling.
B. The names of the owner, occupant or responsible party ordered to make
repairs.
C. Date by which the violations are to be corrected.
D. How further information can be obtained.
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 9-79, a responsible party shall be
deemed to receive an order or notice:
(1) On the date personal service is made.
§ 9-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-75
1:437
§ 9-76. Jurisdictional cooperation.
The assistance and cooperation of police, fire, health department and all
other officials shall be available as deemed necessary by the Housing Code
Official.
§ 9-77. Emergency entry authorized.
When an emergency is reasonably believed to exist or is known to exist
within a dwelling, the City shall have the right to enter immediately and at
any time without an administrative search warrant or without requesting
permission.
§ 9-78. Emergency orders.
If the Housing Code Official determines that a condition exists or is likely
to exist which is an emergency, the Housing Code Official shall immediately
attempt to verbally inform the responsible party and all occupants of the
dwelling of the nature of the emergency condition. The Housing Code
Official shall immediately attempt to verbally order the responsible party to
correct the condition. Such an order shall be effective immediately. Written
notice called for by this Housing Ordinance shall be prepared and mailed
to the responsible party as soon as practical after verbal notice has been
attempted. Failure to comply with an emergency order is a violation of this
Housing Ordinance.
§ 9-79. Time to correct violations.
(2) The day following the date the order or notice is mailed to the
responsible party.
B. All notices and orders of the Housing Code Official served on the
responsible local agent shall be deemed to have been served upon the
responsible party.
A. All orders issued regarding violations of this Housing Ordinance shall
provide a specified time for achieving compliance in relation to the
seriousness of the violation. The following time limits shall be used:
(1) Twenty-four to 72 hours after an order is mailed for an emergency
violation of § 9-28.
(2) Not more than seven calendar days after an order is mailed for
securing a vacant dwelling as per § 9-64 or for providing adequate
heat pursuant to §§ 9-39 and 9-40.
(3) Not more than 30 calendar days for all other violations, except as
stated in Subsections B, C and D below.
B. Orders to repair or correct conditions issued between October 31 and
April 1 for exterior work adversely affected by cold or snow may provide
§ 9-75 LAPEER CODE § 9-79
1:438
§ 9-80. Noncompliance with an order or notice.
Upon failure of the responsible party to comply with an order or notice, the
Housing Official shall issue an appearance ticket or refer the matter to the
City Attorney for prosecution or other appropriate legal action.
§ 9-81. Removal of posted signs or notices.
No person shall remove, damage, deface, interfere with, move or conceal
any order or notice posted pursuant to this Housing Ordinance without first
obtaining written permission of the Building Official. Any sign or notice
posted pursuant to this Housing Ordinance shall include a statement of this
provision.
§ 9-82. Change in ownership.
The Housing Official shall immediately issue a new order to repair or
correct conditions to any person assuming ownership or the status of
responsible party for any dwelling which has been cited in an order to
repair or correct conditions. A responsible party who has failed to comply
with an order to repair or correct conditions shall not be relieved of the
responsibility of having violated a provision of this Housing Ordinance by
transferring title to another person.
§ 9-83. Declaring a dwelling unsafe.
The Housing Official may declare a dwelling unsafe when the responsible
party has failed to comply with § 9-65.
§ 9-84. Notice of unsafe conditions.
The notice of unsafe conditions shall:
additional time for the completion of such work, but in no case longer
than June 30.
C. The Housing Official may extend the reinspection time provided in a
written notice when there are extenuating circumstances or where the
responsible party has made a substantial documented effort to correct
violations. In no instance shall the reinspection time provided extend
beyond two thirty-day extensions or 90 days beyond the date of initial
inspection.
D. The Housing Board of Appeals may grant one thirty-day extension if a
finding of substantial progress is made. Any additional extension of time
may be granted only by the City Commission of the City of Lapeer.
A. Specify the date of the inspection;
B. Specify the address where the violation was found;
C. Include the name, telephone number and signature of the inspector;
§ 9-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-84
1:439
§ 9-85. Posting of dwelling declared unsafe.
If the Housing Official declares a dwelling unsafe and is unable to
personally serve the responsible party with a notice of unsafe conditions,
the Administrator shall send the responsible party the notice by regular
mail and shall post a sign in a conspicuous place on or near the affected
premises. The sign shall state the following:
§ 9-86. Order to vacate.
The Housing Official may issue an order to vacate when the Housing Official
has declared a dwelling unsafe pursuant to § 9-83. Such an order may be
served personally on the responsible party or by regular mail. A copy of
the order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the affected
dwelling and shall state the following:
D. Include a description and the location of each violation observed by the
inspector;
E. State that each violation is a separate punishable offense;
F. Order the responsible party to correct all listed violations by a specified
date;
G. State that a reinspection will be made to determine whether all
violations have been corrected by the date specified;
H. Specify that the responsible party shall make the dwelling safe by
repairing or removing it in accordance with this Housing Ordinance and
other pertinent provisions of Lapeer City Ordinances;
I. State the date in which the unsafe conditions are to be repaired or the
dwelling removed;
J. Specify that the City may demolish or make the dwelling safe if the
responsible party has failed to comply with a notice of unsafe
conditions. Any costs incurred by the City shall be a personal debt of the
responsible party to the City and shall be assessed as a lien against the
property; and
K. Shall inform the responsible party where to obtain the applicable
building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing permits for repair,
construction or demolition.
A. Address of the dwelling;
B. Date by which the violations are to be corrected; and
C. How further information may be obtained.
A. Date of which the dwelling shall be vacated;
B. Address of the dwelling;
§ 9-84 LAPEER CODE § 9-86
1:440
§ 9-87. Occupancy of unsafe dwelling prohibited.
No person shall occupy or permit or allow another person to occupy a
dwelling which has been declared unsafe under § 9-83.
§ 9-88. Failure to vacate.
If a responsible party fails to comply with an order to vacate, the Housing
Official may issue an appearance ticket or refer to the City Attorney's office
for prosecution or other appropriate legal action.
§ 9-89. Order to secure.
The Housing Official may issue an order to secure when he has declared a
dwelling unsafe pursuant to § 9-83. Such an order may be served personally
on the responsible party or by regular mail. The Housing Official shall post
an order to secure on or near the affected premises. The order shall state:
§ 9-90. Securing by City.
Where the responsible party has failed to comply with an order to secure,
the City may secure the dwelling. Any costs incurred by the City for
securing the dwelling shall be a personal debt of the responsible party to
the City and may be assessed as a lien against the property.
§ 9-91. Cost of demolition or making dwelling safe.
If the City demolished or repairs an unsafe dwelling, the cost of demolition
or making a dwelling safe pursuant to the provisions of this Housing
Ordinance shall be a personal debt of the responsible party of the City and
may be assessed as a lien against the property.
§ 9-92. Registration of rental dwellings; application information.
[Amended 4-24-1991]
Application for registration shall be made on such forms and in accordance
with such instructions as may be provided by the City's Building
Department and shall include:
C. How further information may be obtained.
A. The address of the dwelling;
B. The name of the responsible party ordered to secure the dwelling;
C. The date by which the dwelling is to be secured; and
D. How further information may be obtained.
A. The address of the rental dwelling or rooming dwelling;
B. The total number of dwelling units or room units;
§ 9-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-92
1:441
§ 9-93. Registration fees.
Fees for registration required by this chapter and all administrative fees
shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City
Commission of the City of Lapeer and are not subject to appeal to the
Housing Board of Appeals.
§ 9-94. Inaccurate or incomplete registration information.
No responsible party shall provide inaccurate or incomplete information for
the registration of rental dwelling and rooming dwelling of fail to provide
information required under § 9-92. In those cases in which the responsible
party is not a natural person, the information required for the registration
shall be provided for the organization owning the rental dwelling or
rooming until and for the president, general manager or other chief
executive officer of the organization. Where more than one natural person
has an ownership interest, the required information shall be provided for
each person.
§ 9-95. Change in registration information.43 [Amended 4-22-2010]
If any change occurs in registration information provided under § 9-92, the
responsible party shall file an amended registration form with the Building
Department within 30 days after the change occurs. A new owner of a
registered rental or rooming dwelling shall reregister the dwelling within
30 days of assuming ownership.
C. The identification of each dwelling unit by letter or number;
D. The name, residence address, business address, business telephone
number of the property owner;
E. The name, residence address, business address, business telephone
number of a responsible party if other than the owner;
F. The address where the owner/responsible party will accept notices or
orders from the City;
G. The date of registration;
H. Identification of any dwelling unit or rooming units not to be rented;
I. Date of birth of the owner;
J. Date of birth of the responsible party; and
K. Tenant's name and apartment (unit) number.
43.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 9.230, Registration acknowledgment, previously included in
this section, was repealed 4-22-2010.
§ 9-92 LAPEER CODE § 9-96
1:442
§ 9-96. Certificate of compliance for rental dwellings. [Amended
4-24-1991; 4-22-2010]
The name, residence address, business address, business telephone number
of the property owner.
A. The Housing Official shall issue a certificate of compliance for rental
dwellings and rooming dwelling when:
(1) A proper registration application has been filed;
(2) The responsible party has paid all fees to the administrative
agency; and
(3) The rental dwelling or rooming dwelling has been inspected by the
Housing Official and complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Housing Official may issue a temporary or conditional certificate of
compliance for rental dwellings and rooming dwellings when:
(1) A proper registration application has been filed;
(2) The responsible party has paid all fees to the administrative
agency; and
(3) The rental dwelling or rooming dwelling has been inspected by the
Housing Official and found to be safe, sanitary, and generally fit for
human occupancy even though it may not totally comply with all
the provisions of this chapter, and that the temporary occupancy
thereof would not pose a threat to the public health, safety and
welfare.
C. The Housing Official may revoke a certificate of compliance, or a
temporary or conditional certificate of compliance, when the rental
dwelling or rooming dwelling no longer complies with the provisions of
this chapter and/or when the conditions attached to the temporary or
conditional certificate of compliance have not been met.
D. No responsible party shall let or rent to any person a vacant dwelling
until unless it has been inspected or granted a certificate of compliance,
or a temporary or conditional certificate of compliance, by a duly
appointed inspector of the City.
E. No responsible party shall let or rent to any person a vacant dwelling
unit unless it is safe, clean and fit for human occupancy and complies
with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any rental dwelling unit
unless a certificate of compliance, or temporary or conditional
certificate of compliance, has been issued with respect to said dwelling
unit.
§ 9-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-96
1:443
§ 9-97. Certificate of compliance for mixed uses. [Amended
4-22-2010]
Mixed uses, dwelling and commercial, business or otherwise, must obtain a
certificate of compliance for both dwelling use and the other mixed use or
uses.
§ 9-98. Appeals to Housing Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-22-2010]
A responsible party may appeal an order or notice issued pursuant to this
Housing Ordinance, except those matters for which this chapter does not
allow an appeal, if such person:
§ 9-99. Procedure for filing appeal. [Amended 4-22-2010]
Any person wishing to make an appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals
shall file a completed appeal form with the City Administration within 14
calendar days from the date of issuance of the order or notice on the
appellant. If a notice is not personally served on the appellant, it may be
sent to the appellant by regular mail. Failure of the appellant to receive
notification when sent to the address stated on the appeal form will not
render such notice defective. The City shall notify the appellant and other
interested parties including the occupants of the affected dwelling of the
time and date of the Housing Board of Appeals hearing pursuant to § 9-112A
and B.
§ 9-100. Continuation of existing use. [Amended 4-22-2010]
The legal use and occupancy of a dwelling existing on the date of adoption
of this chapter may be continued without change unless the Building Official
determines compliance with this chapter is necessary for the safety and
welfare of the occupants and/or the public.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any rental dwelling unit if
the certificate of compliance, or temporary or conditional certificate of
compliance, has been revoked by the Housing Official.
H. A certificate of compliance shall expire one year from the date of its
anniversary date, unless an exemption is granted per § 9-67J. A
temporary or conditional certificate of compliance shall expire on the
date specified thereon, but in no event more than one year from the
date of its issuance.
A. Believes that the order or notice is an incorrect interpretation of the
Housing Ordinance;
B. Proposed an alternative method equal to or more stringent than the
provisions cited in the order or notice.
§ 9-96 LAPEER CODE § 9-101
1:444
§ 9-101. Records to be maintained. [Amended 4-22-2010]
Adequate inspection records indicating the condition of all rental dwelling
units shall be kept on file in the Building Department.
§ 9-102. Release of records. [Amended 4-22-2010]
Release of records generated and maintained by the Building Department
of the City of Lapeer shall be regulated pursuant to the Freedom of
Information Act, P.A. 442 of 1976, as amended.44
§ 9-103. Complaint confidentiality. [Amended 4-22-2010]
The City shall not release any information regarding the name, address or
telephone number of any person who reports a violation of the Housing
Ordinance except:
§ 9-104. Covenants of lessor or licensor: construction. [Amended
4-22-2010]
A. By consent of the complainant;
B. Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act, P.A. 442 of 1976, as
amended; or
C. By court order.
A. In every lease or license of residential premises, the lessor or licensor
covenants:
(1) That the premises and all common areas are fit for the use intended
by the parties.
(2) To keep the premises in reasonable repair during the term of the
lease or license, and to comply with the applicable health and
safety laws of the state and of the local unit of government where
the premises are located, except when the disrepair or violation of
the applicable health or safety laws has been caused by the tenant's
willful or irresponsible conduct or lack of conduct.
B. The parties to the lease or license may modify the obligations imposed
by this section where the lease or license has a current term of at least
one year.
C. The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed and the
privilege of a prospective lessee or licensee to inspect the premises
before concluding a lease or license shall not defeat any right to have
the benefit of the covenants established herein.
44.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.231 et seq.
§ 9-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-105
1:445
§ 9-105. Enforcement generally. [Amended 4-22-2010]
This Housing Ordinance may be enforced jointly and severally by the City's
Fire Official, the Chief Building Official and the City administration, by and
through their agents. An owner or occupant of the premises upon which any
violation exists may bring an action to enforce the provisions of this chapter
in his own name. Upon application by the City may be substituted for, or
joined with, the complainant in the discretion of the court.
§ 9-106. Civil remedies for violations. [Amended 4-22-2010]
§ 9-107. Delaying or terminating prosecution. [Amended 4-22-2010]
Nothing in this article shall delay or be cause for terminating the criminal
prosecution of a responsible party for violation of this Housing Ordinance.
§ 9-108. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-22-2010]
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any such provision shall be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless
otherwise provided.
A. If a dwelling is constructed, altered, converted or maintained in
violation of any provision of this Housing Ordinance or of any order or
notice given hereunder, or if a nuisance exists at any dwelling, the City
may institute an action in the Circuit Court to prevent such unlawful
construction, alteration, conversion or maintenance, or restrain,
correct or abate such violation of any illegal act of the conduct of any
business in or about such dwelling. The procedure for such action shall
be the same as for an injunction or abatement of a nuisance under
Circuit Court rules, under the statutes made and provided in such
cases, or under the common law. The judgment of the court in such case
may direct the correction, repair or rehabilitation of the dwelling or the
abatement and may authorize the City to carry out the provisions of the
judgment in case of default by the defendant. Whenever the City has
incurred any expense for the enforcement of this Housing Ordinance or
the judgment of the court, the City may institute and maintain a suit
against the responsible party of the dwelling in respect to which such
expense was incurred and may recover the amount of such expense in
addition to the costs of the suit. The judgment of the court may order
the vacation of the dwelling until the corrections, rehabilitations or
abatements are completed.
B. The City shall have a lien upon the premises for the expenses
necessarily incurred in the execution of such judgment, which lien shall
have priority over all other liens or encumbrances, except taxes,
assessments or mortgages recorded previous to the existence of such
lien. Such a lien may be foreclosed as in the case of foreclosure of
mortgages in Circuit Court.
§ 9-105 LAPEER CODE § 9-108
1:446
ARTICLE X
Housing Board of Appeals
§ 9-109. Creation.
A Housing Board of Appeals is hereby established which shall perform its
duties and exercise its powers in such a way that the objectives of this
chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice
done.
§ 9-110. Membership and appointment.
§ 9-111. Meetings; hearings.
§ 9-112. Notice.
A. The Board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Commission for a term of three years.
Any vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the
remainder of the unexpired term and confirmed by the City
Commission. The Housing Board of Appeals shall annually elect is own
Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary and other such officers as it may
deem necessary.
B. The Secretary shall maintain a permanent official record of all its
transactions; such records shall be public records.
C. The compensation of the appointed member of the Housing Board of
Appeals shall be fixed by the City Commission.
A. All meetings of the Housing Board of Appeals shall be at the call of the
Chairman and at reasonable times as the Board may determine.
B. All hearings conducted by said Board shall be open to the public.
C. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct
of its business. [Amended 4-22-2010]
D. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
E. The City Clerk, or his representative, shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote, indicating such fact and shall also keep
records of its hearing and other official action.
F. The Board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses, officials, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the
production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the
matters before it.
G. The Board shall make no decision except in a specific case.
A. The Board shall either by general rule or in specific cases, determine
the interested parties who, in the opinion of the Board, may be affected
§ 9-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-112
1:447
§ 9-113. Appeals.
§ 9-114. Fees.
The City Commission may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by
resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for
appeals to the Housing Board of Appeals. At the time of the notice of appeal
is filed, said fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer to the credit of the
General Revenue Fund of the City of Lapeer.
§ 9-115. Decisions.
by any matter brought before it, which, in all cases shall include those
persons to whom any real property within 300 feet of the premises in
question shall be assessed, according to the latest assessment records
of the City of Lapeer, and the occupants of all single- and two-family
dwellings within 300 feet of said premises in question.
B. Such notice may be delivered either personally or by mail addressed to
said respective owners as disclosed by the most current assessment
records contained in the office of the City Assessor and to the tenants at
the address given for the property in the latest assessment record. If
the tenants name is not known, the term "occupant" may be used.
A. Appeals from the rulings of any official charged with the enforcement of
this chapter may be made to the Board by the person, firm or
corporation or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by
any such decision.
B. Any person may appeal and testify at a meeting (hearing) either in
person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney.
C. Such appeals shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by
the Board of Appeals.
D. The appellant shall file with the City Administration a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds of the appeal.
E. The officer from whom such appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record together with a
summary report of all previous action taken.
F. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless any official, department, board or commission of
the City of Lapeer certifies to the Board of Appeals after notice of
appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a
restraining order granted by a court of record.
A. The Housing Board of Appeals shall render a decision on the appeal
without unreasonable delay in the form of a resolution, either reversing,
§ 9-112 LAPEER CODE § 9-115
1:448
modifying or affirming, wholly or partly, the decision appealed from
or may make such orders, requirements, or determination as ought
to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of any officer, or
department, board or commission of the City of Lapeer.
B. The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirements, decisions, or determination of any
officer or department, board, or commission of the City of Lapeer, or to
decide in favor of the applicant in the manner upon which it is
authorized by this chapter to render a decision. [Amended
4-22-2010]
C. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the
Board the power or authority to alter or change this chapter; such
power and authority being reserved to the City Commission of the City
of Lapeer in the manner provided by law.
D. Appeal to Circuit Court by an unsuccessful appellant to the Housing
Board of Appeals shall be made within 21 days of the date of the
meeting at which the vote was taken.
§ 9-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-115
1:449
Chapter 10
CONDOMINIUMS
§ 10-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be designated as the "City of Lapeer
Condominium Ordinance."
§ 10-2. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to regulate the division and development of land
under the Condominium Act (PA 59 of 1978)45 so that the development is
comparable in quality of design to property divided and developed by other
methods.
§ 10-3. Definitions.
A. All terms as defined in the Condominium Act shall control in this
chapter unless indicated to the contrary in this section.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases shall
be defined as follows:
ACCESSIBLE — In reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets
one or both of the following requirements:
BLOCK — Property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street
and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or
between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of
development.
CITY COMMISSION — The elected governing body of the City of
Lapeer.
CLERK — The Clerk of the City of Lapeer.
Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an
existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards
of the State Transportation Department or County Road
Commission, and of the City, or has an area where a driveway can
provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and meet all
such applicable location standards.
(1)
Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access
to an existing road or street and that meets all applicable location
standards of the State Transportation Department or County Road
Commission and of the City, or can be served by a proposed
easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing road or
street and that will meet all such applicable location standards.
(2)
45.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 9-115 LAPEER CODE § 10-3
1:450
CONCEPTUAL PLAN — A map or graphic representation of the
proposed subdivision submitted for purposes of introduction and initial
feedback.
CONDOMINIUM GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS — Portions of the
condominium development owned and maintained by the condominium
association, as defined in the Condominium Act (PA 59 of 1978).
CONDOMINIUM LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS — Portions of the
condominium development other than the condominium unit itself
reserved for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners of the
condominium development, as defined in the Condominium Act (PA 59
of 1978).
CONDOMINIUM MASTER DEED — The condominium document
recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits
and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and including
those items required in Section 8 of the Condominium Act (PA 59 of
1978).
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT — A plan or project consisting of not less
than two condominium units established in conformance with the
Condominium Act (PA 59 of 1978).
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT, CONVENTIONAL — A development in
which ownership interest is divided under the authority of the
Condominium Act (PA 59 of 1978) and in which the condominium unit
consists primarily of the dwelling or other principal structure and most
of the land in the development is part of the general common area.
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:451
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT, SITE — A development in which ownership
interest is divided under the authority of the Condominium Act (PA
59 of 1978) and in which the condominium unit consists of a building
site, with or without structures, which along with associated limited
common elements, constitutes the equivalent of a lot.
§ 10-3 LAPEER CODE § 10-3
1:452
CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN — Drawings and information
prepared pursuant to section 66 of the Condominium Act (PA 59 of
1978).
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A condominium unit is that portion of a
condominium development designed and intended for occupancy and
use by the unit owner consistent with the provisions of the master deed,
as defined in the Condominium Act (PA 59 of 1978).
CONDOMINIUM, CONTRACTIBLE — A condominium project from
which any portion of the submitted land or building may be withdrawn
in accordance with the Condominium Act (PA 59 of 1978).
CONDOMINIUM, CONVERSION — A condominium project containing
condominium units, some or all of which were occupied before the filing
of a notice of taking reservations under Section 71 of the Condominium
Act (PA 59 of 1978).
CONDOMINIUM, EXPANDABLE — A condominium project to which
additional land may be added in accordance with the Condominium Act
(PA 59 of 1978).
EASEMENT — A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by
the public, a corporation, or person, for specific uses and purposes, to
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:453
§ 10-4. Zoning Ordinance standards.
be designated as a "public" or "private" easement, depending on the
nature of the use.
ENGINEER — The staff engineer or consulting engineer of the City of
Lapeer.
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, and other additions to the natural
state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability.
MASTER PLAN — The comprehensive land use plan for the
municipality, including graphic and written proposals indicating the
general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public
buildings, zoning districts and all physical developments of the
municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan separately
adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly
adopted by the Planning Commission.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lapeer, Michigan.
PLANNER — The staff planner or consulting planner of the
municipality.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Lapeer, the members of which are appointed by the City Commission.
PROPRIETOR — A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or combination of any of them, which may hold any
ownership, interest in land, whether recorded or not.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN — The part of the Master Plan, which sets
forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed
streets and thoroughfares.
WAIVER — A variation or exception from standards contained in the
City of Lapeer Condominium Ordinance.
A. Lot size. In conventional condominium development, the condominium
unit is enclosed air space, such as condominium apartments. In a
conventional condominium, the entire site must meet the minimum lot
size requirements for the zoning district in which the parcel is located.
For site condominium developments, the condominium unit is a piece of
land that is sold as a building site just as lots in a subdivision are sold.
Each condominium unit in a site condominium and its associated
limited common area are considered equivalent to a "lot" and must
meet the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which
the parcel is located.
B. Setbacks. In conventional condominium development, the buildings
must be set back from the site's boundaries and from other buildings as
required for the zoning district in which the parcel is located. For site
condominium developments, the setbacks shall be from the outer edge
§ 10-3 LAPEER CODE § 10-4
1:454
§ 10-5. Lot splits.
Lots in a recorded condominium shall not be further partitioned or divided
unless in conformity with Chapter 7, Zoning, and provided further, that any
partitioning or dividing shall not be in conflict with Act 59, Public Acts of
1978,46 and shall be approved by resolution of the City Commission. No
zoning or building permit shall be sought nor shall any construction be
commenced prior to approval of the lot split by the City Commission.
§ 10-6. Condominium plan review.
of the "lot" consisting of a condominium unit and its associated limited
common area, and shall be consistent with the setbacks for principal
structures in the zoning district in which it is located.
A. Initial investigation.
(1) It is suggested that the proprietor meet informally with City staff to
investigate the procedures and standards of the municipality with
reference to this Condominium Ordinance.
(2) The proprietor should concern himself/herself with the following
factors:
(a) The proprietor shall secure a copy of the Zoning Ordinance,
Condominium Ordinance, City Design and Infrastructure
Standards and other similar ordinances or controls relative to
the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself/
herself aware of the requirements of the City of Lapeer.
(b) The averaged lot size, open space plan, or cluster housing
option provisions outlined in Chapter 7, Zoning, may be
applicable to certain types of conventional and/or site
condominium developments.
(c) The area of the proposed condominium development shall be
properly zoned for the intended use.
(d) The relationship of the proposed condominium development
with respect to the major thoroughfares and plans for widening
of thoroughfares shall be investigated by the proprietor.
(e) Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of
the municipality shall be investigated by the proprietor.
B. Review procedures for conventional condominiums.
(1) Following any initial investigations, the applicant for a conventional
condominium development would follow the site plan review
process as outlined in Chapter 7, Zoning.
46.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:455
(2) After final site plan approval, the applicant shall comply with the
provisions of § 10-7 through the end of this chapter.
C. Review procedures for site condominiums. Following any initial
investigations, the applicant for a site condominium development would
follow the process outlined in this section.
(1) Step One: Conceptual Plan Review. The proprietor may, prior to
preliminary site plan submittal, present a conceptual
representation of the entire proposed site condominium
development to the City for information and feedback. The
Planning Commission is not required to vote to approve or deny,
but may give the proprietor preliminary recommendations on the
proposed site condominium. Recommendations at this stage are
meant to provide direction and shall not infer approval at later
stages.
(a) The following items shall be included on a conceptual site plan
at a scale of not more than one inch to 200 feet:
[1] Lot sizes and lot dimensions.
[2] Street layout.
[3] Zoning of the property within the enclosed plat.
[4] Proprietor's name and address.
[5] Property boundary.
[6] Adjacent property and land use.
[7] Location map.
[8] Proposed phases.
[9] Existing natural features (wooded areas, floodplain,
wetlands, open water, streams, etc.).
[10] Existing easements.
[11] General proposed utility information.
[12] Topographic survey plan (show existing ground contour
lines) for the site and 100 feet beyond the property line.
Contour lines are to be shown every two feet. [Amended
9-14-2006]
[13] All existing driveways and streets within 100 feet of the
site.
[14] Plan shall otherwise comply with City of Lapeer Design
Standards and City Construction Specifications.
[Amended 9-14-2006]
§ 10-6 LAPEER CODE § 10-6
1:456
(b) The proprietor shall submit 10 copies to the City Zoning
Administrator. The Planning Commission shall consider the
proposed site condominium at the first Planning Commission
meeting that is held at least 30 days after submission to the
City Zoning Administrator.
(2) Step Two: Preliminary Approval. The purpose of this step is to
provide the proprietor with preliminary City approval prior to
proprietor producing construction drawings and obtaining
construction permits. All information required for final approval
shall be provided at this step, with the exception of the
construction drawings and construction permits.
(a) Information required on the site condominium plan submitted
for tentative approval, at a scale not more than one inch to 200
feet:
[1] All information required for conceptual plan review, as
listed in § 10-6C(1) of this chapter.
[2] Survey of property and legal description.
[3] Name of the proposed development.
[4] Name, address, and phone number of proprietor and
surveyor or engineer that prepared the plat.
[5] Location map of site condominium, including section and
range.
[6] Utility layout, including connections to existing systems,
pipe sizes, fire hydrant locations, sufficient sanitary and
storm sewer inverts to insure adequate depth, storm
detention/retention areas, storm sewer outlets and any
proposed utility easements. Drainage calculations are not
required at this stage.
[7] Names of abutting subdivisions or site condominiums.
[8] Street names, right-of-way, right-of-way widths and typical
road cross sections.
[9] Proposed drainage shall be indicated by drainage arrows;
drainage arrows should be sufficient to show preliminary
drainage directions of the entire development. [Amended
9-14-2006]
[10] Provide complete language for the master deed, including
the condominium by-laws.
[11] Indicate all one-hundred-year floodplain areas.
[12] Indicate any wetland areas that are regulated by the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
§ 10-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:457
[13] Required zoning setbacks.
[14] Date and North arrow.
[15] All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use
and conditions of such dedication.
[16] Topographic survey plan (show existing ground contour
lines) for the site and 100 feet beyond the property line.
Contour lines are to be shown every two feet. [Amended
9-14-2006]
[17] Plan shall otherwise comply with City of Lapeer Design
Standards and City Construction Specifications.
[Amended 9-14-2006]
(b) The proprietor shall submit 15 copies of the site condominium
plan to the City Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to
the next Planning Commission meeting. Upon receipt, the City
Zoning Administrator shall submit copies to members of the
City Planning Commission and shall make one copy available to
each appropriate City department, which shall review the site
condominium plan and provide written comments to the
Planning Commission at least two weeks prior to the next
meeting.
(c) Planning Commission preliminary review of site condominium
plan.
[1] Before making a recommendation on the site condominium
plan, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing,
notice of which shall contain the date and place of hearing,
and shall be sent by certified mail to the proprietor and
taxpayers of record of land immediately adjacent to the
proposed site condominium, at least seven days prior to
the hearing date.
[2] The site condominium plan and any required
accompanying data shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission for the purpose of checking its compliance
with the Master Plan, Chapter 7, Zoning, the City Design
and Infrastructure Standards, other applicable City
ordinances, and other specifications of this chapter, all in
accord with sound engineering practice.
[3] The Planning Commission shall submit a written
recommendation on the site condominium plan to the City
Commission. The Planning Commission shall either:
[a] Recommend preliminary approval of the site
condominium plan; or
§ 10-6 LAPEER CODE § 10-6
1:458
[b] Set forth reasons for not recommending preliminary
approval and the requirements for preliminary
approval.
(d) City Commission preliminary review of site condominium plan.
[1] The site condominium plan and any required
accompanying data, and written comments from
reviewers, shall be reviewed by the City Commission for
the purpose of checking its compliance with the Master
Plan, Chapter 7, Zoning, the City Design and
Infrastructure Standards, other applicable City
ordinances, and other specifications of this chapter, all in
accord with sound engineering practice.
[2] The City Commission shall make a determination on the
preliminary approval of the site condominium plan within
90 days of filing of the site condominium plan with the City
Zoning Administrator. The City Commission shall either:
[a] Approve the preliminary site condominium plan; or
[b] Deny the site condominium plan, setting forth reasons
for not approving the site condominium plan and the
requirements for preliminary approval.
[3] City Commission approval shall be good for a period of one
year. The approval may be renewed for an additional oneyear
period upon application by the proprietor and
approval by the City Commission.
(3) Step Three: Final Approval of Site Condominium Plan. This is the
final approval stage prior to the proprietor constructing any
proposed infrastructure.
(a) The proprietor shall file with the City Commission the
following, in compliance with the requirements of the
Condominium Act, and any other requirements stipulated in
this chapter.
[1] Approvals from:
[a] Lapeer County Road Commission (if the proposed site
condominium includes or abuts roads under the Road
Commission's jurisdiction).
[b] Lapeer County Drain Commissioner.
[c] Michigan Department of Transportation (if the
proposed site condominium includes or abuts a state
highway, or includes streets or roads that connect
with a state highway).
§ 10-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:459
[d] Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (if the
land proposed to be developed abuts a wetland,
floodplain, lake or stream).
[2] Proof that the proprietor has notified all public utilities in
the City of the application by certified mail (including the
local telephone, gas, electric and cable company).
[3] A Mylar copy, an electronic copy, and 10 blueprint copies
of the site condominium plan submitted for final approval
containing all of the information required for preliminary
approval (the electronic copy shall be retained by the
City).
[4] Documentary evidence sufficient to allow the City to
ascertain whether all the proper persons have signed the
proprietor's certificate, including a current commitment or
policy of title insurance (or equivalent) written by a
company licensed to issue title insurance policies in
Michigan.
[5] Proof of City Engineer's approval of construction plans.
Plans to be prepared and submitted as directed in § 10-7 of
this chapter.
[6] An agreement with the City consisting of a master deed
restriction upon the site condominium whereby the
Building Inspector will not be permitted to issue a building
permit for any structure upon any lot within said site
condominium until the improvements as specified herein
have been completed, or satisfactory arrangements have
been made with the City for the completion of said
improvements. These master deed restrictions shall be
made a part of all deeds or contracts for any unit within
the site condominium.
[7] The proposed master deed, including by-laws, shall be
submitted. Such restrictions shall not be in contradiction
to those of the Zoning Ordinance or any other ordinance of
the City. These restrictions shall become a part of the final
recorded site condominium and shall be recorded along
with the site condominium in the Office of the Lapeer
County Register of Deeds.
(b) City Commission final approval of site condominium plan.
[1] The City Commission shall make a determination on the
site condominium plan at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, or within 20 days of the date of submission. The
City Commission shall either:
[a] Give final approval to the site condominium plan; or
§ 10-6 LAPEER CODE § 10-6
1:460
[b] Set forth reasons for not approving the site
condominium plan and the requirements for final
approval.
[2] Final approval of the site condominium plan by City
Commission shall be valid for a period of two years. The
approval may be renewed for an additional one-year
period upon application by the proprietor and approval by
the City Commission.
D. Construction approval.
(1) The proprietor may not record the condominium master deed and
begin taking reservations on the proposed units until the City
Commission has granted final approval of the condominium plan,
and one of the following has occurred:
(a) The proprietor has installed all improvements. The proprietor
shall submit as-built engineering drawings, as required by this
chapter, and said drawings shall have been checked and
approved for compliance with requirements contained in this
chapter, in the City of Lapeer Design Standards and
Construction Specifications or standards adopted by other
agencies with authority to approve site condominium
improvements. The City may also require on-site construction
observation by the City or its representatives with costs paid
for by the proprietor.
(b) The proprietor may, at the City Commission's option, provide a
bond, cash, certified check or bank letter of credit in the
amount of the cost of installation of all improvements as a
performance guarantee. The performance guarantee shall
accrue to the City, and shall be in an amount equal to the total
estimated cost for completing construction of the specific
public improvement, including contingencies, based on an
estimate by the City Engineer. The term length for which the
performance guarantee is in force shall be for a period to be
specified by the City Commission. If the performance
guarantee is in the form of a bond, it shall be with a surety
company authorized to do business in the State of Michigan
and acceptable to the City Commission. The performance
guarantee shall not be released to the proprietor until the
proprietor has submitted as-built engineering drawings of the
constructed improvements, as required by this chapter, and
said drawings have been checked and approved for compliance
with requirements contained in this chapter, in the City of
Lapeer Design Standards and Construction Specifications or
standards adopted by other agencies with authority to approve
site condominium improvements. The City may also require onsite
construction observation of such improvements by the City
or its representatives with costs paid for by the proprietor.
§ 10-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:461
§ 10-7. Construction plans.
(2) Prior to the final acceptance by the municipality of improvements, a
two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the City
Commission shall be posted by the proprietor.
(3) City Commission approval.
(a) Upon receipt of verification of approval of the requirements
above, the Commission shall take action upon said
condominium plan in accordance with the requirements of the
Condominium Act, Municipal Charter and requirements of this
chapter. In case of disapproval, the reasons for such action
shall, by written communication, be transmitted to the
proprietor who shall, within a reasonable time, resubmit to the
City Commission any changes or alterations stipulated in the
Commission's action of disapproval.
(b) Upon approval the proprietor may, in accordance with the
Condominium Act and any other applicable requirements, file
said plan, master deed, bylaws and other required information
with the Office of the County Register of Deeds.
A. No proprietor proposing to develop a condominium within the
territorial limits to which these regulations are applicable shall record
the condominium plan or enter into any contract for the sale of, or shall
offer to sell said condominium or any part thereof until construction
approval has been obtained and the proprietor has completed
construction of all improvements or has posted a performance
guarantee with the City for the cost of the improvements. The
proprietor shall not proceed with any construction work on the
proposed condominium until the proprietor has obtained from the City
the final approval of the condominium plan, and the City has verified
that all outside agency permits have been obtained; except grading,
which may commence upon approval of the proprietor's grading plan.
The City may further require a preconstruction meeting prior to
allowing commencement of site work.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of every proposed
condominium to have prepared by a professional engineer registered in
the State of Michigan, a complete set of construction plans, including
profiles and cross-sections of each street with grades; profile of
proposed sanitary and storm sewer with sizes and grades; a plan of
water lines with sizes and appurtenances, and specifications and other
supporting data for the required streets, utilities and other facilities.
Such construction plans shall be based on plans which had received
preliminary approval. Construction plans are subject to approval by the
responsible public agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the standards or specifications contained in the City
Design and Infrastructure Standards and the City Construction
§ 10-6 LAPEER CODE § 10-7
1:462
§ 10-8. Topsoil.
Removal of topsoil from areas to be developed shall be prohibited except in
those areas to be occupied by buildings, roads or parking areas. A plan for
storage or stockpiling of topsoil shall be submitted by the proprietor with
the final site plan and shall be approved prior to receiving final approval.
§ 10-9. Completion of improvements.
§ 10-10. Compliance standards.
The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
obtained prior to the installation of any condominium or project
improvements within the City, in public streets, public alleys, public rightsof-
way and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the
City. All condominium or project improvements within the City installed in
public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-ways or public easements, and/
or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the City, shall comply with all of the
provisions and requirements of this or any other related ordinance.
§ 10-11. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and
general welfare of the City. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate,
annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the
Specifications, and eight sets shall be submitted to the City Planning
Department for review and approval.
C. Upon completion of the construction of all required streets, utilities and
other facilities, as-built drawings shall be prepared at the proprietor's
expense by a professional engineer registered in the State of Michigan
and submitted to the City.
A. Prior to the undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor shall
deposit with the Clerk cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter
or credit, whichever the City selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the
City Commission, to insure faithful completion of all improvements
within the time specified. The amount of the deposit shall be set by the
City Commission based on an estimate of the City Engineer. The City
Commission shall release funds for the payment of work as it is
completed and approved by the municipality.
B. Prior to the acceptance by the municipality of improvements, a two-year
maintenance bond in an amount set by the City Commission shall be
posted by the proprietor. Improvements shall be provided by the
proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements
established in this section and/or any other such standards and
requirements which may, from time to time, be established by
ordinance or published rules of the City.
§ 10-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-11
1:463
City, nor conflict with any statutes of the State of Michigan or Lapeer
County, except that this chapter shall prevail in cases where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or
regulations.
§ 10-12. Review fees.
The City Commission shall establish a fee schedule for the review of all
applications included in this chapter. This fee schedule may be amended by
the City Commission, as required.
§ 10-13. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor which is punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a maximum fine of $500, or
both.
§ 10-14. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this Condominium
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this chapter; and the application of those provisions to any
persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 10-15. Repealer.
All ordinances and amendments thereto enacted and/or adopted by the
City Commission inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed, as of the effective date of this chapter. The repeal of the above
ordinances and their amendments does not affect or impair any act done,
offense committed, or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability,
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
§ 10-16. Variations from standards.
A. In cases where variances from the dimensional standards of Chapter 7,
Zoning, are deemed necessary, said variances shall be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the procedures and standards
outlined in Chapter 7, Zoning.
B. Waivers from standards contained in the City of Lapeer Condominium
Ordinance may be granted by the City Commission following a
recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall consider input from the appropriate public
authority(ies) in making its recommendation.
(1) In making its findings, the Planning Commission shall consider the
nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in
the vicinity, the number of persons proposed to reside or work in
§ 10-11 LAPEER CODE § 10-16
1:464
§ 10-17. Enforcement.
The City Commission hereby appoints the City Manager the enforcing
officer of this chapter, and it shall be his or her duty to enforce the
provisions hereof. The City Manager may delegate these duties to another
department or official, and may call upon any department or official of the
City of Lapeer to furnish him or her with such information and assistance
as he or she may deem necessary for the observance or enforcement of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of such department or official to furnish such
information and assistance whenever required.
§ 10-18. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on the 15th day of October 2003.
the subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision
upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. The Planning Commission
shall include its findings and the specific reasons therefore in a
report of recommendations to the City Commission and shall also
record its reasons and actions in the minutes.
(2) The Planning Commission shall only recommend waivers that it
deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. No waiver
shall be recommended unless the Planning Commission finds the
following:
(a) That there are such special circumstances or conditions
affecting said property that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would clearly be impractical or
unreasonable. In such cases, the proprietor shall first state his/
her reasons in writing as to the specific provision or
requirement involved and submit them to the Planning
Commission.
(b) That the granting of the specific waiver will not be detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the
immediate area.
(c) That such waiver will not violate the provisions of the
Condominium Act.
(d) That such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the
interest and purpose of this chapter and the Master Plan of the
City of Lapeer.
C. Application for any waiver or variance shall be submitted in writing by
the proprietor at the time the preliminary plan is filed, stating fully and
clearly all facts relied upon by the proprietor and shall be supplemented
with maps, plans, or other additional data which may aid in the analysis
of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include
such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to
guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
§ 10-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-18
1:465
Chapter 11
PARKING METERS
§ 11-1. Short title.
This Ordinance shall be known as a Parking Meter Ordinance.
§ 11-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof, or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner, or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, upon a street for any purpose other than: While actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers, loading or unloading merchandise,
while in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals, or while
involuntarily stopped by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator
of the vehicle.
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with
this Ordinance placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority
of this Ordinance. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper
legend the legal parking time established by the City and when operated
shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the
expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone,
adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of
a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb
or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any restricted street upon which parking meters
are installed and in operation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path, or
other public place located in the City of Lapeer and established for the use
of vehicles.
VEHICLES — Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
§ 11-3. Installation.
Parking meters shall be installed in such numbers and at such places,
as shall be determined by the City Commission to be necessary to the
regulation, control, and inspection of the parking of vehicles therein. The
City Commission may also designate or reserve areas as loading zones
or make other exceptions for special events or occasions and the City
§ 10-18 LAPEER CODE § 11-3
1:466
Commission shall fix the time limitations for legal parking in such zones.
The hours during the day when the parking meter or meters must be used
in compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall be 8:00 a.m. to 5:30
p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays recognized as legal holidays
by the City of Lapeer. Parking meters shall indicate the time limitations by
designating the same on the parking meter or meters or by appropriate
signs posted in proximity to the meters.
§ 11-4. Placing of meters.
The parking meter installed in the parking meter zones shall be placed upon
the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter
described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as
to show or display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to such
meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate
by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the City and
when operated shall indicate on its dial and pointer the duration of the
legal parking and on the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or
overtime parking.
§ 11-5. Parking spaces.
The City Manager shall have markings painted or placed upon the curb
and/or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each
vehicle parking adjacent or next to a meter shall park within the lines or
markings so established. No person shall park a vehicle in such position that
the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines
or markings in accordance with Chapter 14.01, Section 8.22. All vehicles
parked in a meter parking space, other than a space marked for parallel
parking, shall be parked with front wheels to the curb.
§ 11-6. Operation of meter.
When any vehicle is parked in any parking meter space, the operator of
the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit in
the meter such coins of the United States as may be designated upon the
parking meter and operate the meter in accordance with the instructions on
said meter and Chapter 14.01, Section 8.21.
§ 11-7. Parking time limit.
If any vehicle remains in any meter parking space beyond the parking limit
as fixed by the coin or coins deposited in the meter and the parking meter
shall by its dial and pointer indicate such illegal parking, such vehicle shall
be considered parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time,
and such parking shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. Any vehicle
remaining in a meter parking space beyond the parking limit and receiving
a citation or ticket shall constitute a separate violation for every one hour
§ 11-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-7
1:467
that it remains parked after the time indicated on the parking citation or
ticket.
§ 11-8. Defacing meter.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break,
destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
§ 11-9. Slugs.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter,
any slugs, device, or metallic substitute, or any other substitute for a onecent
coin, five-cent coin, ten-cent coin or twenty-five-cent coin of the United
States.
§ 11-10. Citation tags or tickets.
A. The City of Lapeer Automobile Parking System is hereby authorized and
directed to supply enforcement officers with parking citation tags, civil
infraction citation tickets, or both, for the purpose of giving notice to
persons violating any provisions of this ordinance. Such notice may be
given by delivering such tags or tickets to the violator or by affixing it to
the vehicle by means of which the violation occurred. Such tag or ticket
shall state the registration of the vehicle and the time of the violation
and shall direct the violator to present and settle for such tag or ticket
at the Violations Bureau on or before the date and hour specified
thereon. The violation may be settled at the Violations Bureau by paying
a predetermined fine as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule. If the
violation notice was given by parking citation tag, and is not settled
within 30 days after the time of the violation, a civil infraction citation
shall be issued for the violator to appear at the Lapeer County District
Court. If the violation notice was given by civil infraction ticket, a notice
to appear at the Lapeer County District Court will be mailed to the
alleged violator. Violations of this section shall be processed as civil
infraction, and any person determined to be responsible therefore may
be ordered by Judge, Referee, or Magistrate of competent jurisdiction
to pay a civil fine of not more than $150 and costs in accordance with
section 907 of the Michigan Vehicle Code. (MCLA 257.907; MSA
9.2607). Failure to pay any fines and/or costs as ordered, when a finding
of responsibility for six or more violations has been entered, shall result
in the impoundment of the vehicle by means of which the violation
occurred. [Amended 6-29-1994; 9-19-2011]
B. Prima facie evidence; parking violators.
(1) Any proceeding for a violation of this Ordinance relating to the
standing, or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law
or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of
§ 11-7 LAPEER CODE § 11-10
1:468
§ 11-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this Ordinance that is not designated
as a civil infraction, and any person who aids or abets or assists therein,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $100, or
to imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the Court.
§ 11-12. Courtesy cards.
The City Commission may by resolution authorize the use of courtesy cards,
which, when displayed in the front window of the vehicle, permits parking
in parking metered zones without payment and without regard to the
established legal parking time, such courtesy cards may be loaned to
visitors to the City on official business or to persons under extenuating
circumstances.
such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or
placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, such violations occurred.
(2) This section is hereby repealed. The repeal of this section does not
have any effect on existing prosecutions and shall not operate as an
abatement of any action or proceeding now pending under or by
virtue of this section.
(3) Unlawful standing or parking of lease vehicle; presumption. In a
proceeding for a violation of Section 8.23(A) involving a leased
motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the
citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together
with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaining,
or warrant was the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation,
constitutes in evidence a presumption that the lessee of the vehicle,
not the registered owner, was the person who parked or placed the
vehicle at the point, and for the time during which, the violation
occurred.
C. Procedure for impounding vehicles. Any police officer or any employee
of the City of Lapeer Automobile System may impound any motor
vehicle parked at a place where parking is prohibited by the Ordinance
or which has been involved in six or more violations of this Ordinance
for which violation tags or civil infraction tickets have been issued and
which have not been settled for as required herein. Any person desiring
to redeem such impounded vehicle may do so by payment to the
Violations Bureau of a predetermined fine as listed on the City of
Lapeer Fee Schedule per outstanding violation, or such fine and costs
as may have been assessed by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
together with the payment of towing and/or storage costs. [Amended
6-29-1994; 9-19-2011]
§ 11-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-13
1:469
§ 11-13. Permit parking areas.
The City Commission may, by resolution, designate certain parking areas
for special permit parking, which areas shall be identified by the proper
placement of signs.
§ 11-14. Permits and fees. [Amended 1-2-1975]
The City Commission shall determine the specific requirements necessary
to secure a permit and establish the permit fee.
Chapter 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS
§ 12-1. Obstruction in streets.
No person shall obstruct, or place or permit anything to obstruct, the free
passage or proper use of any public street, alley, sidewalk or public place,
except as may be temporarily permitted by the City Manager, or while
loading or unloading goods, merchandise, materials, or persons.
§ 12-2. Merchandise on sidewalks.
No person, company or corporation shall use any of the sidewalks within
the City, excepting Nepessing Street, for the storage, keeping or displaying
thereon of any goods, wares, merchandise, produce, provisions, vegetables,
boxes, barrels, or show cases, except within the distance of three feet from
the wall of the building used or occupied by such person, company or
corporation in the business portion of the City.
§ 12-3. Street excavating.
A. No person, firm, or corporation shall dig or tear up any pavement,
sidewalk or crosswalk, or dig any hole, ditch, drain or sewer, in any
street, alley or public property, without first obtaining a permit from the
City. [Amended 12-30-1987]
B. It shall be the duty of such person, firm or corporation, upon being
granted a permit as herein above required to maintain all traffic control
devices and to immediately refill and restore, resurface or repave such
street, alley or other public property so that the same will be in as good
condition as before, it shall further be the duty of such person, firm or
corporation to erect sufficient barrier around any cut, trench or
excavation in such manner as to prevent accidents, and to place and
keep upon such barrier suitable and sufficient colored lights during the
night.
C. A separate permit must be obtained for each occasion and such permit
shall specify the location of the cut, trench or excavation to be made.
§ 11-13 LAPEER CODE § 12-4
1:470
§ 12-4. Litter.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized by the City of Lapeer.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter
of literature:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER or LITTERING — "Garbage," "refuse," and "rubbish" as defined
herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as
herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare, including the definition as defined within the Michigan Motor
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing;
(1)
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
(2)
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit;
but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee
is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying
the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held,
given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of
decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order;
provided, that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed
to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a
license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this
state, or under any ordinance of this City; or
(3)
Which while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
(4)
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:471
Vehicle Code.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or
regulation and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording
officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean
and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published
with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the City owned or used by the City and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building, or other
structure, designed or used whether wholly or in part for private
residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds, and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as, paper, wrapping,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
B. Litter in public places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon
any street sidewalk or other public places within the City except in
public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in
official City dumps.
§ 12-4 LAPEER CODE § 12-4
1:472
C. Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. Persons
placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public
places or upon private property.
D. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
E. Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. No person owning or
occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter,
street from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the
City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter.
F. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. No person, while a driver or
passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or
other public place within the City, or upon private property.
G. Truck loads causing litter. No person shall drive or move any truck or
other vehicle within the City unless such vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or
deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any
person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the City, the wheels or
tires of which carry into or deposit in any street, alley or other public
place, mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
H. Litter in parks. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park
within the City except in public receptacles and in such a manner that
the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public
place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.
I. Litter in lakes and fountains. No person shall throw or deposit litter in
any fountain, pond, lake, stream, river, creek, bay or any other body of
water in a park or elsewhere within the City. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
J. Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. No
person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
City. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place. Provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the City
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:473
for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver
thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
K. Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles. No
person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle. Provided, however, that it shall be
lawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any
occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
L. Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or
vacant premises. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
M. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted. No person
shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not
to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position
near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing,"
"No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice,
indicating in any matter that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have
any such handbills left upon such premises.
N. Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited
private premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises
which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present
in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of
inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this
chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises
not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such
inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as
to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about
such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except
that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by Federal Postal
Law or Regulations.
(1) Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this § 12-4
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor
to newspapers (as defined herein) except that newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
O. Dropping litter from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall throw out,
drop or deposit within the City any litter, handbill or any other object.
P. Posting notices prohibited. No person shall post or affix any notice,
poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of
§ 12-4 LAPEER CODE § 12-4
1:474
the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or
upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or
required by law.
Q. Litter on occupied private property. No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any occupied private property within the City, whether owned
by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of
private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon any private property.
R. Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or person in
control of any private property shall, at all times, maintain the premises
free of litter. Provided, however, that this § 12-4 shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
S. Litter on vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open
or vacant private property within the City whether owned by such
person or not.
T. Clearing of litter from open private property by City.
(1) Notice to remove. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private
property within the City or the agent of such owner to properly
dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is
dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be
by regular mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address.
(2) Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of
any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter
dangerous to public health, safety or welfare within five days after
receipt of written notice, provided for in Subsection T(1) above, or
within three days after the date of such notice, in the event the
same is returned to the City Post Office Department because of its
inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly
addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the
disposing of such litter, or to order its disposal by the City.
(3) Charge included in tax bill. When the City has effected the removal
of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest, at the rate of 6% per annum from the
date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior
thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next
regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the City, and said
charge shall be due and payable by said owner at the time of
payment of such bill.
(4) Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due
the City is not paid by such owner within 20 days after the disposal
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:475
§ 12-5. Signs, awnings and canopies.
§ 12-6. Sidewalks.
of such litter, as provided for in Subsection T(1) and (2) above, then
and in that case, the Chief of Police shall cause to be recorded in
the Office of the City Clerk a sworn statement shall constitute a
lien and privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force
and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs
of court, if any, for collection until final payment has been made.
Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by
law for the collection of taxes and, further, shall be subject to a
delinquent penalty of 7% in the event same is not paid in full on
or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance
with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all
legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has
been done properly and satisfactorily, and full notice shall be given
to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus
interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or
described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible
as provided by law.
U. Effective date. This amendment shall become effective at 12:01 p.m. on
the first day of October 1972.
A. No person, company, or corporation shall put up, erect, keep, use or
maintain on or in any sidewalk in the City, any post or fixture for the
support of any sign, awning, canopy, or advertisement or for any other
purpose without having first obtained permission of the City Manager.
B. No person, company or corporation shall put up, erect, keep, maintain
or use any awning or canopy on or over any sidewalk in the City
extending a greater distance than eight feet from the wall or the side of
the building to which the same is attached, or coming nearer than seven
feet five inches of the sidewalk underneath it, nor shall any curtain,
fringe or other appendage be attached or be maintained, on any awning
or canopy so that any part of it shall be within six feet five inches of the
sidewalk underneath it.
A. Sidewalk defined. "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street right-ofway
designed for pedestrian travel.
B. Construction and repair; permit required. No person shall construct,
rebuild or repair any sidewalk, except in accordance with the line,
grade, slop and specifications established by the City for such sidewalk,
and without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
C. Line and grade stakes. Line and grade stakes shall be utilized and
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
§ 12-4 LAPEER CODE § 12-6
1:476
D. Sidewalk maintenance. All sidewalks within the City shall be kept and
maintained in good repair by the owner of the land adjacent to and
abutting upon the same; and if any owner shall neglect to keep and
maintain the sidewalk along the front, rear or side of the land so owned
in good repair and sage for the use of the public, the said owner shall be
liable to the City for any damages recovered against the City sustained
by any person by reason of said sidewalk being unsafe and out of repair.
E. Failure to maintain. If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to
rebuild, repair, and maintain any sidewalk as required in this chapter,
the City, after first giving reasonable notice to the owner of said failure,
may rebuild, repair, and otherwise maintain the sidewalk and charge
the expense therefore to the said owner.
F. Sidewalks to be cleared. The owner and occupant of every lot or parcel
of land adjoining any sidewalk shall be responsible for removing all ice
and snow from sidewalks adjoining such lot or parcel of land within the
time herein specified. Owners and/or occupant shall not deposit ice or
snow in the public right-of-way in violation of § 257.677a of the
Michigan Motor Vehicle Code. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Snow shall be removed from sidewalks in all business districts
within the City within four business hours after the cessation of any
fall of snow or by 9:00 a.m. the next business day following such
fall, whichever period is shorter.
(2) Snow shall be removed from all other sidewalks within the City
within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow.
(3) Ice shall be removed from sidewalks by the owner and occupant of
the lot or parcel of land adjoining such sidewalk immediately upon
its accumulation.
(4) If, because of weather conditions, the immediate removal of ice
from sidewalks is impossible, the owner and occupant shall
immediately cause ice melt or mild salt to be spread upon the ice in
such manner and in such quantities as to prevent the sidewalk from
being slippery and dangerous to pedestrians until such time as the
weather permits the removal of ice.
G. Failure to clear. In addition to any criminal penalties imposed by this
chapter, if any occupant or owner shall fail or neglect to clear ice or
snow from the sidewalk specified herein, or if either of them shall
otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on such sidewalk, the City
may cause such ice or snow to be cleared and the expense of removal
shall become a debt of both the owner and the occupant of said
property to the City and may be collected in any manner permitted by
law. Further, the City shall have a lien upon the land abutting such
sidewalk for the cost of such work plus a 10% administrative fee, such
§ 12-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:477
§ 12-7. Barricades.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any barricade, fence, railing,
barrier or other obstruction erected to protect persons passing in or along
the streets or alleys of the City of Lapeer, at or near any crosswalk,
pavement, sewer or other City improvement which has been constructed,
or which is in the course of being constructed or repaired, or to remove
or extinguish any light at or near the place or places where any such
improvements are being made, or at or near any obstruction or dangerous
place in the streets or alleys of the City of Lapeer.
§ 12-8. Faulty structure.
No person shall permit any building, fence or chimney or other structure
adjacent to or adjoining any street, alley or public place to be unsafe, or
dangerous to the right of public travel in any street, alley or public place.
§ 12-9. Defacing and obscene writing.
No person shall deface or place any obscene advertisement, picture, word
or symbol upon any street, alley, sidewalk, lamp-post, hydrant, tree, park or
other public places.47
§ 12-10. (Reserved)
§ 12-11. (Reserved)
§ 12-12. Street widths of Calhoun, Monroe, Madison, Washington
and Main Streets.
lien to be enforced in the manner prescribed by the laws of the state
providing for the enforcement of real property tax liens.
H. Penalty. Any person who violates Subsection F shall be deemed
responsible for a civil infraction and upon a finding of responsibility by
the court shall be obligated to pay civil fines and costs up to the
maximum allowed for state, traffic civil infractions.
A. The quarter line running north and south through Section 5 in the City
of Lapeer be and the same is hereby fixed and established as a base line
from which to measure all distances west in the said City; and the east
and west boundaries of all lots and streets west of said quarter line
shall be determined by measurement from said base line.
B. The width of Calhoun, Monroe, Madison, and Washington Streets
situate between said quarter line and Main Street are hereby fixed and
established at 55 feet each in width.
47.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 12.10, Curb cuts and driveway approaches, which previously
followed this section, was repealed 5-17-2007. See now Ch. 7, § 7-16.08. Former Sec.
12.11, Tree regulations, which previously followed this section, was repealed 4-15-1992.
§ 12-6 LAPEER CODE § 12-12
1:478
§ 12-13. Street name changing.
C. There shall be taken from the east side of Main Street 13 feet, and that
said Main Street after taking said 13 feet from the east side thereof,
shall be and the same is fixed and established to be 86 feet wide.
A. Who may apply. The City Commission on its own motion, or the City
Planning Commission by resolution from that body, or 25 electors-atlarge
of the City of Lapeer by petition, or an owner of or party in
interest of any real estate abutting the street, alley, or thoroughfare in
question may petition the City Commission to change the name of a
street, alley, or thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the City of
Lapeer.
B. Contents of petition. The petition shall contain the name of the street,
alley or thoroughfare as it is presently entitled and called and the name
the petitioner would like the street, alley or thoroughfare renamed; the
approximate length of the section of the street, alley, or thoroughfare to
be renamed and the approximate direction or directions in which it
runs; the intersecting cross streets at each end of the section of the
street, alley or thoroughfare to be renamed together with the names of
any intermediate intersecting streets; and the character of the property
abutting each side of that section of the street, alley or thoroughfare to
be renamed. If a petition is submitted by the City Planning Commission,
it must be in resolution form and certified by the Clerk of the Planning
Commission. If a petition is submitted by 25 electors-at-large of the City
of Lapeer it must contain their signatures and residence addresses. If
the petition is submitted by an owner of or party in interest of real
estate abutting that section of the street, alley or thoroughfare to be
renamed the petition must also contain the description of the
petitioner's property abutting such street, alley, or thoroughfare
together with his signature and residence address.
C. Notice. Upon the appropriate motion by the City Commission or upon
receipt of a proper petition as aforesaid the City Commission shall
cause a notice of hearing on the change of name of such street, alley, or
thoroughfare to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City of Lapeer once a week for two consecutive weeks and shall mail
a copy of such notice to each owner of or party in interest of real estate
abutting that section of the street, alley or thoroughfare which name is
proposed to be changed, by mailing by first class mail, addressed to
such owner or party at the address shown on the last assessment roll
for ad valorem tax purposes which has been reviewed by the City Board
of Review, as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the manes or
addresses as such owners or parties listed thereon, at least 10 days
before the date set for hearing, and which notice of hearing shall be in
substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF HEARING OF CHANGE OF
NAME OF __________ STREET
§ 12-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-13
1:479
§ 12-14. Vacation of streets. [Added 3-15-2007]
A public hearing will be held before the Lapeer City Commission
on _____ _____, at _____ ___.m., in __________, Lapeer, Michigan, on
the __________ (Petition or Motion) of Street, which street is located
between _____ Street and Street, and which street travels in a _____
direction. Objections to such remaining may be filed in writing with the
City Clerk before said hearing.
D. Public hearing and determination. At such public hearing and any
adjournment thereof, the City Commission shall hear and consider all
matters pertaining to the change of name of the street, alley, or
thoroughfare in question and shall hear all interested parties therein.
Objections to said change of name may be filed in writing with the City
Clerk before said hearing. At the conclusion of said hearing or any
determination as to whether or not it is in the best interests of the
public to change the name of the street, alley, or thoroughfare as
requested.
E. Recording the change of name. If the City Commission finds such
change of name of any street, alley, or thoroughfare within the
corporate limits of the City of Lapeer to be in the public interest, it shall
record the same by resolution. A certified copy of this resolution shall
thereupon be sent by the City Clerk to the Auditor General of the State
of Michigan and be recorded with the Lapeer County Register of Deeds.
The City Manager shall make such changes and corrections on the City
records as are appropriate with such change of name of the street,
alley, or thoroughfare.
A. The term "vacate" shall mean one or more of the following: to vacate,
discontinue, abolish, or abandon any road, street, or alley, or any part
thereof.
B. The City Commission may be petitioned to vacate by one or more
abutting property owners or by City staff. Petitions to vacate are on file
in the City Clerk's office. The petitioner is required to pay all costs
associated with the vacate request as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee
Schedule. If a vacate request is within a platted area, requirements of
Act 288 of 1967 (Land Division Act) as amended,48 shall prevail.
[Amended 2-7-2013]
C. When presented with a vacate request, the City Commission shall hold
a public hearing. Such public hearing will be declared by resolution. In
the same resolution, the City Commission shall appoint a time when it
will meet and hear comments regarding the vacate request. The City
Commission, although not required, may request the Planning
Commission to review any vacate request and provide a
recommendation. [Amended 2-7-2013]
48.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
§ 12-13 LAPEER CODE § 12-14
1:480
§ 12-15. Rules and regulations. [Amended 3-15-2007]
The City Manager is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations
as from time to time appear to him or her to be necessary to carry out
the intent of this chapter, provided that such rules are not in conflict with
this or any other law of the City or other appropriate governmental unit,
and provided further that such rules are approved by the City Commission.
Failure to observe any approved rule or regulation shall be a violation of
this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be published and available for
distribution at the City Clerk's Office.
§ 12-16. Permits and bonds. [Amended 12-30-1987; 3-15-2007]
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made upon forms
prescribed by the City. Such permits may be revoked by the City for failure
to comply with this chapter, including the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter. Application for a permit under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed as agreement by the applicant to promptly
complete any work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of
D. Notice of such meeting to hear objections shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation for at least one week before the time
appointed for such meeting. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any
notice of such meeting to be published for more than one week;
however, in no circumstance shall publication be more than four
consecutive weeks. Notice shall also be given by first class mail to the
owners of all property abutting such highway, street, or alley, as shown
upon the assessment rolls of the City. [Amended 2-7-2013]
E. If after such hearing the City Commission shall determine to vacate, it
shall so declare by resolution. The Commission may reserve an
easement for public or private utility purposes within the right-of-way
of the vacate request, and may, by resolution, extinguish any such
easement whenever such easement ceases to be used for such utility
purposes. [Amended 2-7-2013]
F. Following the adoption of any resolution to vacate, the City Clerk shall
cause to be recorded by the Lapeer County Register of Deeds a certified
copy of the vacate resolution. Upon receipt of the recorded vacate
resolution from the Lapeer County Register of Deeds, a copy shall be
sent to the state treasurer, office of the secretary of state, and recorded
in the book of street records. If a vacate request is within a platted area,
a certified copy of the resolution shall also be sent to the director of the
Department of Energy, Labor and Economic Growth. Until recorded,
the resolution shall not have force or effect. [Amended 2-7-2013]
G. Notwithstanding the above sections, a road, street, or alley, or any part
thereof dedicated for use by the public or a part thereof which is within
25 meters of a lake or general course of a stream, shall not be vacated,
discontinued, abolished, or abandoned except by order of the Circuit
Court for Lapeer County.
§ 12-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-16
1:481
the City in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the public rightof-
way and protect and save harmless the City from all damages or actions
at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or
property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection
therewith.
§ 12-17. Performance bond. [Amended 12-30-1987; 3-15-2007]
A performance bond, certified check, or cash deposit shall be provided by
the recipient of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter in an amount
sufficient to provide security for the proper completion of any work to be
done under the permit.
§ 12-18. Violations and penalties. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Chapter 13
OUTDOOR STORAGE OR ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR
VEHICLES
§ 13-1. Purpose. [Amended 8-26-1987]
This is a chapter to regulate the abandonment of motor vehicles; the
outdoor storage of dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles, and to provide
penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 13-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which has remained on public
or private property for a period of 48 hours after any police office has
affixed a written notice to the vehicle.
DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle from which some
part of parts ordinarily a component of such motor vehicle has been
removed or is missing.
A. Violations and penalties of this chapter shall be deemed responsible for
a civil infraction as outlined in Chapter 62 of the Code of the City of
Lapeer.
B. Applicable codes within the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Act 451 of 1994, as amended from time to time,49
specifically §§ 324.8905a and 324.8905b, shall be deemed responsible
for a civil infraction as outlined in Chapter 62 of the Code of the City of
Lapeer.
49.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 324.101 et seq.
§ 12-16 LAPEER CODE § 13-2
1:482
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle which, by reason of
dismantling, disrepair, or any other cause, is incapable of being propelled
under its own power.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any wheeled vehicle intended to be partially or totally
self-propelled. Farm tractors shall be included as motor vehicles.[Amended
8-26-1987]
§ 13-3. Abandonment or storage of motor vehicle. [Amended
8-26-1987; 1-10-2001]
No person, firm or corporation shall:
§ 13-4. Violations and penalties.
Violators of this chapter shall be subject to a maximum fine of $100 and/or
to imprisonment in the Lapeer County Jail for a period of up to 90 days.
§ 13-5. Nuisance. [Amended 8-26-1987]
The presence of a dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle, or parts thereof,
on any property in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
§ 13-6. Construction. [Amended 8-26-1987]
This chapter shall not be construed as repealing, modifying, or restricting
any other ordinance or state law now in effect or hereafter made effective.
Chapter 14
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 14-1. Uniform Traffic Code adopted.
A. Abandon any motor vehicle in the City of Lapeer.
B. Except as specifically permitted in Chapter 7, Zoning, park, store, or
permit the parking or storing of any improperly registered, unlicensed,
dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle for more than 10 days in any
one calendar year, unless said motor vehicle is located in an enclosed
building.
A. Code adopted. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages as promulgated by the Director of Michigan Department of
State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969,
1969 PA 306, MCLA §§ 24.201 to 24.328, and made effective October
30, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference. [Amended 10-29-2003]
B. References in code. References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships and Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the City of
Lapeer. [Amended 10-29-2003]
§ 13-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1
1:483
C. Purpose and availability. Purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code is to
supplement the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code and provide for traffic
administration and authority, the regulation of rights and duties of
drivers and pedestrians; providing for regulations regarding parking
and the operation of motor vehicles, bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds, and
the others; to provide penalties and sanctions for a violation of the
Uniform Traffic Code. A complete copy of the code is available to the
public at the office of the City Clerk for inspection. [Amended
10-29-2003]
D. Penalties. The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships, and Villages are adopted by reference. [Amended
10-29-2003]
E. Changes in code. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and
Villages is hereby modified as indicated below: [Amended 8-17-1978;
11-30-1988; 4-12-1989; 10-29-1997; 8-13-2003
Section 5.100 Driving or Congregating in City Parking Lot.
Section added to read:
(1) No persons shall operate any motorized vehicle, or knowingly
permit the same to be operated in any parking lot or parking area
owned, operated or controlled by the City of Lapeer, unless the
operator is undertaking to park and leave said vehicle or unless
the operator is immediately undertaking to leave said parking lot
or area after having been lawfully parked.
(2) No operator of a motorized vehicle shall use a City parking lot or
parking area as a shortcut or as an area in which to learn to drive.
(3) No person shall use any City parking lot or parking area as an area
in which to meet or in which to congregate between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
Section 5.97 School Buses; Overtaking, Meeting or Passing;
Discharge of Passengers; Evidence of Violation; Penalties.
Section is amended to read:
(1) The driver of a vehicle that overtakes or meets a school bus which
has stopped and which is displaying two alternately flashing red
lights located at the same level shall bring the vehicle to a full stop
not less than 10 feet from the school bus and shall not proceed
until the school bus resumes motion or the visual signals are no
longer actuated. The driver of the school bus, before resuming
motion, shall deactivate flashing lights, shall permit stopped traffic
to proceed, and shall, when resuming motion, proceed in a manner
that will allow congested traffic to disperse by keeping the bus as
near to the right side of the road as can be done with safety.
§ 14-1 LAPEER CODE § 14-1
1:484
(2) Passengers who cross a road upon being discharged from a school
bus shall cross in front of the stopped school bus.
(3) At an intersection where traffic is controlled by an officer or a stopand-
go signal, a vehicle need not be brought to a full stop before
passing a stopped school bus, but may proceed past the school bus
at a speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, but not more
than 10 miles an hour, and shall proceed with due caution for the
safety of passengers being received or discharged from the school
bus.
(4) The driver of a vehicle who fails to stop for a school bus as required
by Subsection (1) of this section, or who passes a school bus in
violation of Subsection (1) or (3) of this section, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(5) The driver of a vehicle on a highway that has been divided into two
roadways by leaving an intervening space, by a physical barrier, or
by clearly indicated dividing sections constructed so as to impede
vehicular traffic need not stop upon meeting a school bus which
has stopped across the dividing space, barrier or section.
(6) In a proceeding for a violation of Subsection (1) of this section,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation,
complaint, or warrant was in violation of Subsection (1) of this
section, together with proof that the defendant named in the
citation, complaint, or warrant was, at the time of the violation
the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence
a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the
driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
(7) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (4) of this section, a
person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Section 6.28 Bicycles.
(A) License tag required. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on
any street or public way in the City of Lapeer or upon any part
thereof, without first having secured and attached to such bicycle
a proper license tag as provided hereinafter. All bicycle licenses
shall be affixed to the frame of the bicycle for which issued. License
number and serial number shall correspond with the registration
of said bicycle.
(B) License application. Application for a license to own and operate
a bicycle shall be made to the Traffic Division of the Police
Department upon a form to be provided by the Department. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee as listed on the City
of Lapeer Fee Schedule to be paid in advance at the time of
issuance of the license. The Chief of Police shall have authority
to issue bicycle licenses subject to the provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 9-22-2011]
(C) Term of license. The license shall be valid for the life of the bicycle.
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1
1:485
(D) Mechanical condition. The Chief of Police shall have authority to
inspect all bicycles for mechanical fitness, and shall have the
authority to refuse to grant or to revoke the license of any bicycle
found to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
(E) Riding bicycles, skateboards, roller blades or motorized vehicles.
(1) No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard or roller blades
upon any sidewalk located within the street right-of-way on
Nepessing Street between Monroe Street and Saginaw Street.
(2) No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, or roller blades upon
any pedestrian mall area in the Central Business District.
(3) No motorized vehicles shall be ridden on the sidewalk in any
area of the City at any time. No motorized vehicles shall be
ridden on any pedestrian mall areas of the City at any time.
(4) No person shall ride a skateboard or roller blades upon any
street or upon any parking lot located in the Central Business
District.
(5) Except as provided in this subsection, no person shall ride a
bicycle, skateboard, or roller blades upon the following streets,
street rights-of- way, sidewalks, or public parking lots, from
8:00 a.m. Thursday to 8:00 p.m. Sunday during the annual
Lapeer Days celebration:
The area bounded by, and including Park Street on the North,
Clay Street on the south, Mason Street on the west, and
Saginaw Street on the east.
A person may ride a bicycle, skateboard, or roller blades in the
area described above when going directly to, coming directly
from, or participating in a parade or other Lapeer Days event
intended to include bicycles, skateboard, or roller blades.
(F) Serial number. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully
or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of
any bicycle frame. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter any bicycle license; provided, however,
that nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the Police Department
from stamping numbers on the frame of bicycles, on which no
serial number can be found or on which said number is illegible or
insufficient for identification purposes.
(G) Penalty.
(1) A person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
responsible for a civil infraction.
(2) In addition to the penalty described in Subsecton G(1) above, a
person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (E) above
shall also be subject to having the skateboard, roller blades, or
motorized vehicle immediately confiscated and impounded by
the City Police for up to 10 days.
§ 14-1 LAPEER CODE § 14-1
1:486
§ 14-2. (Reserved)50
Section 8.26 Parking Dismantled or Partly Dismantled Motor
Vehicles in Streets or Alleys Prohibited.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation
to park upon the streets or alleys of the City of Lapeer any motor
vehicle that has been dismantled or partly dismantled or that is in
the process of being dismantled or torn down.
(B) It is the intent of this section that the terms "dismantled" or
"dismantling" shall be construed to mean the taking apart, or
tearing down of any motor vehicle by the removal of any part or
parts therefrom.
(C) Any such motor vehicle so described in Subsection (A) of this
section being parked on the streets or alleys of Lapeer is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and it shall be the duty of any police
officer of said City to abate such nuisance by removing the same
from said street or alley, and said motor vehicle so removed shall be
returned to the owner thereof only upon payment to the City Clerk
by such owner of the expenses incurred by said City in removing
same from street or alley.
Section 8.27 No Parking on Nepessing Street Between the
Hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Amended 9-22-2011]
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to park a motor
vehicle upon Nepessing Street in the City of Lapeer between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless said motor vehicle is
occupied by a person in charge of the power and control of said
motor vehicle and capable of moving the same upon notice from
any police officer of the City of Lapeer.
(B) Any police officer of the City of Lapeer may impound any vehicle
parked on Nepessing Street in violation of the terms of this chapter.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Section 9.3 Penalties.
Any provision of this chapter which describes an act or omission
which remains a misdemeanor under the terms of the Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code, being 1949 Public Act 300, as amended, shall be a
misdemeanor under this chapter, punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. A violation of any other provision of this chapter
not constituting a misdemeanor, as herein provided, shall be processed
as a civil infraction, and any person determined to be responsible for
a civil infraction may be ordered by judge, referee, or district court
magistrate of competent jurisdiction to pay a civil fine of not more than
$100 and costs in accordance with Section 907 of said Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code (MCLA § 257.907; MSA § 9.2607).
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3
1:487
§ 14-3. Public parking lots. [Amended 5-1-1975]
A. Designation of downtown City parking lots. The following areas are
hereby designated as downtown City parking lots:
Downtown City Parking Lots
Designation Location
No. 1 Northeast corner of Clay Street and Court Street
intersection
No. 2 End of Park Street on the East Side of Saginaw
Street
No. 3 Between Nepessing and Park Streets and adjacent to
Pine Street on the west
No. 4 Between Nepessing and Park Streets and adjacent to
Pine Street on the east
No. 5 Between Nepessing Street on the North and
Farmers Creek on the south, and between Saginaw
and Court Streets
No. 6 Southwest corner of Clay and Cedar Streets with
Clay Street on the north and the alley south of Clay
Street on the south
No. 7 Between Fox Street and Cedar Street on the south
side of Clay Street (City/county parking lot)
No. 8 Between Nepessing Street and Clay Streets and
between Mason and Cedar Streets
No. 9 Between Nepessing and Park Streets and Between
Mason and Court Streets
No. 10 Located immediately West of 407 Clay Street
B. Parking hours in downtown City parking lots. Except in those areas
designated as "Downtown Resident Parking Areas" by an appropriate
Traffic Control Order pursuant to Section 2.53(A) of the Uniform Traffic
Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages, as amended from to time,
there shall be parking for the general public in Downtown City Parking
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
2:00 a.m. of the following day, and there shall be no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.51 [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
50.Editor's Note: Fomer Sec. 14-2, Parking Violations Bureau, as amended 3-14-1984,
10-26-1988, 6-12-1996, 10-15-2003, and 9-22-2011, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Installation and location of parking meters in
downtown City parking lots, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 14-3 LAPEER CODE § 14-3
1:488
§ 14-4. Commuter parking lots. [Amended 8-29-1984]
§ 14-5. (Reserved)52
§ 14-6. Parking of trucks or buses. [Amended 3-14-1990]
It shall be unlawful to park any truck or bus, except those actively providing
a service, on any public street for more than three hours per day. For
purposes of this section, "public street" means the portion of any street
certified by the City in accordance with Public Act 51 of 1951, as
amended.53 "Truck" or "bus" shall mean any vehicle with a licensed empty
weight of more than 5,500 pounds or any vehicle which exceeds 22 feet in
length.
§ 14-7. Truck routes. [Amended 3-14-1990]
C. Parking areas for downtown residents. Downtown City parking lots
shall contain the number of spaces for downtown residents as the
Lapeer City Commission shall from time to time determine by
resolution in those locations which are designated in an appropriate
traffic control order pursuant to Section 2.53(A) of the Uniform Traffic
Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as amended from time to time.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Prohibition of parking of semitrailers. In order to preserve the surface
of downtown parking lots from heavy loads and to assure an adequate
supply of parking spaces, there shall be no parking of semitrailers in
any downtown parking lots.
A. Designation of commuter parking lots. The following areas are
designated as commuter parking lots:
Commuter Parking Lots
Designation Location
No. 1 Lot located on Saginaw Street north of Genesee
Street
No. 2 Lot located on South Main Street between the
G.T.W.R.R. and Farmers Creek
B. Prohibition of parking of vehicles, trailers or semitrailers in excess of 20
feet in areas designated as commuter lots. In order to establish
sufficient room for parking and vehicular mobility in areas designated
as commuter lots there shall be no parking of any vehicle, trailer, or
semitrailer having a length in excess of 20 feet in any lot so designated.
52.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 14.06, Safety belts and child restraint systems, was repealed
8-13-2003.
53.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 247.651 et seq.
§ 14-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-7
1:489
§ 14-8. Michigan Motor Vehicle Code adopted.
A. The operation of any truck as defined in Public Act 300 of 1949, as
amended,54 is prohibited upon every street in the City except truck
routes designated as such by Traffic Control Order. Provided, however,
that no provision of this section shall prohibit:
(1) The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City.
(2) The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, other
governmental agencies or contractors licensed to provide services
to the City residents or to trucks engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or
utilities within the City.
(3) The operation of a truck upon any officially established detour in
any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the
street for which such detour is established.
(4) Any truck while engaged in one or more local pickups or deliveries
from using such prohibited streets as may be reasonably necessary
in so doing, provided that such truck shall upon completion of the
last pickup or delivery, return by the shortest route to the nearest
street upon which it is permitted to operate.
B. No truck operated in the City shall exceed the normal maximum axel
load established by Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended.
C. During the months of March, April and May in each year, the maximum
axle load allowable for trucks operating in the City shall be reduced by
35% from the normal maximum axle load. The City Manager may
suspend the restrictions imposed by this section when conditions of the
street, or the public health, safety, and welfare so warrant. The City
Manager may impose the restricted loading requirements of this
section on streets at any other time it is reasonably necessary to protect
the street from damage.
D. It shall be the duty of any person driving or in charge of any truck
operating upon any street in the City for which truck travel is limited or
restricted, to proceed, upon the request of any police officer, to any
public or private scale for the purpose of weighing the truck to
determine whether the weight thereof is in excess of the weight limit
permitted upon such street.
A. The Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300; MCLA §§ 257.1 to
257.923; MSA §§ 9.1801 to 9.2623, as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference.
B. Referenced in Vehicle Code. References in the Michigan Motor Vehicle
Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Lapeer.
54.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.1 et seq.
§ 14-7 LAPEER CODE § 14-8
1:490
§ 14-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-2001; 11-7-2013]
The penalties provided by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code are adopted by
reference and will be enforced to the extent permitted by law.
§ 14-10. Anti-idling of diesel-fueled motors. [Added 9-2-2014]
C. The City of Lapeer adopts § 257.625(1)(c) of the Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, by reference and as subsequently amended,
a violation of which is a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the
following: [Added 11-7-2013]
(1) Community service of not more than 360 hours;
(2) Imprisonment for not more than 180 days;
(3) A fine of not less than $200 nor more than $700.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect, preserve and
promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City
through the reduction, prevention and control of fuel emissions. It is the
intent of this section to provide for the enforcement of standards to
assure a reduction in fuel emissions which may be injurious to humans,
plant life, animal life or property or which interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property or the conduct of business.
B. Application. Section 14-10 shall apply to all commercial motor vehicles
and all covered farm vehicles, as those terms are defined in 49 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 390.5 that are fueled by diesel fuel and
are physically present within the City of Lapeer.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUS — Any motor vehicle designed, constructed and/or used for the
transportation of passengers, including taxicabs.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any of the following vehicles:
IDLING — The operation of the diesel-fueled engine of a vehicle that is
running while the vehicle is not in motion.
(1) An ambulance;
(2) State, federal, and municipal police vehicles;
State, federal, and municipal Fire Department vehicles or fire
patrol vehicles, including a fire suppression or fire vehicle operated
by the Department of Natural Resources;
(3)
A municipal-owned vehicle used in order to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of City residences and visitors.
(4)
D. Idle standard.
§ 14-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-10
1:491
(1) No person shall cause, allow, grant or permit the engine of a dieselfueled
motor vehicle to idle for more than five consecutive minutes
if the vehicle is not in motion.
(2) A vehicle subject to this section shall not operate a diesel-fueled
auxiliary power system (APS) to power a heater, air conditioner, or
any other equipment on that vehicle during sleeping or resting in a
sleeper berth for greater than five minutes.
(3) Subsection D(1) of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Buses while discharging or picking up passengers;
(b) Motor vehicles remaining motionless because of traffic, an
official traffic control device or signal, or the direction of a law
enforcement officer;
(c) Motor vehicles whose primary and/or secondary power source
is utilized in whole or in part for necessary and definitively
prescribed mechanical operation other than propulsion,
passenger compartment heating or air conditioning;
(d) Motor vehicles being inspected or waiting to be inspected by
state, local, or federal safety inspector;
(e) Motor vehicles undergoing maintenance, servicing or repair
when idling is necessary for said maintenance, servicing, or
repair;
(f) Emergency vehicles;
(g) Motor vehicles engaged in the process of connection,
detachment, or exchange of a trailer;
(h) Motor vehicles and buses operating defrosters, heaters or air
conditioner or is installing equipment to prevent a safety and/
or health. Buses are allowed to idle a maximum of 15 minutes
in a sixty-minute period to maintain passenger comfort while
non-driver passengers are on board.
(i) In the case of an armored vehicle, when a person is inside the
vehicle to guard its contents or during the loading or unloading
of the vehicle.
(j) Emergency vehicles idling while at a location of an emergency
or training mode and not for the convenience of the vehicle
operator.
(k) A vehicle idling due to mechanical difficulties over which the
driver has no control; an officer or inspector enforcing this
chapter may require documentation or receipt within a
specified number of days in order for this conditional
exemption to apply.
§ 14-10 LAPEER CODE § 14-10
1:492
Chapter 15
ELECTIONS
E. Noninterference with state or federal regulations. Nothing in this
section is intended to limit or supersede motor vehicle guidelines set
forth in accordance with federal and state regulations.
F. Enforcement.
(1) This section shall be enforced by the City Police Chief or person
designated by the Police Chief, or any other person designated by
the City Manager to enforce the provisions of this section.
(2) In addition to any remedies available at law, the City may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against any person to
restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this section.
(3) Each occurrence in violation of this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
G. Penalties. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
H. Severability.
(1) If any portion of this section is determined to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion
shall be deemed severed from the regulations, and such
determination shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the
article.
(2) If the application of any provision of this section to a particular
person or property is determined to be invalid or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not
affect the application of said provision to any other property.
I. Effective date. Section 14-10 shall take immediate effect.
§ 14-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-10
1:493

ARTICLE I
Precincts
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Sec. 2.01, of the 1978 General Ordinances;
amended 2-28-1996]
§ 15-1. Territory included in each precinct.
Hereafter there shall be four election precincts in the City of Lapeer.
A. Precinct Number One shall include all territory lying north of Genesee
Street and west of Lincoln Street to end of City limits.
B. Precinct Number Two shall include all territory lying east of Lincoln
Street; north of Genesee Street; west of Fox Street extended from
Genesee Street to Biddle Street; west of Biddle Street to Cedar Street;
west of Cedar Street to Second Street; south to Second Street to Main
Street; and west of Main Street to end of City limits.
C. Precinct Number Three shall include all territory lying east of Main
Street north of Second Street; and all territory east of Cedar Street
extended to Biddle Street; east of Biddle Street to Fox Street; east of
Fox Street to Genesee Street; north of Genesee Street to Saginaw
Street; and east of Saginaw Street south of Genesee Street to end of
City limits.
D. Precinct Number Four shall include all territory lying south of Genesee
Street and west of Saginaw Street to end of City limits.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1
1:495
Chapter 16
TAXATION
§ 15-1 LAPEER CODE § 15-1
1:496
ARTICLE I
City Operating Tax Millage
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Sec. 2.07, of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 16-1. City operating tax millage ordinance.
The tax limit created by Section 3(G) of Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909,
as amended,55 as adopted by Section 9.1 of the Charter of the City of Lapeer,
as revised on August 5, 1958, for the operating expenses of the City of
Lapeer, shall be limited to not more than 10 mills of the assessed valuation
as equalized of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City
for each City fiscal year beginning April 1, 1967.
55.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 117.3(g).
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1
1:497

ARTICLE II
City Income Tax
[Adopted as Ch. 23 of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ 16-2. Adoption by reference. [Amended 12-27-2009]
The City hereby adopts by reference the provisions of the City Income Tax
Act, Act 284 of 1964, Chapter 2, Uniform City Income Tax Ordinance, as
amended in accordance with the provisions of MCLA § 141.501 et seq., a
true copy which is on file with the City Clerk.
§ 16-3. Exemptions. [Amended 12-27-2009]
§ 16-4. Effective date.
This article shall take effect at 12:01 a.m., January 1, 1967.
A. An individual taxpayer, in computing his taxable income, is allowed a
deduction of $600 for each personal and dependency exemption which
the taxpayer has under the rules for determining exemptions and
dependents as provided in the Federal Internal Revenue Code. The
taxpayer may claim his spouse and dependents as exemptions, but if the
taxpayer and the spouse are both subject to the tax imposed by this
section, the number of exemptions claimed by each of them when added
together shall not exceed the total number of exemptions allowed under
this section.
B. An additional exemption is allowed for each of the following for which
the taxpayer qualifies:
(1) A taxpayer who is a paraplegic, quadriplegic, or hemiplegic, or who
is a totally or permanently disabled person as defined in Section
216 of Title II of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 416.
(2) A taxpayer who is blind as defined in Section 504 of the Income Tax
Act of 1967, Act No. 281 of the Public Acts of 1967, being Section
206.504 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
(3) A taxpayer who is a deaf person as defined in Section 2 of the Deaf
Persons' Interpreters Act, Act No. 204 of the Public Acts of 1982,
being Section 393.502 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
(4) A taxpayer who is 65 years of age or older.
C. An exemption is allowed under Subsection 31(1)56 to a person with
respect to whom a deduction under Section 151 of the Internal Revenue
Code is allowable to another federal taxpayer during the tax year and is
therefore not considered to have a federal personal exemption under
Subsection 31(1).
56.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.631(1).
§ 16-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4
1:499

ARTICLE III
State Housing Authority Tax Exemption: Silver Maple Village
[Adopted 8-21-1978; amended in its entirety 3-1-2010 (Ch. 29 of the
1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 16-5. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as the State Housing Authority Tax
Exemption Ordinance, and it shall be deemed sufficient in any action for
enforcement of the provisions hereof, to define same by such title and
reference to the number hereof.
§ 16-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is declared as follows:
§ 16-7. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply:
ACT — The State Housing Development Authority Act, Act 346 of the Public
Acts of 1966, as amended, cited at MCLA § 125.1401.
AUTHORITY — The State Housing Development Authority, under Act 346.
AUTHORITY-AIDED MORTGAGE — A mortgage made, held, purchased or
assisted by the Authority.
CITY or CITY COMMISSION — The duly elected commission of the City of
Lapeer.
ELDERLY — A family where the head of the household is 62 years of age
or older, or a single person who is 62 years of age or older, or in the event
project based Section 8 subsidies are no longer available to the project, it
shall mean a single person who is 55 years of age or older or a household in
A. To declare the public necessity of the assistance of the City of Lapeer in
developing and preserving housing for its elderly citizens of low and
moderate income;
B. To provide a binding agreement with the "owner" or "mortgagor" as
defined herein establishing terms and conditions for the continuing
status of tax exemption to the housing development;
C. To establish, by ordinance, real estate tax exemption status for elderly
citizens of low and moderate income, dwelling within the "housing
development," as defined herein, under Act 346 of the Public Acts of
1966, as amended ("Act 346");57
D. To establish an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all
taxes to be paid by the owner to the City of Lapeer, and distribute
pursuant to Act 346.
57.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-7
1:501
which at least one member is 55 years of age and all other members are 50
years of age or older.
FEDERALLY AIDED MORTGAGE — A below-market interest rate mortgage
insured or purchased or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD); or a market interest rate mortgage insured
by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and augmented by a
program of rent supplements; or a mortgage receiving benefits under other
federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate-income
housing, and consistent with the provisions of this Act.
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development which contains a significant
element of housing for persons of low or moderate income, and such
elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal,
and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality
of the development, as it relates to housing for persons of low or moderate
income and in which funds from the authority's note and bond financing are
used for no elements of such development, other than housing projects for
low-income or moderate-income persons.
LOW-INCOME OR MODERATE-INCOME PERSONS — Families and persons
who cannot afford to pay the amounts at which private enterprises, without
federally aided mortgages or loans from the authority are providing a
substantial supply of decent, safe, and sanitary housing, and who fall within
income limitations set by the authority in its rules. Among low-income or
moderate-income persons, preference shall be given to the elderly, and
those displaced by urban renewal, slum clearance, or other governmental
action.
OWNER or MORTGAGOR — Silver Maple Village 2009 Limited Dividend
Housing Association, LLC, a Michigan limited-liability company, and its
heirs, successors and assigns.
PROJECT — A certain housing development to be acquired and renovated
by the owner, identified as the "elderly building," which consists of 100 oneand
two-bedroom apartments on Dewey Boulevard, which:
Shall be financed by a federally aided mortgage or loan made by the
authority;
A.
Dwelling units shall be occupied exclusively by elderly citizens of low
and moderate incomes;
B.
Legal description. Part of the N.E. 1/4 of Section 6, T. 7 N., R. 10 E.,
CITY OF LAPEER, LAPEER COUNTY, MICHIGAN, being described as:
Beginning at a point, said point being distant N. 87° 47' 10" E. 679.62
feet along the North Section Line of said Section 6, said line also being
the Center Line of Oregon Street and S. 02° 14' 37" E. 1066.86 feet
from the N. 1/4 corner of said Section 6; thence from said point of
beginning N. 87° 15' 40" E. 300.00 feet; thence N. 02° 14' 37" W. 150.00
feet; thence N. 87° 15' 40" E. 415.00 feet; thence N. 48° 08' 50" E.
84.01 feet; thence S. 41° 51' 10" E. 287.51 feet; thence S. 49° 06'
25" E. 126.50 feet; thence S. 42° 30' 14" W. 77.40 feet; thence 97.96
C.
§ 16-7 LAPEER CODE § 16-7
1:502
UTILITIES — Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by the development.
§ 16-8. Declaration of public necessity and benefit;
acknowledgment of offer.
§ 16-9. Contractual effect.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15a(5) of the Act58 to the
contrary, a contract between the City and the "owner" with the Authority
and HUD as third-party beneficiaries thereunder, to provide tax exemption
feet along the arc of a curve to the left, said curve having a radius
of 123.68 feet, a central angle of 45° 22' 44", a chord length of 95.42
feet and a chord bearing of S. 19° 48' 51" W.; thence S. 87° 15' 40"
W. 965.02 feet; thence N. 02° 14' 37" W. 270.00 feet to the point of
beginning, containing 7.94 acres more or less and subject to easements
of record. The above 7.94 acres, as described is that portion of the total
29.94 acre project set aside for the three-story senior citizens building
requiring tax abatement.
A. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens
of low and moderate income and to encourage the development of such
housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in
accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966
(1966 P.A. 346, as amended, MCLA § 125.1401 et seq., MSA § 16.114(1)
et. seq.). The City is authorized by said Act to establish or change the
service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing
exempt from taxation under the Act at any amount it chooses not to
exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act. It is further
acknowledged that such housing for elderly by persons of low and
moderate income is a public necessity, and as the City will be benefitted
and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by
providing certain real estate tax exemption therefor is a valid public
purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article
for tax exemption and a service charge in lieu of taxes during the
periods hereinafter contemplated are essential to the determination of
economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed or
renovated and financed in reliance thereon.
B. The City acknowledges that the "owner" has offered, subject to receipt
of a mortgage loan from the Authority, to acquire, renovate, own, and
operate a housing development identified as the "project" under § 16-7
of this article on certain property located at Dewey Boulevard, in the
City, to serve elderly persons of low and moderate income, and that the
"owner" has offered to pay the City on account of said development an
annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.
58.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a(5).
§ 16-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-9
1:503
and accept payments in lieu thereof as previously described is effected by
enactment of this article.
§ 16-10. Tax exemption to project; terms.
§ 16-11. Acknowledgment and acceptance.
The City, acknowledging that the owner and the Authority have established
the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the
enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualifications of the
housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment
in lieu of taxes as established herein, and in consideration of the owner's
offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the Authority, to acquire,
renovate, own, and operate said Housing Development, hereby agrees to
accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all
property taxes.
§ 16-12. Annual service charge for public services; distribution.
A. Pursuant to Act 346 of the Public Acts of 1966,59 the project, as defined
herein is declared exempt from all taxes imposed by the state or by any
political subdivision public body or taxing district.
B. Such exemption shall remain in effect under conditions where the
owner or mortgagor shall:
(1) Devote the entire project and its rental units to the exclusive
occupancy of elderly citizens of low and moderate income, as
defined by rule of the authority;
(2) Allocate the full benefits of any exemption granted to the project
under the Act, and any ordinance of the City exclusively to elderly
citizens of low and moderate income in the form of reduced housing
charges;
A. During the period of exemption, the owner or mortgagor, its successors
or assigns, shall pay to the City an annual service charge for public
services, in lieu of taxes, on or before July 1 of each year in an amount
equal to 4% of the contract rents (as defined by the rules promulgated
pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended) of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of the cost of fuel,
electricity, water and sanitary sewer service, paid by the project. In the
event the project no longer receives project-based Section 8 subsidies
from HUD, "contract rents" shall mean all rental income paid by on
behalf of the tenants from the preceding calendar year exclusive of the
cost of fuel, electricity, water and sewer services paid by the project.
B. In any event, the annual service charge to be paid each year in lieu of
taxes for that part of the project which is occupied by other than elderly
59.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1401 et seq.
§ 16-9 LAPEER CODE § 16-12
1:504
§ 16-13. Provisions operative upon exemption certification.
These provisions shall become fully operative upon notice to the Assessor
for the City by the owner or mortgagor, its successors or assigns of the
certification of tax exemption by the authority for the project in accordance
with the provisions of the Act.
§ 16-14. Period of effectiveness.
This article shall remain in effect for the period of time in which the
project is encumbered by an outstanding federally aided, or authority-aided
mortgage, or so long as the authority has any legal interest in the property;
provided that acquisition and renovation of the housing development
commences within one year from the effective date of this article.
§ 16-15. Severability.
If any section, clause, or phrase, or portion thereof in this article is, for
any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent portion of this article, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this article.
§ 16-16. Effective date.
This article following publication in accordance with the law shall become
effective on the date the project is acquired by the owner.
persons of low and moderate income, shall be equal to the full amount
of taxes that would be paid on that portion of the project if it were not
tax exempt.
C. All annual service charges collected by the City shall be distributed
pursuant to Section 15A of Act 34660 to the several taxing units.
60.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1415a.
§ 16-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-16
1:505
Chapter 17
TRAILER COACH; MOBILE HOME; MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 17-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — A prebuilt housing module or a home which is designed
to be transported by any motor vehicle upon a public highway and designed,
equipped and used for sleeping, eating, and living quarters, or is intended
to be so used.
TRAILER COACH — Any vehicle, whether self-propelled or drawn by
another vehicle, used and maintained for use, or originally designed and
intended for use as a conveyance upon the streets and highways and so
designed, constructed or modified as to permit occupancy thereof as a
dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME PARK — As defined in Act 243 of the
Public Acts of 1959, as amended.61
§ 17-2. Trailer or mobile home parks.
Trailer coach or mobile home parks may be established within the City in
the districts specified by Chapter 7, Zoning, upon application to the City
Manager and compliance with the provisions of Act 243 of the Public Acts
of 1959, as amended.
§ 17-3. Trailer coaches or mobile homes unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep or maintain
any trailer coach or mobile home which is being used for human occupancy
or habitation on any lot, piece, or parcel of ground including public property
within the City limits, except in trailer coach or mobile home parks regularly
licensed in accordance with the terms of Act 243 of the Michigan Public
Acts of 1959, as amended, but this section shall not prohibit the storage of
one trailer coach or mobile home not being used for human habitation in an
unenclosed area if said trailer coach or mobile home bears a current vehicle
license.
§ 17-4. Removal of wheels.
No owner or occupant of any trailer coach or mobile home shall remove or
deflate the wheels or tires or cause the same to be removed or deflated from
any such occupied vehicle within the City limits except for the purposes of
repair, nor shall he in any way erect, block, or stabilize such vehicles except
61.Editor's Note: Said act was repealed by by P.A.1976, No. 419, § 46; see now MCLA
§ 125.2301 et seq.
§ 16-16 LAPEER CODE § 17-4
1:506
that these provisions shall not apply in the regularly licensed trailer coach
or mobile home parks.
§ 17-5. Public nuisance per se. [Amended 11-19-1975]
The location of any trailer, mobile home or trailer coach or mobile home
park subsequent to the effective date of this chapter and in violation of any
of the provisions thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se,
and shall be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 17-6. Municipal trailer park regulations.
The following regulations are hereby established for all trailer coach parks
owned or operated by the City of Lapeer:
A. Applicants for trailer or camp space must be at least 16 years of age
and must furnish the following information:
(1) Full name.
(2) Age.
(3) Residence address.
(4) Person and address to notify in case of emergency.
(5) Type of trailer or camper.
(6) License number of car.
(7) Number of days of anticipated occupancy.
B. A fee shall be paid for each day's occupancy as listed in the City of
Lapeer Fee Schedule, as amended from time to time by the Lapeer City
Commission. [Amended 8-3-1981; at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. All ground fires are prohibited except in those places or receptacles
provided by the City.
D. All cases of persons or animals affected or suspected of being affected
with any communicable disease shall be immediately reported to the
Chief of Police.
E. All dogs, cats, or other animals or pets shall be tied and restrained and
shall not run loose. The permitting of an animal to continuously bark or
make noises shall be grounds for revocation of the owner's trailer park
permit and for summary removal of applicant.
F. No trailer shall be used by a greater number of occupants than which it
is designed to accommodate.
G. Each applicant and all persons in his party shall maintain the trailer or
camp lot assigned to him in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
§ 17-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-6
1:507
times, and no person shall throw, deposit or bury on or in the ground
any garbage, trash, or refuse of any kind, nature, or description.
H. All garbage, trash, and refuse shall be deposited in receptacles
provided by the City, and in no other place.
I. The discharge and emptying of toilets or sewerage from trailers shall be
made in those places provided by the City, and in no instance shall be
deposited in any indoor toilet facilities.
J. Not more than one trailer or camp, occupied by a single family or
group, will be permitted on an individual lot. No trailer or camp shall
occupy more than one lot unless the fee is paid for the extra lot.
K. Not more than two cars will be permitted per trailer or camp lot. Each
car must be registered on the trailer or camp permit.
L. Visitors must leave their cars in designated parking areas.
M. Quiet must be observed for the benefit of those who retire early.
N. No dish-washing will be allowed at drinking fountains or in laundry
rooms.
O. Hot water shall not be taken from buildings for personal camp use.
P. Trailer or camp permits must be posted where they can be readily
inspected by the park officers or authorities.
Q. All persons staying in the trailer park shall conduct themselves in a
peaceful and orderly manner and in accordance with these regulations,
the Code of the City of Lapeer, and the laws of the State of Michigan,
and any violation thereof shall constitute sufficient grounds for a
revocation thereof shall constitute sufficient grounds for a revocation of
the trailer or camp permit given to the applicant and for summary
removal of the applicant and his family or group.
R. No business or trade shall be conducted on the premises other than that
specifically licensed and authorized by the City. The trailer park shall be
open for registration between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
each day of the week beginning May 1 of each year through October 31
of each year.
S. No applicant or person in his party shall stay more than 72 hours in any
seven-day period without special permission from the Park Manager.
[Amended 8-1-1969]
T. Due to the need to maintain a safe and quality municipal trailer park,
the City, through its designated agent, may reject any individual trailer
coach or recreational vehicle that is considered detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of others using the municipal trailer park,
including, but not limited to, aesthetic considerations, and the following
rules shall be applicable: [Added 6-19-2017]
§ 17-6 LAPEER CODE § 17-6
1:508
Chapter 18
FIRE CODE
§ 18-1. Adoption of code by reference.
There is hereby adopted by reference, pursuant to the provisions of Act
279 of Michigan Public Acts of 1909, as amended,62 the International Fire
Code, 2015 Edition, copyrighted in 2014, promulgated and adopted by the
International Code Council, of 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club
Hills, Illinois 60478-5795.
§ 18-2. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of the International Fire Code is to prescribe
minimum requirements and controls to safeguard life and property from
fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use
of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property and the occupancy of buildings and premises
in the City of Lapeer; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor, and prescribing penalties for the violation of this code.
§ 18-3. Availability of code.
A complete copy of the International Fire Code shall be available to the
public at the office of the Lapeer City Clerk.
§ 18-4. References in code.
(1) No decks, porches or storage buildings may be installed or
attached;
(2) No permanent plantings, such as trees, bushes or shrubs, are
allowed;
(3) No individual trailer coach or recreational vehicle shall be
admitted, or allowed to remain within the park which is not in good
repair and aesthetic condition, which includes, but is not limited to,
rust, peeling paint, weather damage, broken windows, broken or
compromised panels or components, or similar conditions.
U. This chapter shall become effective August 1, 1969.
A. Reference in the International Fire Code to name of jurisdiction shall
mean the City of Lapeer.
B. Reference in the International Fire Code to violation penalties in
Section 109.4 shall be a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more
than $500. The City may also pursue injunctive relief.
62.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 117.1 et seq.
§ 17-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-4
1:509
§ 18-5. Changes in code.
The following subsections are modified or deleted as follows:
105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or
structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official conducting an
inspection to determine that applicable provisions of this code have been
met and occupancy authorized.
105.6 Required operational permits. The fire code official is authorized
to issue operational permits or otherwise give approvals for the operations
set forth in Subsections 105.6.1 through 105.6.48.
105.6.32 Open burning. Without exception as to type, kind or location,
an operational permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of an open
fire or a fire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private
ground. Instructions and requirements of the permit shall be strictly
followed.
108.1 Board of Appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals
of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative
to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be a Board
of Appeals established by the Fire Department. The Board of Appeals shall
consist of three or more individuals. The fire code official shall be an ex
officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before
the Board. Board members need not be residents of the City of Lapeer. The
Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall
render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate
copy to the fire code official.
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a civil
infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense. The City of Lapeer may also pursue injunctive relief, and
may recover inspection fees per the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule.
C. Reference to the penalty for failure to comply in Section 111.4 means
the violator shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$500.
D. Reference to the International Building Code shall mean the Michigan
Building Code.
E. Reference to the International Mechanical Code shall mean the
Michigan Mechanical Code.
F. Reference to the Department of Fire Prevention shall mean the City of
Lapeer's Fire and Rescue Department.
§ 18-4 LAPEER CODE § 18-5
1:510
110.1 General. If during the inspection of a premises, a building or
structure or any building system, in whole or in part, constitutes a threat to
human life, safety or health, the fire code official shall issue such notice or
orders to remove or remedy the conditions as shall be deemed necessary in
accordance with this section. The owner, occupant, or person in possession
or control shall immediately comply with such notice or order, including the
payment of any fees or obtaining any permits from applicable departments
or agencies for any of the repairs, alterations, remodeling, removing or
demolition required.
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500. Each day
a violation occurs shall be a separate offense. The City of Lapeer may also
pursue injunctive relief.
Section 202 General Definitions.
KEY BOX. Key box as used in this chspter shall mean a repository
container, similar to the key box described in Section 506, for storing
keys for entry to premises, a building, rooms in a building, elevators in
a building, and other boxes or areas within a building.
302.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for purposes of
this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meaning shown
herein.
Bonfire, Hi-Boy, High Voltage Transmission Line, Portable Outdoor
Fireplace, Powered Industrial Truck, Recreational Fire, and Sky
Lantern: all unchanged.
OPEN BURNING. The burning of materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air. Open burning
does not include road flares, smudge pots and similar devices
associated with safety or occupational uses.
OUTDOOR SOLID FUEL FIRED FURNACE. A freestanding
accessory structure, housing a solid-fuel-fired furnace, with a
smokestack, used to provide heat or hot water to a building, other
accessory structure, swimming pool or hot tub, via air, liquid or other
means.
304.3.3, 304.3.4. The clearance distances from combustible walls,
openings or combustible roof eave lines shown in both sections are
increased to 10 feet. The remainder of these sections remain unchanged.
307.1.1 Prohibited burning. Open burning, bonfires, and recreational
fires (including use of portable outdoor fireplaces) are prohibited within
the corporate limits of the City. This restriction shall not apply to the use
of charcoal and similar materials for the purpose of food preparation. The
lighting of, use, and release of untethered sky lanterns is also prohibited.
Exceptions:
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:511
1) Prescribed burning for the purpose of vegetation mitigation and control
in City parks when authorized by the fire code official.
2) The fire code official may permit the burning of firewood for warming
purposes only, and only at construction locations or special events.
Permits will be issued solely at the discretion of the fire code official,
based on weather and property conditions.
3) Daily use of the designated fire pit at the Water Tower Travel Trailer
Park is permitted between May 1 and October 31, unless a local
burning ban has been imposed by the fire code official. The fire pit is
available for the use of persons staying at the campground and the use
of City residents by appointment.
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code
official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to any open burning in the
City. Open burning includes, but is not limited to, silvicultural or range
or wildlife management fires, prevention or control of disease or pests,
bonfires, and recreational fires. Application for such approval shall only be
presented by, and permits issued to, the owner of the land upon which the
fire is to be kindled.
307.4.1, 307.4.2, and 307.4.3 are hereby deleted.
307.5 Attendance. Authorized, open burning fires shall be constantly
attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire
extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or
other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand,
water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate
utilization.
403.11.1.5 Tenant identification. Tenant identification shall be provided
for secondary exits from occupied tenant spaces that lead to an exit
corridor or directly to the exterior of the building. Tenant identification
shall be posted on the exterior side of the exit or exit access door and shall
identify the business name and address using plainly legible letters and
numbers that contrast with their background. There are no exceptions.
503.3 Marking. All fire apparatus access roads shall be conspicuously
posted with uniform (No Parking-Fire Lane) signs in keeping with the
standard established in the Michigan Manual of Traffic Control Devices,
as revised, and as prescribed by the fire code official and erected on both
sides of the fire apparatus access roads. Signs shall be erected no farther
than 100 feet apart in all areas designated as fire apparatus access roads.
Signs shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and
shall be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.
504.1 Required access.
1) Exterior doors and openings required by this code or the Michigan
Building Codes shall be maintained readily accessible for emergency
access by the fire department. An approved access walkway leading
from fire apparatus access road to exterior openings shall be provided
when required by the fire code official.
§ 18-5 LAPEER CODE § 18-5
1:512
2) All required rescue windows shall be accessible by a thirty-five-foot
ground extension ladder placed so that the inclination of the ladder
does not exceed 70°. An area of discharge, 36 inches in all directions
around the base of the ladder, shall be provided. Ladders and
associated areas of discharge shall be located within the property line.
505.1 Address numbers. New and existing buildings shall have approved
address numbers, building numbers, or approved building identification
placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers
shall not be spelled out and each character shall be a minimum of six
inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. Where required by
the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional
approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by
means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public
way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the
structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
506.1 Key box required. Key boxes are required for the following
premises:
1) All commercial and manufacturing buildings over 3,500 square feet
constructed after February 1, 1992.
2) All existing commercial and manufacturing buildings over 3,500 square
feet which undergo renovation or remodeling which affects an area of
2,000 square feet or more, or which is done at a cost of $25,000 or
more.
3) Any building having a gate capable of being locked and which could
hinder fire department access to the premises.
4) Any commercial or manufacturing building equipped with a fire alarm
or sprinkler system.
Single occupancy businesses are required to have a key box installed at the
location designated by the fire code official, normally the main entrance.
Additional key boxes may be required by the fire code official depending on
the size and layout of the building.
In strip malls, up to three businesses with connected common walls and on
the same level may share a key box between them (up to a maximum of
five businesses may be permissible with approval of the fire code official).
All the businesses are equally responsible for maintaining the key box and
alarm system. All key boxes shall be alarmed.
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:513
In businesses that have an existing alarm system (i.e., burglar or fire
alarm) or have an automatic fire suppression system such as a sprinkler,
CO2, dry or wet chemical, the key box(es) shall be connected to the alarm
system. In buildings without or not requiring an alarm or automatic fire
suppression system, an audible alarm approved by the fire code official
shall be mounted on the outside of the building. This alarm shall activate
any time the key box is opened or physically removed from the building.
The key box(es) to be ordered must be one approved by the fire code
official.
For some locations, a key box padlock may be required. The Lapeer Fire
and Rescue Department shall provide key box order forms, and shall
keep a copy of the completed order form in the business inspection file.
Installation requirements for the key box include:
a) The key box will be installed at the location specified by the fire code
official, normally at the main entrance.
b) The key box will be mounted at five feet from grade level.
c) All key boxes must be connected to the building alarm system or
audible alarm prior to being closed.
507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building
hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than
300 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by
an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on site
fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code
official.
509.1 Identification. Fire protection equipment shall be identified in an
approved manner. Rooms containing controls for air-conditioning systems,
sprinkler risers and valves, or other fire detection, suppression or control
elements shall be identified for the use of the fire department. Approved
signs required to identify fire protection equipment and equipment location
shall be constructed of durable materials, permanently installed and
readily visible. All fire department connections shall have a sign approved
by the fire code official. The sign shall specify the type of water based fire
protection system it serves and the building areas served.
609.3.3.1 Inspection. An inspection shall be performed on all hoods,
grease-removal devices, fans, ducts and other appurtenances at intervals
specified on Table 609.3.3.1 or as approved by the fire code official.
Inspections shall be made by the manufacturer, installer, or maintenance
company. The inspections shall ascertain that the system will cover all
the cooking surfaces with the extinguishing agent when manually or
automatically actuated. The manual actuation, automatic actuation, and
system interconnections shall also be inspected to determine that they
operate as required. A written inspection report shall be filed with the fire
code official upon completion of each inspection.
§ 18-5 LAPEER CODE § 18-5
1:514
609.3.3.3 Records. Records for inspections shall state the individual and
company performing the inspection, a description of the inspection and
when the inspection took place. Records for cleanings shall state the
individual and company performing the cleaning and when the cleaning
took place. Such records shall be completed after each inspection or
cleaning, maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years, and
a copy of each report shall be forwarded to the fire code official within
30 days of the date of the inspection, cleaning, test, or maintenance
performed.
901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests, and
maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on
the premises for a minimum of three years. A copy of each inspection, test,
or maintenance record shall be forwarded to the fire code official within 30
days of the date of that the inspection, test, or maintenance occurred.
903.3.7 Fire Department connection. The location of fire department
connections shall be approved by the fire code official as outlined in
Sections 912.2 through 912.2.2.
907.3.1 Duct smoke detectors. Smoke detectors installed in ducts shall
be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity present in the
duct. Duct smoke detectors shall be connected to the building's fire alarm
control unit when a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2.
Activation of a duct smoke detector shall initiate a visible and audible
supervisory signal at a constantly attended location and shall perform the
intended fire safety function in accordance with this code and the Michigan
Mechanical Code. In facilities that are required to be monitored by a
supervising station, duct smoke detectors shall report as a fire alarm. They
shall not be used as a substitute for required open area detection. (The
remainder of this section remains unchanged.)
912.4 Access. Immediate access to fire department connections shall
be maintained at all times and without obstruction by vehicle parking,
carports, garages, refuse storage containers, fences, landscaping or other
obscuring features for a minimum of three feet. Access to fire department
connections shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The exception shown as #4 is hereby modified as
follows:
Exceptions, #4. The possession, storage, sale, handling, and use of
fireworks shall comply with the provisions of PA 257 of 201263 and
Chapter 19, Offenses Against Public Peace, Safety and Morals, of the
Code of the City of Lapeer.
The remainder of the section remains unchanged.
5601.2.2 Sale and retail display. The sale and retail display of fireworks
shall comply with the provisions of PA 257 of 2012.64
63.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 28.451 et seq.
64.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 28.451 et seq.
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6
1:515
§ 18-6. Additions to code.
The following provisions are hereby added to the International Fire Code:
104.12 Open buildings due to fire. The fire code official or a duly
authorized representative is empowered to order the securing of firedamaged
buildings. If the owners of the affected building are present, this
order shall be given to them. If no owners or representatives of the building
are present, the fire code official or a duly authorized representative may
have the building secured. The expense of securing the building shall be
a debt to the City from the responsible owner and shall be collected as
any other debt to the City. Fire-damaged buildings or sites are subject to
the same abatement procedures as contained in Section 110 for unsafe
buildings.
105.1.7 Building permit requirements. No building permit shall be
issued by any City department until all plans required by this section have
been submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
304.4 Outdoor containers. Dumpsters or containers stored outdoors
shall be provided with lids and shall be constructed (including the lids) of
noncombustible materials or approved combustible materials. They shall
not be placed within 10 feet of combustible walls, openings or combustible
roof eave lines.
Exception: Existing enclosures or container storage areas are exempt
from this requirement where:
1. In the opinion of the fire code official, there is no other location in
which to locate them.
2. They are not currently within 10 feet of an exit or utility meters.
307.6 Outdoor solid-fuel-fired furnace prohibition. The installation
and use of solid-fuel furnaces is prohibited. No property owner, lessee, or
person in possession or control of real property in the City of Lapeer shall
use or permit the use of solid-fuel-fired furnaces.
Existing nonconforming outdoor solid-fuel-fired furnaces. The lawful use of
a nonconforming outdoor solid-fuel-fired furnace existing at the time of the
adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although such
furnace does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. However, the
use of a nonconforming outdoor solid-fuel-fired furnace must not create a
public nuisance or cause a human health hazard.
503.4.2 Authority to remove obstructions. If any vehicle, trailer or
other object is so located within a fire apparatus access road or at any
other location prohibited by this chapter, or any City ordinance, at a time
the fire department is responding to an alarm which necessitates use of
such fire apparatus access road and/or other location, then any member of
the City Police or Fire Departments may move or cause same to be moved
by any means necessary without liability for any damage being occurred by
the City of Lapeer or any officer, agent or employee thereof.
§ 18-6 LAPEER CODE § 18-6
1:516
901.6.3 Certification required. Any installation, testing, repair or
maintenance of fire alarm or suppression systems required by this code
or the Building Code shall be performed only by a certified fire alarm or
suppression firm and/or individual or by a firm and/or individual licensed
pursuant to Act 407 of the Public Acts of 2016, the Skilled Trades
Regulation Act, MCLA § 339.5101 et seq., as amended. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
912.2.3 Remove location. Fire department connections (FDCs) serving
sprinkler systems shall be installed at an approved remote location away
from the building or structure, and shall not be located on the wall of a
building unless approved by the fire code official. FDCs serving class 1 or
3 standpipe systems may be located on walls, provided such walls are of
fire-resistive or noncombustible construction.
912.2.4 Fire Department connection locations. Unless approved by
the fire code official, a fire department connection location (FDC) shall not
be located more than 50 feet from a fire hydrant. FDCs shall be installed
not less than 18 inches nor more than 36 inches above the finished grade
of an approved fire apparatus access road. FDCs shall not be obstructed
by vehicle parking, carports, garages, refuse storage containers, fences,
landscaping or other obscuring features.
Exceptions:
1. Existing FDCs.
2. FDCs that are not able to be located away from a wall due to physical
restrictions may be located in an area approved by the fire code official.
SECTION 114
RESTITUTION
114.1 Arson. In any case in which arson takes place, the person(s)
convicted of that crime, or of any lesser charge, or by way of a plea bargain,
shall be financially responsible for all costs of investigating, fighting and
extinguishing the fire, for any property securing services and/or for any
other security procedures performed by the City of Lapeer or its agents or
representatives.
114.2 Alcohol and drugs. In any case where abuse of alcohol or drugs
can be proven to have contributed to the cause of the emergency response
by the City of Lapeer or its agents, the person(s) proven to be on alcohol
or drugs shall be financially responsible for the cost of any work performed
by the City of Lapeer or its agents or representatives.
SECTION 115
MISCELLANEOUS
115.1 Fire alarms. No person shall willfully or knowingly raise or
circulate any false alarms of fire.
§ 18-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6
1:517
115.2 Crossing of fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled
over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on
any street, alleyway, private drive, or any other vehicular roadway without
the consent of the fire official in command of said operation.
115.3 Defacing Fire Equipment. No person shall damage, deface, or
attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any fire department vehicle at
any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure, fire department personnel while
performing departmental duties.
115.4 Fire hydrant use. A person shall not use or operate any fire
hydrant intended for the use of the fire department for fire-suppression
purposes unless such person first secures written permission from the
Director of Public Works. In addition, no person shall obstruct, remove,
tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant except for the purpose of
fire extinguishment, training, testing purposes, making necessary repairs,
or when permitted by the fire code official or Director of Public Works.
§ 18-7. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected
by this chapter.
§ 18-8. Repealer.
Unless specifically preserved or provided for herein, all sections in former
Chapter 18, Fire Prevention, are hereby repealed.
§ 18-9. Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Lapeer City
Commission hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases
be declared unconstitutional.
Chapter 19
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS
§ 19-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
§ 18-6 LAPEER CODE § 19-1
1:518
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The work "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes any spirituous, vinous, malt or
fermented liquor, beer, wine, spirits, alcohol or liquids any compounds,
whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name
called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for
beverage purposes.
CITY — The City of Lapeer.
MINOR — A person, male or female, under the age of 21 years.
NUDITY — [Amended 3-2-1994]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, club, or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACE — [Amended 3-2-1994]
§ 19-2. Offenses against public peace.
No person in the City shall:
The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering;
A.
The showing of the human male or female buttocks or anus with less
than a fully opaque covering;
B.
The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any part of the nipple; or
C.
D. The showing of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
All out-of-doors land and areas open to the general public including
public streets and alleys; and
A.
All buildings, rooms, theaters, athletic grounds, bars, dance halls and
lounges open to the public whether or not entrance is gained by the
payment of an admission charge.
B.
A. Tumultuous conduct. Disturb, tend to disturb, or aid in disturbing the
peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous
conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any
premises owned or possessed by him or under his control.
B. Assault. Beat, strike, wound, imprison, or inflict violence on another, or
assault another with intent to commit murder, rape, mayhem, robbery
or larceny. Nor shall any person assault another with a lethal weapon,
instrument, or thing with intent to commit upon the person of another
any bodily injury.
C. Fighting. Fight another person except in boxing exhibitions duly
authorized and licensed under law.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:519
D. Unlawful occupancy. Occupy, lodge, or sleep in any vacant lot, vacant or
unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop, or other building or structure, or
in any automobile, truck, railroad car, or other vehicle, without owning
the same or without permission of the owner or person entitled to the
possession of the same.
E. Fraudulent schemes. Engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick
to obtain money or other valuable thing from others; or any person who
aids or assists such trick, device or scheme.
F. Disturbance of religious worship. Disquiet disturb any congregation or
assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent
behavior, or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near
the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting.
G. Conduct in schools or school grounds.
(1) Create a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or
on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds
lawfully used for school activities.
(2) Fail to leave the school premises immediately when so directed by
the principal or his designee.
(3) Enter or remain in any public, private, or parochial school, or on
surrounding school grounds after being requested to leave by the
principal or his designee.
H. Open intoxicants.
(1) Transport or possess any alcoholic liquor in a container which is
open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken, within the
passenger compartment of a vehicle on any public street, sidewalk,
alley, parking lot, or property used for municipal purposes by the
City of Lapeer. If the vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment
separated from the passenger compartment, a container which is
open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken shall be in
encased or enclosed. This section shall not apply to any chartered
passenger vehicle licensed by the Michigan Public Service
Commission.
(2) Consume, or possess any alcoholic liquor in a container which is
open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken, on any public
street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot, or property used for municipal
purposes by the City of Lapeer, unless approval for such
consumption or possession has been given by the Lapeer City
Commission.65
I. Unlawful occupancy. Remain in any private building, private open land,
or private parking lot used by the public, after being requested to leave
65.Editor's Note: Former Section 19.01(I), Fireworks, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-20-2012. See now § 19-30.
§ 19-2 LAPEER CODE § 19-2
1:520
§ 19-3. Offenses against public safety.
No person in the City shall:
by the owner, tenant, or person lawfully in possession, or where the
property is posted in a conspicuous manner. [Amended 8-30-2000]
J. Make, cause or continue any loud, unnecessary, unnatural, or unusual
noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, health,
peace or safety of others at any time, day or night.
K. Use, operate, play or permit the use, operation, or playing, of any sound
production or reproduction device, radio, musical instrument, drums,
CD player, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers, sound amplifiers,
or any other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound, in such a manner as to disturb any person of normal sensitivity
in any residential or public area. The operation of any such device,
radio, instrument, phonograph, television set, machine, loudspeakers,
or similar device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance
of 100 feet or more from its point of origin shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section. This provision shall not apply to any
participant in parades, band concerts, lawful firework displays,
memorial salutes, or any other event or activity which has been
authorized by the City of Lapeer or is otherwise specifically authorized
by law. [Amended 5-5-1997; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Interference with police department.
(1) Resisting officer. Resist any police officer, any member of the Police
Department, or any person duly empowered with police authority,
while in the discharge or apparent discharge of this duty, or in any
way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty.
(2) Assisting in escape. Offer or endeavor to assist any person in the
custody of a police officer, a member of the Police Department or a
person duly empowered with police authority to escape or to
attempt to escape from such custody.
(3) Failure to stop upon police signal. Attempt to flee or elude an
officer in uniform after such officer has given a visual or audible
signal by hand, voice, or other means, to stop.
B. Engage in any activity or game in any public mall, sidewalk, or public
parking lot in the Central Business District that involves the throwing,
batting or kicking of objects. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Harassing communications.
§ 19-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3
1:521
§ 19-4. Offenses involving morals.
No person in the City shall:
(1) Use a telephone or other communication service or device to
terrorize, frighten, threaten, harass, or annoy any 911 emergency
dispatcher or any other emergency personnel.
(2) Threaten physical harm or damage to any person or property in the
course of a telephone conversation or through the use of any
common carrier communications service or device with any 911
emergency dispatcher or any other emergency personnel.
(3) Falsely and deliberately report by telephone or other
communications service, system or device, that any person has
been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, has been a
victim of a crime, or has been in an accident.
(4) Falsely and deliberately report a fire, that the safety of persons or
property is immediately in danger, or the existence of an
emergency when no such emergency exists.
(5) Deliberately refuse or fail to disengage a connection between a
telephone or other communication service or device provided for
the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering
with any emergency communications service.
(6) Use any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language in the
course of a telephone conversation or other communication with
any 911 emergency dispatcher or other emergency personnel.
(7) Suggest any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone
conversation or other communications with any 911 emergency
dispatcher or other emergency personnel.
(8) Penalty. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor which is
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a
maximum fine of $500, or both.
A. Window peeping. Look, peer, or peep into or be found loitering around
or within view of any window within a building occupied as the
residence of another with the intent of watching or looking through said
window to observe any person undressed or in the act of undressing or
dressing.
B. Sexual intercourse. Undertake or attempt to undertake sexual
intercourse or undertake the motion of sexual intercourse on any public
lawn, sidewalk, street, alley, park, yard, school grounds, cemetery or
parking lot that is open to the public or in view of the public from public
property.
§ 19-3 LAPEER CODE § 19-4
1:522
§ 19-5. Offenses involving person under 21 years of age.
C. Nudity. Appear in a state of nudity in any public place, including any
building or establishment open to the public in the City of Lapeer.
[Amended 3-2-1994]
D. Allow nudity. On premises they own, operate, or control, knowingly
permit or allow a person to appear in a state of nudity. [Amended
3-2-1994]
E. Exception. Subsection C of this section shall not be applicable to young
children. [Amended 3-2-1994]
A. Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the
person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or
furnishes alcoholic beverage to a person who is less than 21 years of
age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is
less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or
both.
B. A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport or
possess, in a motor vehicle, alcoholic beverages unless the person is
employed by a license under Public Act 531 of 1978,66 the Liquor
Control Commission, or an agent of the Liquor Control Commission and
is transporting or having the alcoholic beverage in a motor vehicle
under the person control during regular working hours and in the
course of the person's employment. A person who violated this
subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or to imprisonment in the
county jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or both.
C. A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person less than
21 years of age, or a person less than 21 years of age who uses a
fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic beverages, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $500, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
not more than 90 days, or both.
D. A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic
liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as
provided in Subsection B above. A person less than 21 years of age who
violates this subsection is guilty of a civil infraction pursuant to state
law punishable by the following civil fines and sanctions: [Amended
4-15-1998; 9-22-2011; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
66.Editor's Note: See now the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCLA § 436.1701 et
seq.
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:523
§ 19-6. Aiding and abetting commission of an offense.
Every person in the City of Lapeer concerned in the commission of an
offense under this chapter, whether he directly commits the act constituting
the offense, or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may
hereafter be prosecuted and tried and upon conviction shall be punished as
if he had directly committed such offense.
§ 19-7. (Reserved)67
§ 19-8. Minor curfew.
(1) For the first violation a fine of not more than $100, and may be
ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance
abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as
described.
(2) For a second violation a fine of not more than $200, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance
abuse treatment and rehabilitation services, and designated by the
administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community
service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment
at his or her own expense.
(3) For a third or subsequent violation a fine of not more than $500,
and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or
substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services, and
designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to
perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 13 years to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll, frequent or otherwise be or remain in or upon any
of the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or public buildings or
places of amusement or entertainment or other public grounds or
places in the City of Lapeer between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. immediately following, unless such minor is accompanied by a
parent, guardian, custodian, or some adult 18 years of age delegated by
the parent or guardian to accompany such minor, or unless such minor
is returning home from school or church function or entertainment, or
unless the employment of such minor makes it necessary to be upon the
streets, alleys or other public places during the prohibited hours
hereinabove mentioned.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor between the ages of 13 and 15 years
of age to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, frequent or otherwise be or remain
in or upon any of the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or public
buildings or places of amusement or entertainment or other public
67.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 19.07, Furnishing of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, as
amended 2-14-2001, was repealed by a vote of the electors 4-7-1975.
§ 19-5 LAPEER CODE § 19-8
1:524
§ 19-9. Firearms, bows and slings.
grounds or places in the City of Lapeer between the hours of 10:30 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. immediately following, unless such minor is accompanied
by a parent, guardian, custodian, or some adult 18 years of age
delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany such minor, or
unless such minor is returning home from school or church function
or entertainment, or unless the employment of such minor makes it
necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or other public places during
the prohibited hours hereinabove mentioned. [Amended 2-4-1971]
C. It shall be unlawful for any minor the age of 16 years to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll, frequent or otherwise be or remain in or upon any of the
public sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or public buildings or places of
amusement or entertainment or other public grounds or places in the
City of Lapeer between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
immediately following, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent,
guardian, custodian, or some adult 18 years of age delegated by the
parent or guardian to accompany such minor, or unless such minor is
returning home from school or church function or entertainment, or
unless the employment of such minor makes it necessary to be upon the
streets, alleys or other public places during the prohibited hours
hereinabove mentioned. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. Any person assisting, aiding, abetting or encouraging any minor under
the age of 17 years found violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
E. Police officers may in their discretion take into custody any minor under
the age of 17 years found violating the provisions of this chapter and
return him or her to his or her place of abode, or may make a complaint
against such minor under the Juvenile law of this state, provided that, if
after investigation by the officer taking into custody such minor, it is
found that such minor is incorrigible or willfully absents himself or
herself from home and that the parents, guardian or legal custodian are
unable to control such minor, then a complaint shall be made against
such minor under the juvenile law of this state.
F. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a child or ward to fail
to pick up the child or ward from the Lapeer City Police Department
within two hours of receiving any notice that said child or ward is being
held at the Lapeer City Police Department. Any person violating this
section shall be responsible for a civil infraction with the same fine and
costs as for state law, traffic civil infractions.
G. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a child or ward under
the age of 17 years to knowingly allow such child or ward to be out in
violation of the curfew established by this chapter. Violation of this
section shall be a misdemeanor punishable as described in § 1-2A of the
Code of the City of Lapeer.
§ 19-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9
1:525
§ 19-10. Keeping of bees within City limits.
§ 19-11. (Reserved)
A. It shall not be lawful for any person to shoot with a slingshot or bow and
arrow within the corporate limits unless such location has been
approved by the Chief of Police.
B. It shall not be lawful for any person to use or shoot an air gun or air
rifle, or to permit the same to be done within the City of Lapeer, except
on such person's own premises when the slug of bullet is not projected
outside of such person's premises.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and all police officers of
the City to seize all such air guns or air rifles found in use in
violation of this section. Upon a judicial determination by the court
having jurisdiction of such offense, and of the person committing
the same, that such air gun or air rifle was used contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, such air gun or air rifle shall be
destroyed or disposed of by the Chief of Police in such manner as
such court may direct.
C. Except in the lawful defense of his person, family or property, no person
shall fire or discharge within the City any firearm, or any toy firearm in
which any explosive substance can be used.
D. No person shall sell, loan or furnish to any minors any firearm, or any
toy firearm in which any explosive substance can be used, or any
dynamite, dynamite fuse or caps, gunpowder, or any other explosive
substance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep bees
within the limits of the City of Lapeer without a written or printed
permit or license signed by the City Manager and Chief of Police.
B. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to keep bees within said City
shall make application to said City Manager describing the place and
location where it is proposed to keep said bees. Upon receipt of said
application, the said City Manager and Chief of Police shall immediately
inspect the said premises were it is proposed to keep said bees, and
shall grant or deny permission to keep said bees on said premises as in
their judgment the welfare of the City and its inhabitants demand. Said
action on the part of said City Manager and Chief of Police shall be final,
and from which there shall be no appeal.
C. Any permit granted as provided for in this section may be revoked by
said City Manager and Chief of Police upon 30 days' notice given in
writing to the holder of said permit.
§ 19-9 LAPEER CODE § 19-12
1:526
§ 19-12. Barbed wire fences.
No person shall build, erect or construct a barbed wire fence upon or along
any street, alley or sidewalk, or upon that portion of any premises adjacent
to any street, alley or sidewalk.
§ 19-13. Discarded refrigerators.
No person shall store, maintain, discard, or dispose of any unused
refrigerator, or ice box, or any other container or appliance capable of
containing a child and having self-locking doors on the exterior, without first
complying with one or more of the following safety precautions:
§ 19-14. Open wells; cisterns.
The owner of any property within the City, where open wells, cisterns,
cesspools or any other similar openings exist, shall cause the same to be
properly enclosed and secured so as to prevent the entrapment of persons
within such openings.
§ 19-15. Police right to draft bystander.
Any member of the police force may require the assistance of any bystander
or resident of the City to assist him in making any arrest authorized by
the laws of this state or the Charter or ordinances of the City. No person
shall abuse, resist, oppose or in any manner obstruct or refuse to assist any
policeman in the exercise of his duty or in making any arrest.
§ 19-16. Falsely impersonating police.
No person shall falsely impersonate any member of the police or falsely
represent himself to be a member thereof or wear the uniform, star or
badge or carry the club or handcuffs designated for such police force with
intent to falsely impersonate any member of the police force.
§ 19-17. Disorderly persons.
A. The removal of all exterior locks.
B. The removal of all doors or covers permitting entrance to the appliance.
C. Padlocking all exterior doors or covers.
D. Storing the appliance in such manner as to make entry inaccessible by
causing the doors or covers to be firmly pressed against a wall or a
floor.
A. It is unlawful for any person who shall invite or solicit any person of the
opposite sex with whom they are not acquainted to ride in any
automobile or other vehicle while on any public street, lane, alley or
other public places in the City of Lapeer, or for any person to solicit any
person of the opposite sex to commit any immoral act.
§ 19-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-17
1:527
§ 19-18. Threats.
No person shall menace or threaten injury to the person or property of
another, or put any person in fear.
§ 19-19. Public intoxication.
No person in a public place shall be intoxicated and also endanger directly
the safety of another person or the safety of property, or act in a manner
that causes a public disturbance.
§ 19-20. Disorderly house.
No person shall permit or suffer any house, building or other place owned
or occupied by him to be a resort for noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons,
nor permit or suffer to remain therein any noisy, boisterous, or disorderly
persons.
§ 19-21. Gaming.
§ 19-22. Houses of prostitution.
B. It is unlawful for any person to make, aid or assist in making any riot,
disturbance or improper diversion, or to aid or assist in collecting a
crowd for any unlawful purpose.
C. It is unlawful for any person to commit a breach of the peace.
A. No person shall for hire, gain or reward keep any gaming tools,
implements or materials for the purpose of being used for any illegal
gaming by any person or knowingly suffer any such gaming tools,
implements or materials to be kept maintained or played on any
premises occupied or controlled by him in the City.
B. No person shall hire, gain or reward, allow, suffer or permit any person
under the age of 17 years of age to play at billiards, card, dice or any
other game of skill or chance in any room or place whatever owned,
kept or maintained by such person.
C. No person shall play billiards, cards, dice or at any gaming table or at
any game, for the purpose of gaming or betting upon the result of any
such game or games.
A. No person shall keep a house of ill fame, or house of assignation,
resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness, and no person
shall let any dwelling house, rooms, or other premises knowing that the
lessee intends to use it as a place of resort for the purpose of
prostitution or as a house of assignation.
B. No person shall be or remain in any house of ill fame or house of
assignation for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or debauchery.
§ 19-17 LAPEER CODE § 19-23
1:528
§ 19-23. Radio and television interference.
Between the hours of 6:30 p.m. and 12:30 a.m., no person shall knowingly
operate within the City any machine, device, apparatus, or instrument, the
operation of which causes reasonable preventable electrical interference,
with radio or television reception within the City. X-ray machines or
apparatus used therefor are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or
reasonable preventable interferences with radio or television reception and
are not negligently operated.
§ 19-24. Excavations.
§ 19-25. Hunting.
No person in the City of Lapeer shall:
§ 19-26. Disruption of administration of government.
A. Excavation adjacent to public thoroughfare. No person, firm or
corporation that is the owner, lessee, or occupant of real estate in the
City of Lapeer shall permit any excavation, basement or cellar to
remain unfilled on said real estate which is adjacent to any public
sidewalk, alley, street, thoroughfare, parking lot, or other area used by
the public unless there is immediately erected a barricade not less than
10 feet in height of solid material such as wood, concrete or masonry,
and unless adequate lateral support to the adjacent public property is
properly provided.
B. Nuisance per se. The existence of any such excavation as set forth in
Subsection A, supra, for more than 24 hours without providing the
necessary barricade and lateral support is hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se.
A. Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time within the City of Lapeer.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect and preserve the
orderly administration of government by defining those areas of
administration and prescribing penalties for the disruption thereof. It is
not the purpose or intent of this section to deny a person or his right of
free speech, assembly, petition, due process of law or his right of free
speech, assembly, petition, due process of law or equal protection of the
law to or before the person government. This section is intended to
discourage anarchy and to encourage the peaceful and orderly redress
of wrongs and grievances.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT — The management and
carrying out of the routine functions of government, such as (and not
by way of limitations) the providing of police and fire protection; the
collection of taxes; the education of children; and the providing of
§ 19-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-26
1:529
§ 19-27. Loitering.
water, sewer, postal, hospital, medical, or judicial services within the
City of Lapeer.
EXECUTIVE OF GOVERNMENT — The person charged with the
primary responsibility for executing a particular function of
Government within the City of Lapeer.
GOVERNMENT — The Government of the City of Lapeer, County of
Lapeer, Michigan; Lapeer Public Schools, State of Michigan; and United
States of America; or any of their respective Boards, Commissions,
Departments, or instrumentality's functioning within the City of Lapeer.
LEGISLATURE OF GOVERNMENT — That body of persons charged
by law with the primary responsibility for enacting or adopting rules,
regulations, or ordinances that are operative in the City of Lapeer.
C. Acts prohibited. No person, group of persons, firm or corporation shall
disrupt or hinder the orderly administration of government.
D. Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall preclude any persons, groups
of persons, firm, or corporation from petitioning or appearing in person
before either the executive or legislature of government in their regular
course of their business. Recognizing that the stability of government
and the respect and confidence of the citizenry in their government is
dependent upon the prompt hearing and thorough redress of the
wrongs and grievances of the citizenry, the executive and legislature of
the City of Lapeer are hereby required to promptly hear and consider
the peacefully presented wrongs and grievances of all proper persons.
E. Effective date. This section shall become effective on September 12,
1969.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place
in such manner so as to:
(1) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tend to
hinder or impede the free an uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians.
(2) Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.
§ 19-26 LAPEER CODE § 19-27
1:530
§ 19-28. Use or possession of drug paraphernalia.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in Subsection A herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions
and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey
such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days or both. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense
on each successive day continued.
D. This chapter shall become effective on December 29, 1971.
A. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess, drug paraphernalia
within the City of Lapeer. This section does not apply to manufacturers,
practitioners, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons
whose conduct is in accordance with state and/or federal law. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit any possession, manufacture
or use of any drug paraphernalia, by legitimate health care providers,
pharmacists, or any other individual, or entity, that can establish that
their possession and/or use of such drug paraphernalia is otherwise
consistent with the lawful manufacture, possession, or sale of
controlled substances.
B. Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used or intended for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, or concealing a controlled
substance, or injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
into the human body a controlled substance. It includes but is not
limited to the following:
(1) Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
(2) Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
(3) Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
(4) Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying, or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
(5) Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or
measuring controlled substances.
§ 19-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-28
1:531
(6) Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use in cutting
controlled substances.
(7) Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing
twigs and weeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marihuana.
(8) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or
intended for use in compounding controlled substances.
(9) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or
intended for use, in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
(10) Containers and other objects used or intended for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances.
(11) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended
for use in injecting controlled substances into the human body.
(12) Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
(a) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls.
(b) Clips, tips or other such objects, commonly known as roach
clips, used to secure to a cigarette type controlled substance,
one end of which is placed to the lips of the human body,
facilitating maximum distance of combustion for maximum
consumption of controlled substance.
(c) Water pipes, carburetion tubes and devices, smoking and
carburetion masks, cocaine vials, chamber pipes, carburetor
pipes, electric pipes, air-driven pipes, chillums, bongs, and ice
pipes or chillers.
(13) A device that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human
body, and which consists of at least a razor blade or similar object
and a mirror or flat piece of glass.
(14) A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed
to deliver a measured amount of controlled substance to the user.
(15) A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically
designed to carry a measured amount of a controlled substance to
the user's nose.
§ 19-28 LAPEER CODE § 19-28
1:532
(16) A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is
specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in
an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake
fluid, oil or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for
carrying and concealing controlled substances.
(17) A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small
diameter bowl and is specifically designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the
human body.
C. A controlled substance is any drug, substance, or immediate precursor
defined by the Michigan Public Health Code as a controlled substance,
or defined as a controlled substance by the laws of the United States,
including Section 102, Paragraph (6), of the Controlled Substances Act,
21 U.S.C. § 802(6).
D. In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," in addition to
all other relevant factors, the following factors shall be considered:
(1) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
(2) The proximity of the object to controlled substances, and or to
other objects reasonably considered to be drug paraphernalia.
(3) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
(4) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object.
(5) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
(6) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its potential for illegal use.
(7) National and/or local advertising concerning its suitability for
illegal use.
(8) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
(9) Expert testimony concerning its use.
E. The provisions of this chapter are severable, and the invalidity of any
phrase or part of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of this chapter.
F. Penalty.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
section shall be sentenced to not more than 90 days in jail and/or a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense.
§ 19-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-28
1:533
§ 19-29. (Reserved)68 [Amended 5-30-2001]
§ 19-30. Fireworks. [Added 12-20-2012]
(2) Any drug paraphernalia used, or possessed, in violation of this
section may be seized and forfeited to the City.
A. Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
"Fireworks Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of
the ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks, as allowed
under the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCLA § 28.451 et seq., as
amended.
C. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
APA STANDARD 87-1 — 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for
construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties,
and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics
Association of Bethesda, Maryland.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Fireworks devices that are designed to
produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply
with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission
under 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard
87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include lowimpact
fireworks.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol,
a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible
or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.
LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS — Ground and handheld sparkling devices
as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to
3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
MINOR — An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
NATIONAL HOLIDAY — The following legal public holidays:
(1) New Years' Day, January 1.
(2) Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January.
(3) Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February.
(4) Memorial Day, the last Monday in May.
(5) Independence Day, July 4.
(6) Labor Day, the first Monday in September.
68.Editor's Note: Former § 19.29, Possession and/or use of marihuana, amended 5-30-2001,
was repealed 2-4-2019.
§ 19-28 LAPEER CODE § 19-30
1:534
(7) Columbus Day, the second Monday in October.
(8) Veterans Day, November 11.
(9) Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November.
(10)Christmas Day, December 25.
D. Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks generally. A person
shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on days other
than the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday.
On the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday, a
person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. [Amended 7-18-2013]
E. Possession of consumer fireworks by a minor. A minor shall not possess
consumer fireworks.
F. Use of consumer fireworks on public property or the property of others.
A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on
public property, school property, church property, or the property of
another person without that organization's or person's express
permission to use those fireworks on those premises.
G. Use of consumer fireworks while under the influence. An individual
shall not use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under
the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a
combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance. As used in
this subsection:
(1) "Alcoholic liquor" means that term as defined in Section 1d of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA § 257.1d.
(2) "Controlled substance" means that term as defined in Section 8b of
the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCLA § 257.8b.
H. Reckless use of consumer fireworks. An individual shall not use
consumer fireworks in a reckless manner.
(1) As used in this subsection, "reckless" means "conduct
demonstrating a substantial lack of concern as to whether injury
results to people or property."
I. Determination of violation; seizure. If a governmental or law
enforcement agency determines that a violation of this section has
occurred, an officer of that agency may seize the consumer fireworks as
evidence of the violation.
J. Penalty.
(1) A violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of
up to $500 plus the costs of prosecution.
§ 19-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-30
1:535
Chapter 20
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
§ 20-1. General provisions.
(2) Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating
this section, the City may dispose of or destroy any consumer
fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution.
(3) In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found responsible
for a violation of this section shall be required to reimburse the City
for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying of consumer
fireworks that were confiscated for a violation of this section.
K. Severability. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of the
Fireworks Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent portion of this section, and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
section.
L. Savings. All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing,
acquired or incurred at the time this section takes effect are saved and
may be consummated according to the law in force when they are
commenced.
M. Effective date. This section shall take immediate effect after the final
passage thereof.
A. Licensee defined. As used in this chapter, except as otherwise
specifically provided, the term "licensee" means and includes any
person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter and the
employees or agents of such person.
B. Licenses required. No person shall engage or be engaged in the
operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or
privilege for which any license is required by any section of this chapter
without first obtaining a license from the City in the manner provided
for in this chapter.
C. Multiple businesses. The granting of a license to any person operating,
conducting, or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege
which contains within itself or is composed of trades, professions,
businesses or privileges which are required by this chapter to be
licensed shall not relieve the person to whom such license is granted
from the necessity of securing individual licenses for each such trade,
profession, business or privilege.
D. State-licensed businesses.
§ 19-30 LAPEER CODE § 20-1
1:536
(1) The fact that a license has been granted to any person by the state
to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade,
profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from
the necessity of securing a license from the City if such license is
required by this chapter.
(2) No license required by any provision of this chapter shall be issued
to a person who is required to have a license or permit from the
state until such person submits evidence that such license has been
secured.
E. Fees.
(1) No license shall be issued until the required fees have been paid
according to the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule, as amended by the
City Commission.
(2) No license fee shall be required from any person who is exempt
from such fee by provisions of state or federal law. Such a person
shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter. The City Clerk
shall, in all cases, issue to such a person a license which clearly
states such exemption and the reason therefor.
(3) No license shall be prorated, unless otherwise specifically
provided.
F. License application.
(1) Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, every person required to
obtain a license from the City to engage in operation, conduct or
carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall
make application for such license to the City Clerk, on forms
provided by the City Clerk, and shall state under oath or affirmation
such facts as may be required for or applicable to the granting of
such license.
(2) The City Clerk shall examine each application filed under this
chapter for a permit and shall make, or cause to be made, such
further investigation of the application and the applicant as the
City Clerk shall deem necessary. The permit will be issued when the
City Clerk determines the following facts:
(a) That all of the statements made in the application are true.
(b) That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent
transaction or enterprise.
(c) Nothing in the applicant's proposed activity will violate any
provision of Chapter 7, Zoning, or any other law or ordinance.
(3) All applications for any license shall be referred to the Police Chief
or designate for an investigation and recommendation on matters
pertaining to the public safety, health or welfare which are or may
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1
1:537
be involved in the exercise of the license applied for unless
otherwise specifically provided. Where the Police Chief's
investigation requires the determination of good moral character
of the applicant, the definition of good moral character shall be
in accordance with Act 381 of 1974 (MCLA § 338.41 et seq.), as
amended.
G. Authorized issuing officer and approval of City officers or department
heads.
(1) The authorized issuing officer shall be the City Clerk unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(2) Whenever the approval of a license is required by any City officer
or department head, the criteria for approval shall be the
applicant's compliance with federal, state and local laws
concerning the field in which such officer or department head is
involved.
H. Use of buildings and premises. No license shall be issued for the
conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing, or
act, if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully
comply with the requirements of the City Code. No such license or
permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of
any act which would involve a violation of Chapter 7, Zoning.
I. Change of location. The location of any licensed business or occupation,
or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided, 10 days' notice
thereof is given to the City Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the
contrary; provided, that the building and zoning requirements of the
ordinances are complied with.
J. Nuisances. No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or
operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
K. Inspections. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are
provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to
secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of
the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of
making the inspection any officer or employee of the City who is
authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time
that admission is requested.
L. Bonds or insurance.
(1) Where the provisions of this chapter require that the applicant for
any license furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an
amount deemed adequate by the proper City Officer, or where the
amount thereof is specified in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule, in
the amount so required. The form of such bond shall be acceptable
§ 20-1 LAPEER CODE § 20-1
1:538
to the City Attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license
may furnish one or more policies of insurance in the same amounts
and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond.
Any such insurance policies shall be approved as to substance by
the City Official issuing such license and as to form by the City
Attorney.
(2) No license shall be issued to any applicant unless the required bond
or insurance has been posted.
M. License year.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided, all licenses by the City
shall be annual licenses. The license year shall begin January 1 of
each year and shall terminate at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of
that year.
(2) An annual license issued between December 1 and December 31 of
any year shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year next
following issuance thereof.
(3) Unless as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, an
application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same
manner as an original application.
N. Issuance.
(1) If the application for any license is approved by the authorizing
issuing officer of the City, as provided in this chapter, and all other
applicable sections of this chapter have been complied with, the
license shall be issued by the City Clerk or other such officer as is
designated to issue such license.
(2) The City Clerk shall keep a full record in the Clerk's office of all
licenses issued. Such records shall contain the number of the
license, the date the same is issued, the nature of the business
authorized to be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the
expiration date of the license, the place where the business may be
carried on under the license, and the name of the person
authorized to conduct same.
(3) Acceptance of any person of a license granted by the City under
this chapter shall constitute permission to any officer of the City,
within the authority granted by this chapter under which license
was granted, to enter upon and inspect the licensed premises at all
reasonable times.
O. Exhibition of license.
(1) No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter upon his/her person at all times when
engaged in the operation, conduct or maintenance of any business
for which the license was granted. However, where such trade,
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1
1:539
profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried
on at a fixed place or establishment, such license shall be exhibited
at all times in some conspicuous place in the licensee's place
of business. Every licensee shall produce his/her license for
examination when requested to do so by any police officer or by any
person representing the issuing authority.
(2) Any person holding a license under this chapter may obtain from
the issuing authority a duplicate copy of such license in case the
original has been lost, destroyed or so worn or soiled as to be
partially or wholly illegible. No such duplicate copy shall be issued
unless the licensee returns the original to the City Clerk or files an
affidavit with the City Clerk to the effect that such license has been
destroyed or lost. A duplicate license issued shall be plainly marked
on its face "Duplicate."
(3) No person shall display any expired, suspended or revoked license,
or any license for which a duplicate has been issued.
P. Transfer of license.
(1) No licensed issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this
chapter, and then only in accordance with such provision.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall
permit another person to use or employ any license issued to him/
her by the City.
Q. Denial, suspension or revocation procedures.
(1) The issuance of licenses applied for under this chapter may be
denied, suspended or revoked by the authorized issuing officer of
the City for good cause.
(2) The term "cause," as used in this chapter, shall include an act or
omission or the permitting of a condition to exist, with respect to
the license in question; contrary to the health, safety or welfare of
the public; unlawful or fraudulent in nature; violation of the
provision under which the license was granted; beyond the scope of
the license issued; or is forbidden by this chapter or any duly
established rule or regulation of the City applicable to the trade,
profession, business or privilege for which the license has been
granted. The term "cause," as used in this chapter, shall also
include the arrest and conviction of the licensee for any crime
involving moral turpitude.
(3) Any denial, suspension or revocation of a license by the authorized
issuing officer shall be provided written notice, stating the cause or
causes therefor, and be delivered to the licensee personally or
mailed to the licensee's address, by certified mail, as shown in the
§ 20-1 LAPEER CODE § 20-1
1:540
application for a license within 10 days of such denial, suspension
or revocation.
(4) Any person whose license has been denied, suspended or revoked
shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager, or designate,
provided a written request is filed with the City Clerk within 10
days of receipt of such notice of denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) The City Manager, or designate, shall conduct a hearing not less
than 10 days after the receipt of such written request to appeal a
denied, suspended or revoked license, at which time and place the
licensee shall have an opportunity to present a defense to such
denial, suspension or revocation.
(6) The City Manager, or designate, shall either overturn the action of
the authorized issuing officer and issue or reinstate any denied,
suspended or revoked license, or confirm the action of the
authorized issuing officer and sustain the issuance, or suspension
and revocation of any license.
(7) The City Manager, or designate, shall provide written notification
within five days of determination to either overturn or confirm the
action of the authorized issuing officer regarding the denial,
suspension or revocation.
(8) Any person whose license has been confirmed by the City Manager
to be denied, suspended or revoked, shall have the right to appeal
to the City Commission, provided a written request is filed with the
City Clerk within 10 days of receipt of such confirmation.
(9) Upon a request to appeal to the City Commission, the City
Commission shall conduct a hearing and give notice by regular mail
to the licensee or his/her attorney, at his/her last known address, of
the time and place of the hearing. The City Commission shall by
vote of a majority of its membership either overturn the action of
the City Manager and issue or reinstate any denied, suspended or
revoked license, or confirm the action of the City Manager and
sustain the issuance, or suspension and revocation of any license.
The decision of the City Commission shall be final and conclusive.
(10) If a licensee whose license has been denied, suspended or revoked
fails to request a hearing, as provided within this chapter, or in the
event the City Commission after a hearing confirms the action of
the City Manager, the license shall be deemed to be fully and
completely revoked for the balance of the license year.
(11) Upon denial, suspension or revocation of any license as provided in
this chapter, any fees paid shall not be refunded.
(12)No person whose license has been denied, suspended or revoked
shall operate any business during any time when a license has been
denied, suspended or revoked.
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1
1:541
§ 20-2. License required for going-out-of-business or removal sale.69
Unless otherwise prescribed by statute, no person shall advertise or
conduct a going-out-of-business, insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage,
insolvent, assignee's, executor's, administrator's, receiver's, trustee's
removal, closing out, and sales of goods, wares and merchandise damaged
by fire, smoke, water or otherwise without first having obtained a license
under this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Regulation of
Certain Sales, Public Act 39 of 1961 et seq., (MCLA § 442.211 et seq.) as
amended.70
§ 20-3. Secondhand dealer and junk dealer. [Amended 5-22-2014]
R. Provisions complementary and supplemental. The provisions of this
chapter, together with other relevant provisions of any other section of
this chapter, or the provisions hereafter authorized or required by state
law, and any and all thereof relative to licenses, permits, businesses,
trades, occupations, premises or anything connected therewith, shall
each be construed to be complementary and supplemental to each
other so far as relevant, and unless otherwise prescribed or
inconsistent herewith, shall constitute a part of the regulations and
conditions applicable generally to any particular license in the same
manner as though these provisions were fully written into each
separate sections of this chapter.
S. Penalties. The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not exceed a
fine of $500 or imprisonment for 90 days, or both, unless otherwise
specified.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public health, safety
and welfare, reduce and/or eliminate the acceptance and resale of
stolen or unauthorized property and reduce crime. The City enacts this
section to license and regulate secondhand dealers and junk dealers
within its jurisdiction. This section is adopted in conjunction with the
Secondhand Dealers and Junk Dealers Act, 350 of 1917, (MCLA
§ 445.401 et seq.), as amended, and which said Act is adopted by
reference.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
JUNK — Any personal property which is, or may be salvaged for reuse,
resale, reduction, or similar disposition, or which is possessed,
transported, owned, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted
for any of the aforesaid purposes. Without limiting the aforesaid
definition of "junk," terms shall include used, or salvaged rope, bags,
69.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 20.01, Billiards and Pool Rooms and Bowling Alleys, previously
included here, was repealed 4-29-2010.
70.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 20.02, Taxicab license, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 6-5-2017.
§ 20-1 LAPEER CODE § 20-3
1:542
paper, rags, glass, rubber, wood pellets, and similar articles of property,
dismantling of automobiles or other machinery including tires.
JUNK DEALER — Any person, firm, corporation, member or members of
a copartnership or other entity, whose business is buying, exchanging,
collecting, receiving, storing, accumulating, selling, or otherwise
handling junk, but does not include a scrap processor, an automotive
recycler, or a junkyard that deals principally in industrial scrap and is
licensed by the City.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, firm, corporation, member or
members of a copartnership, or other entity, whose principal or primary
business is that of dealing in, buying, purchasing, selling, exchanging,
storing or receiving secondhand goods. "Principal or primary business"
means that more than 50% of the gross revenue of the secondhand
dealer is derived from the buying, purchasing, selling, exchanging,
storing and receiving secondhand goods.
The definition of secondhand dealer does not include:
Scrap processor, an automotive recycler, or a junkyard that
deals principally in industrial scrap and is licensed by the City.
(a)
Any person, firm, corporation, member or members of a
copartnership, or other entity subject to the Precious Metals
and Gem Dealer Act, Act 95 of 1981 (MCLA § 445.481 et seq.),
as amended.
(b)
Any person, firm, corporation, member or members of a
copartnership, or other entity subject to the Pawnbrokers Act,
Act 273 of 1917 (MCLA § 446.201 et seq.), as amended.
(c)
Householders selling, purchasing, consigning, or trading
articles owned and possessed by themselves or the executors
or administrators of any such householders.
(d)
Sellers of new articles, wares or merchandise from
manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sale
to customers.
(e)
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, an estate
sale, a gun, knife, gem or antique show, a convention or an
auction.
(f)
Any transaction while operating as a charitable organization
or conducting a sale the proceeds of which are donated to a
charitable organization.
(g)
Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a
charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to
the charitable organization.
(h)
Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the
person who sold the article when new which involves either:
(i)
(1)
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:543
SECONDHAND GOODS — Any goods, wares, merchandise or other
personal property acquired or purchased after having been acquired at
retail and used by another except as excluded herein.
the return of the article; or the exchange of the article for a
different, new article.
Such term includes:
Home and personal audio and video equipment, including but
not limited to televisions, radios, audio players, receivers, and
recorders of any kind; and personal electronic devices.
(a)
Car stereos, GPS devices, and other audio and video
equipment for use or installation in a motor vehicle.
(b)
Computers and video game devices of any kind and related
software, game disks, and cartridges.
(c)
(d) Electrical or other appliances.
(e) Tools; other than antique or farm and garden implements.
(f) Musical instruments.
(g) Sporting equipment and bicycles.
(h) Lawn mowers and lawn equipment and snow blowers.
Telephones and cellular phones where no new items are
offered for sale.
(i)
(j) Fur coats and other fur clothing.
(k) Ammunition and knives.
(1)
Such term does not include:
(a) Used car dealers.
(b) Art galleries.
(c) Used book or magazine stores.
(d) Clothing stores.
(e) Antique dealers and other dealers in used household furniture.
(f) Trading cards.
(g) Tapestries.
(h) Nonprofit organizations reselling donated goods.
An Internet dropoff store operating in compliance with MCLA
§ 445.401(3).
(i)
(2)
§ 20-3 LAPEER CODE § 20-3
1:544
A person engaged in the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade
of personal property or other valuable thing for himself or
herself as provided under MCLA § 445.401(2).
(j)
(k) Silverware, flatware, china and crystal.
C. License required; term; transfer.
(1) No person shall carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or
junk dealer without first obtaining a license to do so from the City
as provided in this section for each separate place of business
conducted by such owner.
(2) Any license issued under this section shall be for the period of one
year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked for cause.
(3) No license under this section shall be transferable.
D. Authorized issuing officer. All secondhand dealer and junk dealer
licenses shall be approved by the Mayor, with confirmation by the
Commission, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to issue a license.
Prior to the issuance of any such license, the applicant shall pay an
annual license fee as stated within the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule.
E. Inspection. The City and any of its departments, as well as the county
and any other governmental agencies as necessary to ensure that the
proposed business and applicant comply with applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations during normal business hours. An
application may be refused for submission for approval until a report
from applicable departments is received and information furnished to
ensure that the applicant or proposed premises comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations.
F. Application.
(1) Application for a secondhand dealer and junk dealer license shall
be made in writing to the Mayor and filed in the office of the City
Clerk. Said application shall contain the name and address of the
applicant, the location where the business is to be carried on,
owner of the real estate on which the business is to be conducted,
previous experience as a secondhand dealer or junk dealer, listing
of all agents/employees, and any other such information as may be
deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of
this section.
(2) A secondhand dealer and junk dealer shall provide to the City Clerk
within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the name and address
of the new employee.
G. Bonds or insurance. Each application for a secondhand dealer and junk
dealer shall be accompanied by a corporate surety bond in the sum of
$3,000 conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties and
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:545
obligations pertaining to the conduct of the business and for payment
of all costs and damages incurred by any violation of this section.
H. Additional requirements. Issuance of a license under this section shall
be subject to the following additional requirements:
(1) Licensee shall comply with all requirements listed under MCLA
§§ 445.404 through 445.407, as amended.
(2) Licensee shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations.
(3) Location of licensee shall be subject to local laws and zoning
requirements.
I. Secondhand article dealer mall or flea market.
(1) The owner of any premises or land upon which two or more persons
operate as secondhand article dealers may obtain a secondhand
article dealer mall or flea-market license for the premises or land if
the following conditions are met:
(a) Each secondhand article dealer occupies a separate sales
location and identifies herself or himself to the public as a
separate secondhand dealer.
(b) The secondhand article dealer mall or flea market is operated
under one name and at one address, and is under the control of
the secondhand article dealer mall or flea-market license
holder.
(c) All sales are completed at a central location under the control
of the secondhand article dealer mall or flea-market license
holder, who maintains a record of all sales.
(2) The secondhand article dealer license holder and each secondhand
article dealer operating upon the premises or land shall comply
with MCLA § 445.404.
J. General provisions.
(1) The junkyard, shop or place for the dismantling of automobiles, or
other machinery, shall be so conducted as not to create a nuisance
by reason of noise or disagreeable odors or fumes, that no loads of
iron or other heavy materials may be unloaded nor breakup
hammers used between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. That
said junk dealers shall not burn rubber or other substance so that
the air may be polluted, nor shall said junk dealers cause to be
lighted any fires in the closing hours, nor shall said junk dealers
obstruct or cause to be obstructed the sidewalks, alleys, or right-ofway,
nor place nor cause to be placed outside of the property lines
any hides, secondhand articles, used car parts, wheels, tin, iron, or
metal of any kind or nature, and the City Commission shall impose
§ 20-3 LAPEER CODE § 20-3
1:546
such other regulations and restrictions as may be necessary to
prevent the business of the licensee from being conducted in such
manner as to be a nuisance or a noisome and offensive business
within the City Limits of the City of Lapeer, Michigan, and the said
City Commission may rescind such license upon complaint and said
junkyard shall cease to operate until said evils are corrected or
upon such terms and conditions as the said City Commission in
its discretion may ordain; provided, that before rescinding such
license, the licensee shall be informed of the complaint against him
and shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon.
(2) It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section
for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of a
secondhand or junk dealer within the corporate limits of the City of
Lapeer unless such property upon which said business is conducted
shall be enclosed according to Chapter 7, Zoning, of the City of
Lapeer Code.
(3) Goods or materials on the premises of a secondhand store shall not
be stored, allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street,
alley, walkway or curb, or become scattered or blown off the
premises.
K. Manifests. Every secondhand dealer and junk dealer shall keep a record
of all items, goods, and merchandise received, purchased and sold and
such record and the premises of every secondhand dealer and junk
dealer shall be open to the inspection of all police and health officials at
all reasonable hours.
L. Denial, suspension or revocation procedures. Any denial, suspension or
revocation procedures shall be as set forth in § 20-1Q of this chapter.
M. Unlawful purchases or receipt of goods or articles. No person shall
purchase or receive any article:
(1) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
(2) From any person intoxicated or under the age of 17 years without
written consent of parent or guardian; and
(3) From a person known or suspected to be a thief or a receiver of
stolen property.
N. Violations; penalties.
(1) The license of a person, corporation, copartnership, or firm found
to be in violation of any provision of this section shall be considered
to be revoked and such person, corporation, copartnership, or firm
shall not be permitted to carry on the business of being a
secondhand or junk dealer within the City for a period of one year
after that conviction.
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:547
§ 20-4. Shooting galleries.
(2) A person, corporation, copartnership, or firm who violates this act
is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be imprisoned for not more
than six months and shall be fined not less than $500 or more than
$1,000, excluding the costs of prosecution.
(3) A secondhand or junk dealer who buys or sells scrap metal,
knowing that it is stolen, is guilty of a felony punishable by
imprisonment for not more than five years or a fine of not more
than $5,000, or both. The penalties imposed under this subsection
apply only to a first violation of this subsection.
(4) A secondhand or junk dealer who buys or sells stolen scrap metal
knowing that it was stolen is guilty of a felony punishable by
imprisonment for not more than five years or a fine of not more
than $10,000, or both. The penalties imposed under this subsection
apply to a second or subsequent violation.
(5) The remedies under this act are independent and cumulative. The
use of one remedy by a person does not bar the use of other lawful
remedies by that person or the use of a lawful remedy by another
person.
(6) Each and every day a violation exists shall be deemed a separate
day.
O. Repeal. All ordinances and sections of ordinances in conflict with this
section are hereby repealed.
P. Savings. Should any phrase, word, sentence, or paragraph of this
section be declared unenforceable, unconstitutional, or illegal by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall be
considered to be in full force and effect. The determination by the court
shall have no effect with respect to the validity of the remaining
portions of the section, which are not affected by the decision of the
Court.
A. Shooting gallery defined. The term "shooting gallery," as used in this
section, means any public place or range for shooting and discharging
firearms at a target for which a fee is charged, except shooting galleries
or ranges maintained or operated by any military organization, police
department or school, the privileges of which are not available to the
general public.
B. License required. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall
operate a shooting gallery in the City of Lapeer without first obtaining a
license under this section from the City Commission.
C. Authorized issuing officer. All licenses for shooting galleries shall be
approved by the City Commission and it shall be the duty of the City
Clerk to issue a license.
§ 20-3 LAPEER CODE § 20-4
1:548
D. Application.
(1) Application for a shooting gallery shall be made in writing to the
City Commission and filed in the office of the City Clerk. Said
application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the
location where the business is to be carried on, owner of the real
estate on which the business is to be conducted, previous
experience as an operator of a shooting gallery, listing of all agents/
employees, and any other such information as may be deemed
necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this
section.
(2) Any applicant for a shooting gallery shall provide to the City Clerk
within 24 hours after hiring a new employee the name and address
of the new employee.
E. Bonds or insurance.
(1) Each application for a shooting gallery shall be accompanied by a
certificate of liability insurance policy issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state and shall be in full
force in the amount of $500,000 for bodily injury to any one person;
in the amount of $500,000 for bodily injury to more than one person
which were sustained in the same accident, and $500,000 for
property damage resulting from one accident.
(2) Each liability insurance policy shall contain a clause obligating the
insurer to give the City Clerk, by certified mail, at least 10 days'
written notification before the cancellation or termination of such
insurance by other than the expiration of the original term of the
policy. Upon termination of any such policy of insurance, however
caused, the shooting gallery in connection with which it was
furnished shall immediately be suspended, and such suspension
shall continue until the required insurance policy has been
furnished and approved by the City Commission.
F. Location. No shooting gallery shall be located nearer than 1,000 feet to
the entrance of any school, church or hospital, nor in any location which
in the opinion of the City Commission will result in the annoyance of any
nearby resident. However, a license may be issued for a shooting
gallery in the convention center, notwithstanding this section, if all of
the other provisions of this article are complied with.
G. Hours of operation. No shooting gallery shall be operated between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
H. Safety rules. In the operation of any shooting gallery, the following
safety rules shall at all times be observed:
(1) The backstop behind the target shall be of at least four-sixteenthinch
steel boiler plate, shall extend the full width of the room and
forward at such angle of 45° from the floor and shall be made rigid.
§ 20-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-4
1:549
§ 20-5. Circuses, medicine shows, carnivals, tent shows.
The top of such backstop shall extend forward not less than 24
inches. There shall be provided a six-inch sand trap at the bottom
and directly in front of the backstop the full width and depth of the
same. The counter shall not be less than 12 feet from the backstop
and so constructed that there shall be no interference between or
among the persons shooting at different targets.
(2) No person under the influence of intoxicants or narcotics, nor any
minor under the age of 16 years, shall be permitted to handle or
discharge any firearms upon the premises.
(3) No pistols or revolvers shall be permitted, except where each pistol
or revolver is chained down or so affixed to the counter that it
cannot possibly be aimed in any direction other than towards the
target. Each pistol or revolver shall be housed or boxed in a
separate compartment not less than 18 inches by 30 inches
permanently affixed to the counter and made of steel boiler plate at
least 1/4 inch in thickness.
(4) No rifle, pistol or revolver shall be used which discharges a
cartridge or cartridges at a velocity in excess of 1,200 feet per
second.
(5) All doors, gates and entrances leading into that part of the
premises between the firing point and the backstop shall be
securely locked, and no one shall be permitted therein at any time
persons are engaged in shooting or have access to the rifles used.
(6) All rifles, pistols and revolvers, including the sights thereon, shall
be at all times kept in first-class condition.
(7) The ammunition used shall be smokeless, and only .22 caliber short
cartridges shall be permitted to be used.
(8) The shooting galleries shall be properly and adequately ventilated
at all times.
(9) Attendant shall wear a uniform, brassard or other distinguishing
mark to identify them as employees of the licensee.
A. License required. No circus, medicine show, carnival or tent show shall
present or offer any exhibit, play or any form of entertainment
whatsoever within the limits of the City of Lapeer without first
obtaining a license under this section from the City Clerk.
B. Application. Application for a circus, medicine show, carnival, and tent
show shall be made in writing and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
Said application shall contain the name and address of the applicant,
the location where the business is to be carried on, owner of the real
estate on which the business is to be conducted, previous experience as
§ 20-4 LAPEER CODE § 20-5
1:550
§ 20-6. Pawnbrokers.71
a circus, medicine show, carnival, tent show, listing of all agents/
employees, and any other such information as may be deemed
necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this section.
C. Bonds or insurance.
(1) Each application for a circus, medicine show, carnival or tent show
shall be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance policy
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
state and shall be in full force in the amount of $500,000 for bodily
injury to any one person; in the amount of $500,000 for bodily
injury to more than one person which were sustained in the same
accident, and $500,000 for property damage resulting from one
accident.
(2) Each liability insurance policy shall contain a clause obligating the
insurer to give the City Clerk, by certified mail, at least 10 days'
written notification before the cancellation or termination of such
insurance by other than the expiration of the original term of the
policy. Upon termination of any such policy of insurance, however
caused, the circus, medicine show, carnival or tent show in
connection with which it was furnished shall immediately be
suspended, and such suspension shall continue until the required
insurance policy has been furnished and approved by the City
Commission.
A. Definition. Any person within the City who loans money on deposits of
personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal
property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledgor or
depositor, or who loans or advances money on personal property by
taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such
personal property into his/her/its possession, is hereby declared to be a
pawnbroker.
B. License required. No person shall carry on the business of a
pawnbroker without first having obtained a license under this section in
accordance with the provisions of the Pawnbrokers Act, Public Act 273
of 1917 (MCLA § 446.201 et seq.), as amended.
C. Adoption by reference. The City hereby adopts by reference the
provisions of MCLA § 446.201 et seq., as amended.
D. Authorized issuing officer. All pawnbrokers licenses shall be approved
by the Mayor, with confirmation by the Commission, and it shall be the
duty of the City Clerk to issue a license.
E. Application.
71.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 20.06, Transient or itinerant photographers, previously
included here, was repealed 4-29-2010.
§ 20-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-6
1:551
§ 20-7. Solicitors, canvassers, peddlers, transient or itinerant
merchants.
(1) Application for a pawnbroker license shall be made in writing to the
Mayor and filed in the office of the City Clerk. Said application shall
contain the name and address of the applicant, the location where
the business is to be carried on, owner of the real estate on which
the business is to be conducted, previous experience as a
pawnbroker, listing of all agents/employees, and any other such
information as may be deemed necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of PA 273 of 1917, as amended,72 and
this section.
(2) A pawnbroker shall provide to the City Clerk within 24 hours after
hiring a new employee the name and address of the new employee.
A. Permit and license required. No person shall engage in the business of
solicitor, canvasser, peddlers, transient or itinerant merchant without
first obtaining a license under this section from the City Clerk.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any individual, whether resident of the
City of Lapeer or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile,
motor truck, or any other type of conveyance from place to place,
from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to
make orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to
be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual
has carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale
or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not,
provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself,
or for another person, firm, or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or
occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel
room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the
City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for
future delivery.
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the City of Lapeer or
not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to
street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or
provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales
and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from
place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon,
automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and
further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate
72.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 446.201 et seq.
§ 20-6 LAPEER CODE § 20-7
1:552
transaction make delivers to purchasers as a part of a scheme or
design to evade the provisions of this section shall be deemed a peddler
subject to the provisions of this section. The word "peddler" shall
include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — As used herein shall include the singular and the plural
and also mean and include any person, firm or corporation, association,
club, copartnership or society, or any other organization.
TRANSIENT OR ITINERANT MERCHANT — Includes all persons, both
principals and agents who engage in and conduct within this City, either
in one locality, or traveling from house to house, and place to place,
a temporary or a transient or itinerant business, with the intention of
continuing in such business in any one place for a period of not more
than 90 days. Transient or itinerant shall also include motor vehicles for
sale that are not located on the premises of its property owner in the
corporate limits of the City of Lapeer.
C. Application. Applicants for permit and license under this section must
file with the City Clerk, a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a
form to be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall give the following
information:
(1) Name, description, date of birth, driver's license number, and
telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Permanent home address and full local address of applicant.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
(4) The name of the person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other
business entity represented, if different than the applicant,
together with the address of the registered office of the business
and registered agent designated in Michigan for service of legal
process, and the address of the nearest local or district office.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) Two photographs of the applicant, taken within 60 days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which
picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(7) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance
the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
(8) A statement by a reputable physician of the City of Lapeer, dated
not more than 10 days prior to submission of the application,
certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infection or
communicable disease.
§ 20-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-7
1:553
(9) If a lot, room, building or structure is to be used, or if a cart, stand,
booth, or other structure or fixture is to be placed on the property
of another, evidence that the applicant has the legal consent of the
legal owner of the property.
(10) If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together
with the license number, a statement that the applicant has a
current valid operator's license and whether the applicant has had
his or her driving privileges revoked, suspended, or restricted
within three years immediately prior to the date of application, and
the nature of any such revocation, suspension or restriction.
(11) A copy of a valid current Michigan sales tax license, or, if exempt, a
copy of a current exemption certificate, if required for the goods,
wares or merchandise sold.
(12) If food is to be sold, a health card or its equivalent issued by the
State of Michigan regulatory agency.
(13) The name of the person having the management or supervision of
the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it
will be carried on in the City; the local address of such person while
engaged in such business, the permanent address of such person;
the capacity in which such person will act (that is, whether as
proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the
person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be
carried on, if any; and, if a corporation, under the laws of what
state the same is incorporated.
D. Bonds and insurance.
(1) No solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient or itinerate merchant
shall engage in such business, and no license shall be issued by the
City Clerk, unless there is on file an indemnity bond with the City
Clerk in the penal amount of $1,000 to indemnify the City for any
and all damage to public property of any kind, and conditioned that
the licenses will pay to the City all fines and penalties which may be
assessed against the licensee for a breach of any ordinance relating
to the business carried on by such person, and conditioned, further,
that such licensee will fulfill any obligation to a resident of the
state, which obligation is incurred as a result of the operation of
such licensee in the City.
(2) Every applicant for a license under this section shall provide
evidence of proper public liability and personal injury insurance for
each vehicle to be used in the amount of not less than the following:
(a) On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one
accident: $500,000.
(b) On account of damage to property in any one accident:
$100,000.
§ 20-7 LAPEER CODE § 20-7
1:554
(3) Each liability insurance policy shall contain a clause obligating the
insurance to give the City Clerk, by certified mail, at least 10 days'
written notification before the cancellation or termination of such
insurance by other than the expiration of the original term of the
policy. Upon termination of any such policy of insurance, however
caused, the license in connection with which it was furnished shall
immediately be suspended, and such suspension shall continue
until the required insurance policy has been furnished and
approved by the City Commission.
E. Badges. The City Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of
delivery of his license a badge which shall contain the type of license for
which applied (i.e., Licensed Solicitor) the period for which the license
is issued and the number of the license. Such badge shall, during the
time such licensee is engaged in soliciting, be worn constantly by the
licensee on the front of his outer garment in such a way as to be
conspicuous.
F. Exhibition of license.
(1) Any person issued a license under this section, are required to
exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen.
(2) No person shall permit another person to use or employ a license
issued to him/her by the City.
G. Duty of police to enforce. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the
City of Lapeer to require any person seen soliciting, canvassing,
peddling, transient or itinerant merchant, and who is not known by
such officer to be duly licensed, to produce such license and to enforce
the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating
the same.
H. Exemptions. The following persons are exempt from the licensing
requirement of § 20-7:
(1) Any person under the age of 16 years of age, except that persons
under age 16 peddling or vending from a motor vehicle shall be
requested to obtain a license.
(2) Any person representing any established public or private school,
provided that sales are under the sponsorship of the school.
(3) Any person selling vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm products
at any farmer's market approved by the City.
(4) Any person operating any booth or concession during a Cityapproved
special event.
(5) Any person exempt from the licensing requirement by virtue of
state or federal law.
I. Additional requirements.
§ 20-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-7
1:555
(1) The hours for soliciting, canvassing, peddling, transient or itinerant
merchant, shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday. No licensed solicitor, canvasser,
peddler, transient or itinerant merchant will be allowed to conduct
such business on Sundays.
(2) No soliciting, canvassing, peddling, transient or itinerant merchant
or any person on his behalf; shall shout, make any crate, blow a
horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loudspeaking
radio or sound-amplifying system upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public places of said City or upon any private
premises in the said City where sound of sufficient volume is
emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard
upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for
the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandize which such licensee proposes to sell.
(3) No solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient or itinerant merchant
shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets,
nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be
permitted to operate in any congested area where its operations
might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this
section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith,
shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or
the public impeded or inconvenience.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient
or itinerant merchant whether licensed or not, to sell or expose for
sale or offer for sale, in any place within the limits of the City any
stale, rotten, fermented, nauseous or unwholesome vegetables,
fruit, berries or any other articles or provisions by them sold, under
licenses or otherwise, or any unwholesome bread, cake or other
bakery products.
(5) No solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient or itinerant merchant
shall sell or offer for sale any faulty, incomplete or deteriorated
article of merchandise.
(6) No solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient or itinerant merchant
shall, during school hours, sell or offer for sale any merchandise
upon any public place of the City contiguous or adjacent to any
property used for school purposes and within 200 feet of such
property.
(7) No solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient or itinerant merchant
shall call without an appointment at any dwelling or residence
where a sign is displayed stating "no peddlers," "no salesmen," "no
trespassing," or words of similar meaning or import.
(8) The issuing of a solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient or itinerant
merchant license from the City of Lapeer does not waive mandated
licenses (i.e., state, health inspection, etc.).
§ 20-7 LAPEER CODE § 20-7
1:556
§ 20-8. Erection and posting of signs.
§ 20-9. Precious metal and gem dealer.
Chapter 21
WASTEWATER TREATMENT CHARGES
J. Effective date. This section shall take effect at 12:01 a.m., on December
14, 1967.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place,
post, affix, nail or fasten by any means whatsoever any sign, poster,
picture, writing or advertising to any pole, tree, lamp post, building or
other object on any property of the City of Lapeer.
B. Unless satisfactory evidence is produced to the contrary, the consent of
the person, firm or corporation for whose benefit the sign, poster,
picture, writing or advertising is erected, placed, posted, affixed,
nailed, or fastened by any means whatsoever as aforesaid shall be
presumed and such person, firm or corporation shall be liable as an
accessory for the penalties as hereinafter set forth.
C. The erecting, placing, posting, affixing, nailing, or fastening by any
means whatsoever of each such sign, poster, picture, writing or
advertising shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the erecting, placing, posting,
affixing, nailing or fastening by any means whatsoever of signs on any
property of the City of Lapeer by governmental, nonprofit, or charitable
organizations; provided, that the consent of the Lapeer City
Commission is first secured.
E. Political, campaign, or election signs will follow regulations as specified
under Chapter 7, Zoning, § 7-17.02J, Noncommercial message sign.
[Amended 12-7-2015]
A. License required. No person shall carry on the business of a precious
metal and gem dealer without first having obtained a license under this
section in accordance with the provisions of Public Act 95 of 1981
(MCLA § 445.481), as amended.
B. Adoption by reference. The City hereby adopts by reference the
provisions of The Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Act 273 of 1917,
as amended, in accordance with the provisions of MCLA § 445.481 et
seq.
C. Authorized issuing officer. Application for a precious metal and gem
dealer license shall be made in writing to the local police agency
through the City Clerk's Office. All licenses under this section shall be
approved by the Police Chief, and it shall be the duty of the local police
agency through the City Clerk's Office to issue a license.
§ 20-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1
1:557
§ 21-1. Purpose.
The Board of Commissioners determines and declares that it is necessary
and conducive for the protection of public health, safety and welfare of
the people of the City to regulate and control the disposal of human and
industrial waste within the City to the end that public health, safety and
welfare of the people of the City will be protected and enhanced and
to prevent the indiscriminate and uncontrolled disposal of human and
industrial waste in violation of recognized public health standards and so
herein to provide for the establishment of rates and charges for the use of
the service rendered by the City of Lapeer wastewater treatment facilities;
to provide for the collection of said rates and charges; to provide for
management of the City of Lapeer wastewater treatment facilities; and to
provide for penalties for violations hereof.
§ 21-2. Management of wastewater treatment facilities.
The complete wastewater treatment facilities of the City of Lapeer shall be
under the management, supervision and control of the City Manager. The
City Manager may employ or designate a person or persons to whatever
position he deems advisable to carry out the efficient management and
operations of the sewer system. The City Manager may make such rules,
orders, or regulations as he deems advisable and necessary to assure the
efficient management and operation of the system, subject to the rights,
powers, and duties reserved by law to the City Commission. All such rules,
orders or regulations made by the City Manager shall be consistent with
state and federal requirements.
§ 21-3. Definitions.
Definitions contained in Chapter 5, Plumbing, Water and Sewers, shall also
apply to this chapter and are incorporated herein.
§ 21-4. Application.
A. Every person owning or occupying any building or portion thereof, in
which plumbing fixtures are installed, and every person owning or
occupying any parcel of real estate or portion thereof, having drainage
piping thereon, shall connect such drainage pipe or building to a sewer,
if available.
B. The rates and charges hereinafter established shall be payable by the
owners and/or occupants of each and every lot, other parcel of real
estate, or building, that is connected to and using the City of Lapeer
sanitary sewer system.
C. The rates and charges hereinafter established shall also be payable by
the owners and/or occupants of any lot, other parcel of real estate, or
any building, from which there is a discharge of sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly,
into the sanitary sewer system of the City of Lapeer.
§ 21-1 LAPEER CODE § 21-4
1:558
§ 21-5. Rates and charges.
D. The rates and charges hereinafter established shall be payable by the
owners and/or occupants of any lot, other parcel of real estate, or
building, situated so that a sanitary sewer is available for an extension
to service neighboring parcels and shall be required to connect to the
City sewer system by statute, ordinance or agreement. Unless varied by
agreement between the City and any owners and/or occupants, an
available public sanitary sewer system means a public sanitary sewer
system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street, or public
way which crosses, adjoins, or abuts upon the property and passing not
more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which
sanitary sewage originates.
A. Lateral installation. "Lateral" means a tap made to the public sewer
when said sewer is originally installed, for the purposes of enabling
future sewer connections to be made. Lateral installation is the
responsibility of the property owner and is subject to inspection fees as
listed in the City of Lapeer fee schedule.
B. Charges outside the City. The charges for sewer services furnished
outside the corporate limits of the City of Lapeer shall be as follows:
(1) Monthly charges. The monthly charges for sewer services
furnished outside of the corporate limits of the City of Lapeer shall
be the same as those for users of the sewer services inside the
corporate limits of the City of Lapeer.
(2) Capital charges. Except as provided in the Mayfield Township Land
Transfer Agreement dated September 5, 2001, and the Lapeer
Township Land Transfer Agreement dated December 4, 2006, users
outside the corporate limits of the City of Lapeer, in addition to
regular monthly charges, shall pay a "capital charge."
(a) This capital charge shall be comprised of the following
amounts:
[1] A sum equal to 1/2 the total sewer monthly charges for
those premises and billed on the monthly water bill;
[2] A sum equal to the City of Lapeer's operating millage
multiplied by the taxable value of the property served by
the sewer as appears on the tax roll of the township in
which said property is located; and
[3] The City authorized administration fee per the City of
Lapeer Fee Schedule for such service.
(b) This capital charge shall be billed annually and shall be due
and payable on July 1 of each year.
C. Monthly rates, minimum charges, and tap-in fees.
§ 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-5
1:559
(1) The charges for sewer service to each premises within the City
connected to the City of Lapeer wastewater treatment system for
each monthly period shall be as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee
Schedule, as may be amended from time to time.
(2) Tap-in fees shall be the rate, by category, as listed in the City of
Lapeer Fee Schedule.
D. Basis of rates and extension. The rates and charges provided for herein
shall be based on the actual amount of water supplied by the municipal
waterworks system as shown by the water meter readings.
E. The minimum charge for any service where the user is a metered water
consumer shall be determined by means and methods satisfactory to
the City.
F. Deduct water meters are not permitted within the City of Lapeer. Water
used in the process of manufacture or any other purpose, which does
not discharge into the public sanitary sewer system, may be exempt
from sewer charges. A separate water meter and an in-house plumbing
alteration are required for this exemption; thus, the property owner
shall procure a water meter for this purpose from the City at his, her or
its expense. Any such meter obtained from the City shall be used to
measure the amount to water to be billed. Before approval of said
meter, a schematic of the plumbing alteration must be submitted to the
Water/Sewer Superintendent for review. Before granting approval of a
separate meter and plumbing changes, the City must be satisfied that
such approval would be in the best interest of the City, and not in any
way be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
G. In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building which is discharging
sanitary wastes, water or other liquid into the public sanitary sewer of
the City, either directly or indirectly, is not a user of water supplied by
the City, and the water used thereon or therein is not measured by a
City meter or by a meter acceptable to the City, then the amount of
water used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the City in
order to arrive at the rate or charge as provided in the City of Lapeer
Fee Schedule. Provided, however, that the owner or other interested
party, at his own expense, shall, at the request of the City, install and
maintain a water meter of a type and size and in a location acceptable
to the City, and the quantity of water used as measured by said meter
shall be used to determine the wastewater treatment facilities charges.
H. In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building is discharging
sewage in the form of industrial waste, either directly or indirectly, into
the public sanitary sewer system of the City, and the City finds it is not
practicable to attempt to measure such wastes by meter, it shall
measure the same in such a manner and by such method as it may find
reasonable in order to determine the appropriate rates and charges for
said property. If the City finds that it is practicable to attempt to
§ 21-5 LAPEER CODE § 21-5
1:560
§ 21-6. Collection; lien for unpaid fees; affidavits.
measure such wastes by meter, then the owner of the property shall
install a meter acceptable to the City on 10 days' notice.
I. Surcharges.
(1) If, after proper analysis of the industrial waste to be discharged,
where pretreatment to the degree required is not provided, the
City may treat the excessive strength wastewater by special
constriction, operation, or maintenance, then and in that event a
surcharge shall be imposed to any such user of the City's sanitary
sewage system for the treatment of the excessive strength
wastewater. The City may accept such excessive strength
wastewater upon such conditions and for such period of times as it
shall deem to be reasonable, considering the other requirements of
the City.
(2) The surcharge to any such user shall be an amount equal to the
actual, prorated share of that user of the annual costs of operation
and maintenance, including replacement, attributable to the
treatment of the excessive strength wastewater. Unit charge to
compute the surcharges are as follows:
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
unit rate
= Annual cost allocated to BOD
Total annual weight of BOD in raw sewage
Suspended solids (SS) unit rate = Annual cost allocated to suspended solids (SS)
Total annual weight of suspended solids in raw
sewage
Phosphorus (P) unit rate = Annual cost allocated to phosphorus (P)
Total annual weight of phosphorous (P) in raw
sewage
Ammonia nitrogen unit rate = Annual cost allocated to ammonia nitrogen
Total annual weight of ammonia nitrogen in raw
sewage
(3) The calculated rates for these surcharges as listed in the City of
Lapeer Fee Schedule.
A. Collection of unpaid fees. No free service shall be furnished by the
system to the City or to any person, firm or corporation, public or
private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. Charges for services
furnished by the system shall be billed and shall be due 15 days after
the billing date indicated on the sewer bill. A penalty of 10% of the bill
shall be added by the City to those bills not paid on or before the due
date. Within five working days after the due date, a past-due notice
shall be mailed to those customers whose accounts are then delinquent.
§ 21-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-6
1:561
The past-due notice shall inform the customer of the amount of the
delinquency, including the 10% penalty. Within five working days after
the expiration date on the past due notice, a shutoff notice shall be
mailed to those customers whose accounts still remain delinquent. This
shutoff notice shall indicate the date that the sewer service will be shut
off, which date shall be 10 days from the date of the shutoff notice,
unless the delinquent amount, including the 10% penalty, is paid by
the last business day prior to the scheduled shutoff date. Services so
discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing,
including the 10% penalty, and an additional shutoff charge as listed
in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule for the amount owed are paid
to the City in full. The shutoff charge shall consist of the following
components:
(1) A normal duty hour sewer division turn-on charge as listed in the
City of Lapeer Fee Schedule; or
(2) An after-duty turn-on charge equal to the average cost of a sewer
division employee's wage (a minimum of two hours per union
contract plus fringe benefits), plus the average cost of equipment
utilized based on the State Schedule C rate for a minimum of two
hours.
B. Lien. Charges for services furnished by the City's sewer department for
sewer services to any premises shall be a lien thereon. On June 1 of
each year, the City Manager, or Manager's designee, shall certify any
such charges which were delinquent as of May 15 to the City's Assessor.
The Assessor shall enter the same upon the next tax roll against the
premises to which such services shall have been rendered and such
charges shall be collected and said lien enforced in the same manner as
provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll.
C. Affidavit. Pursuant to MCLA § 123.165, Subsection B above shall not
apply to property owner lessors who comply with the following
provisions:
(1) An affidavit is filed with the City verifying that a lease has been
legally executed containing a provision that the lessor shall not be
liable for payment of sewer bills accruing subsequent to the filing
of said affidavit. The affidavit shall also contain a notation of the
expiration date of the lease.
(2) A copy of the lease showing the name of tenant(s) responsible for
the sewer bill shall also be filed with the City.
(3) The lessor shall give 20 days' written notice to the City of any
cancellation, change in, or termination of the lease.
(4) A deposit as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule for each such
lease shall be made to the City prior to having the sewer billing
placed in the name of the tenant and/or commencing sewer service.
Such deposit shall bear no interest and will be utilized to pay any
§ 21-6 LAPEER CODE § 21-6
1:562
§ 21-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 21-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective upon publication, September 29, 1982.
Chapter 22
WATER REGULATIONS
§ 22-1. Water meter required.
§ 22-2. Meters procured from City. [Amended 7-10-2002]
delinquent billing for that premises or refunded upon payment of
the final sewer bill.
A. Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be served, by first-class mail addressed to the place
where bills are sent, with a written notice stating the nature of such
violation and a time limit for required compliance. Failure to correct the
violation within the time stated shall subject the offender to prosecution
for a misdemeanor, punishable by 90 days in jail and/or $500 fine.
B. The City, at its option, may also elect to enforce the terms of this
chapter and/or collect damages for the violation thereof in any court of
competent jurisdiction, which said damages shall include all actual
costs, court, attorney and other related legal fees, plus an additional
charge of 100% of the total costs and/or penalties.
A. All water services being supplied from the water distribution system of
the City of Lapeer shall be provided with a water meter of a kind, size
and type approved by the Lapeer City Commission.
B. The fee owner or the land contract purchaser with the right of
possession, as the case may be, of any two-family house, apartment
building, multifamily unit, multi-industrial or multi-commercial unit
shall have either the water meter bill in the name of the fee owner or
said land contract purchaser, or provide a separate water meter and
accessible shutoff valve for each individual family unit. [Amended
8-17-2006]
C. The rates and charges hereinafter established shall be payable by the
owners and/or occupants of any lot, other parcel of real estate, or
building, situated so that a water main is available for an extension to
service neighboring parcels and shall be required to connect to the City
water system. [Amended 7-24-2008]
A. All meters must be procured from the City of Lapeer and installed by
the City of Lapeer, the cost of installation to be borne by the owner of
the property upon which the meter is installed.
§ 21-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:563
§ 22-3. Ownership of water and water meter. [Amended 7-24-2008]
All water up to the moment it passes through the City's water meter into
each residence or building shall be and remain the personal property of the
City of Lapeer. All water meters used or installed in the City of Lapeer's
water system are and shall remain the personal property of the City of
Lapeer.
§ 22-4. Meters to be sealed. [Amended 2-26-1986; 7-24-2008]
All water meters shall be sealed at the time of installation with a form
of seal approved by the Superintendent of Water and Sewer. The water
meters shall be sealed at the register box and the couplings. The seals shall
not be broken except by the authority of the Superintendent of Water and
Sewer. The residents and the owners of property upon which a water meter
is installed are responsible for the intactness of these seals and a fee for
tampering with the seal wire will be added to the water bill at the property
where any of these seals are found broken as listed in the City of Lapeer
Fee Schedule.
§ 22-5. Owner responsible.
§ 22-6. Meter reading and accessibility.
Meters will be read by employees or parties designated by the City
Commission or City Manager. The water meter shall be installed in an area
that is accessible for reading and repair work. Water meters may not be
placed in a crawl space or similar confined space areas.
B. All buildings serviced by the City Of Lapeer shall be equipped with a
meter transmitter unit (MXU) purchased from the City Of Lapeer. The
Water Department shall install the MXU unit to a wall, within five feet of
the meter location.
A. The owner of property upon which a meter is installed shall be
responsible for any and all damage sustained to the meter, including
damage sustained through freezing or hot water backup, which shall
include the cost of replacing a water meter that has sustained damage;
provided, however, that the City of Lapeer will bear the cost of
repairing or replacing meters where the same is required due to the
wear and tear of ordinary service. [Amended 6-12-1985; 7-24-2008]
B. All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building water line to the public water main shall be
borne by the owner. [Amended 6-12-1985]
C. Meter bypass lines are not allowed. [Amended 7-10-2002]
§ 22-2 LAPEER CODE § 22-7
1:564
§ 22-7. Definitions. [Amended 6-12-1985]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER — The owner of the house, or other building, or premises, lot
or parcel of land to which water is supplied by the City of Lapeer. For the
purpose of this chapter, the furnishing of water service shall be deemed the
sale of a commodity and the relationship between the City of Lapeer and the
consumer, that of vendor and purchaser.
OWNER — Title holder of record or any one of the title holders of record
with an equal interest in the property, a land contract vendee in possession,
a receiver, personal representative, trustee, lessee, or any other person,
firm, or corporation having the right of possession or control of the property.
§ 22-8. Water rates.
A. The charges for water service to each premises, structure or building
within the City connected with the water supply system for each
monthly period shall be as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule.
(1) Rates for providing private fire protection shall be as listed in the
City of Lapeer Fee Schedule.
(2) Except as provided in the Mayfield Township Land Transfer
Agreement dated September 5, 2001, and the Lapeer Township
Land Transfer Agreement dated December 4, 2006, users outside
the corporate limits of the City Of Lapeer shall be charged 1 1/2
times the charge for water used within the City, plus an annual
charge equal to the City operating millage times the taxable value
of the property served by the water system as appears on the tax
roll of the township in which said property is located, including the
City-authorized administration fee, which will be billed annually
and shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year. [Amended
7-10-2002; 8-1-2003; 7-24-2008]
B. The City shall pay for all water used by it at the foregoing rates, except
that for fire hydrants in the City. Charges against the City shall be
payable from the current funds of the City, or from the proceeds of
taxes, which the City, within constitutional limitations, is hereby
authorized and required to levy in an amount sufficient for that
purpose.
C. In the event that the City of Lapeer is able to effect a rebate from the
City of Detroit retroactive to the latter's increase in water rates of May
1, 1976, the City of Lapeer shall pass that retroactive rebate on to the
customers who paid the same by either a credit to their future water
bills or by a cash rebate, as the City Commission determines. This
emergency ordinance shall become effective June 1, 1976.
D. Collection. No free service shall be furnished by the system to the City
or to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public
§ 22-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-8
1:565
§ 22-9. Meter testing. [Amended 7-10-2002; 7-24-2008]
§ 22-10. Inoperative meter.
Should a water meter become inoperative, the consumer shall pay for water
service based on the average of three preceding metered months.
agency or instrumentality. Charges for services furnished by the system
shall be billed and shall become due 15 days after the billing date
indicated on the water bill. A penalty of 10% of the bill shall be added
by the City to those bills not paid on or before the due date. Within
five working days after the due date, a past-due notice shall be mailed
to those customers whose accounts are then delinquent. The past-due
notice shall inform the customer of the amount of the delinquency,
including the 10% penalty. Within five working days after the expiration
date on the past due notice, a shutoff notice shall be mailed to those
customers whose accounts still remain delinquent. This shutoff shall
indicate the date that the water service will be shut off, which date shall
be 10 days from the date of the shutoff notice, unless the delinquent
amount, including the 10% penalty, is paid by the last business day
prior to the scheduled shutoff date. Services so discontinued shall not
be restored until all sums then due and owing, including the 10%
penalty, and an additional shutoff charge as listed in the City of Lapeer
Fee Schedule for the amount owed are paid to the City in full. The
shutoff charge shall consist of the following components: [Amended
8-17-2006; 7-24-2008]
(1) A normal duty hour sewer division turn-on charge as listed in the
City of Lapeer Fee Schedule; or
(2) An after duty turn-on charge equal to the average cost of a sewer
division employee's wage (a minimum of two hours two per union
contract plus fringe benefits), plus the average cost of equipment
utilized based on the State Schedule C rate for a minimum of two
hours. [Amended 7-10-2002]
E. Tap-in fees per tap for domestic water services and fire suppression
services will be as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule. [Amended
6-28-2007]
A. The consumer may have his, her, or its meter tested for a fee. The size
of the water meter determines the fee as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee
Schedule. All water meters are tested by a private testing company to
meet the American Water Works Specifications.
B. Should the water meter fail to meet American Water Works
Association's test specifications, the City shall refund the testing fee to
the consumer and make an appropriate adjustment in the water bill.
However, should the meter be found to register within the American
Water Works Association's test specifications, the City shall retain the
meter-testing fee to defray the expense of the test.
§ 22-8 LAPEER CODE § 22-11
1:566
§ 22-11. Cross-connection.
A. The City of Lapeer adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross-
Connection Control Rules of the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, being R325.11401 through R325.11407 of the
Administrative Code, and the City of Lapeer Cross-Connection Control
Program. The City of Lapeer Water Department shall be the designated
authority and administrator of the cross-connection control program
and/or plan as hereinafter described. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Plan. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Pursuant to Michigan Public Act 399, 1976,73 and R325.11404 of
the Administrative Code, a comprehensive cross-connection control
plan shall be developed and submitted to the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality for review and approval.
(2) The plan shall outline the conduct of the City of Lapeer Cross-
Connection Control Program, including the method for performing
initial inspections, determining inspection/reinspection
frequencies, backflow prevention assembly tracking and testing
schedules, requirements for surveyors, annual reporting,
generation of compliance/noncompliance records and notices,
pertinent piping information requests, fees, and water service
shutoff notices.
(3) Upon approval by the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, the plan will become the instrument for providing program
conduct and policies.
(4) Any changes to the approved plan will be submitted to the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for review and
approval before final approval by the City Commission and
implementation by the authority/agent.
(5) The cross-connection control plan will be made available to the
public for review.
C. Water discontinuance.
(1) The authority/agent, as designated in the cross-connection control
program, shall have the right to enter any facility receiving water
from the municipal water system for the sole purpose of inspecting
for cross-connections. Failure or refusal on the part of the facility to
allow the authority/agent entry shall be deemed evidence of a
cross-connection that is an immediate hazard to the public and, as
such, the Authority/Agent will follow the steps as outlined in the
approved cross-connection control plan.
73.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 325.1001 et seq.
§ 22-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-11
1:567
(2) If a facility fails to correct any deficiencies identified during the
cross-connection inspection, or any subsequent inspection, or
otherwise fails to follow the compliance steps or procedures
contained in the cross-connection control plan, the water service to
the facility will be discontinued until such time that the deficiencies
are corrected and approved by the authority/agent.
D. This chapter is not intended to supersede the state plumbing code, or
any other state statute, or legally adopted ordinance or code of the City
of Lapeer. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any State of Michigan or federal statute or
regulation, or any other legally adopted ordinance or code of the City of
Lapeer, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail. [Amended 7-24-2008]
E. Prohibitions. No person in the City of Lapeer shall:
(1) Connect to a public water supply system unless the proposed
connection has first been approved by the authority/agent.
(2) Steal any water meter, water pipe, other water equipment or tools,
or steal any water itself which belong to the City.
(3) Willfully damage or injure or suffer or permit to be injured any
water meter, pipe or other water equipment or tools which belong
to the City.
(4) Prevent or circumvent a water meter from measuring water used
from that supplied by the City of Lapeer, or in any way hinder or
interfere with the proper action of the water meter.
(5) Fraudulently use water belonging to the City or wastewater
belonging to the City.
(6) Violate any written order of the City of Lapeer in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter, including the cross-connection control
program.
(7) Violate any other provisions of this chapter, including the crossconnection
control program.
F. Penalties.
(1) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. As allowed by
law or equity, damages recoverable for any violation of this section
shall include all actual costs, court, attorney and other related legal
fees, plus an additional charge of 100% of the total costs and/or
penalties. [Amended 7-24-2008]
§ 22-11 LAPEER CODE § 22-11
1:568
§ 22-12. Collection.
§ 22-13. Water usage reduction. [Amended 3-14-1990; 7-24-2008]
Outside irrigation for any purposes, including lawns, gardens, and flower
beds, from the City's public water supply may be prohibited or restricted
upon published notice when the City Manager, through his Superintendent
of Water and Sewer, determines that a public water shortage is likely to
occur. During such times, the City Manager may also direct that other
measures be taken or restrictions observed by users of the public water
(2) In addition to the penalty described in Subsection F(1), at the
request of the authority/agent, the City Attorney may bring an
action for injunctive relief or other appropriate action in the name
of the people of the City of Lapeer to enforce this chapter, or an
order issued pursuant to this chapter.
A. Lien. Charges for services furnished by the City's water department for
water services to any premises shall be a lien thereon. On June 1 of
each year the City Manager, or Manager's designee, shall certify any
such charges which were delinquent as of May 15 to the City's Assessor.
The Assessor shall enter the same upon the next tax roll against the
premises to which such services shall have been rendered and such
charges shall be collected and said lien enforced in the same manner as
provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll. [Amended
4-29-1987]
B. Affidavit. Pursuant to Public Act 178 of 1939, as amended,74 Subsection
A above shall not apply to property owner lessors who comply with the
following provisions: [Amended 7-24-2008]
(1) An affidavit is filed with the City verifying that a lease has been
legally executed containing a provision that the lessor shall not be
liable for payment of water bills accruing subsequent to the filing of
said affidavit. The affidavit shall also contain a notation of the
expiration date of the lease.
(2) A copy of the lease showing the name of tenant(s) responsible for
the water bill shall also be filed with the City.
(3) The lessor shall give 20 days' written notice to the City of any
cancellation, change in, or termination of the lease.
(4) A deposit as listed in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule for each such
lease shall be made to the City prior to having the water billing
placed in the name of the tenant and/or commencing water service.
Such deposit shall bear no interest and will be utilized to pay any
delinquent billing for that premises or refunded upon payment of
the final water bill.
74.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 123.161 et seq.
§ 22-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-13
1:569
supply system. Notice of any such measures or restrictions shall be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Lapeer.
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
Chapter 24
PARKS
§ 24-1. General rules and regulations.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARK — Any land owned or leased by the City and used for municipal
park purposes.
B. Conduct in parks. No person shall in any park:
(1) Reserve any tables other than pavilions, for picnics or family
reunions or City-approved events.
(2) Intentionally damage, deface, destroy, tamper with, or displace any
park, park facilities, or park features, including but not limited to
buildings, bridges, docks, tables, benches, fences, pavement,
utilities or utility lines, or any parts or appurtenances thereto;
signs, notices, or placards; monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers; historic, prehistoric or cultural resources or
artifacts; tables, stoves, outdoor grills, drinking fountains,
recreational equipment, bridges, or other or other structures or
equipment of the City.
(3) Pick or mutilate any flower (wild or domestic) or intentionally
disturb any tree, shrub, or another plant material.75
(4) Advertise or sell merchandise by any means or method without the
consent of the City Park Board through its Director of Parks,
Recreation and Cemetery (hereinafter referred to as "Director").
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(5) Knowingly permit a dog, cat or any small domestic animal to enter
or remain in the park unless said animal is properly restrained by a
maximum of a six-foot leash. Pet owners must clean up their pet's
waste.
75.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), Possess, transport or consume any alcoholic
beverage, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 22-13 LAPEER CODE § 24-1
1:570
(6) Discharge any firearm, air rifle, BB gun, spring gun, bow and
arrow, spear, sling, any instrument that can fire blank cartridges, or
any other form of weapon potentially harmful to human safety or to
wildlife. Shooting into park property from beyond park boundaries
is prohibited. These restrictions shall not apply to any duly
appointed law enforcement officer while carrying out the duties
and responsibilities of his or her position.
(7) Throw, discard or leave any papers, litter, garbage or rubbish
unless the same is deposited in containers furnished by the City for
this purpose.
(8) Dispose of any household or commercial trash including but not
limited to: yard waste, furniture, automotive parts, etc.
(9) Plant trees, flowers, weeds or vegetables without the consent of the
City Park Board through its Director. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(10) Operate any motor vehicle, as defined in Chapter 14, Vehicles and
Traffic, of the Code of the City of Lapeer, in a manner which is
prohibited by the provisions of said Chapter 14.
(11) Operate or ride as a passenger on any motorcycle, motorbike,
minibike, go-cart, snowmobile, or any other motorized vehicle,
except in those areas expressly designated for these vehicles by the
City Park Board through its Director. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(12) Remain in, use or occupy any portion of any park between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless he is part of an
identifiable group of persons which has received prior written
approval of the City Park Board through its Director to so remain
in, use or occupy a portion of a park for a specified period of time
between the hours set forth above. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(13) Start a fire except in such places provided for that purpose by the
City; and all fires shall be put out by the person starting the same
before leaving the immediate vicinity of the fire.
(14) Use or attempt to use any portion of the City Park System for which
a special permit is required or has been obtained by another party,
without a special permit, or refuse to surrender said portion of the
park system to any person or group having a special permit for that
portion of the park system, or refuse to surrender any portion of the
park system to an authorized representative of the City Park Board
through its Director or designee. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(15) Unnecessarily congregate or loiter.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1
1:571
(16) Hunt, disturb, pursue, harm, kill, trap or throw objects at any
species of animal, reptile or bird nor shall any individual remove or
have in their possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs;
or nest, or young of any reptile or bird.
(17) Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any food,
tobacco, alcohol, or illegal substances.
(18) Bring or use glass containers on park property.
(19) Set up tents or shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the
purpose of overnight camping; unless permission granted by the
Director.
(20) Climb any building or wall, stand or sit upon monuments, railings,
fences, tables, or open property not designed or customarily used
for such purpose.
(21) Deposit or cause to be deposited in any drain, pond or other body of
water within or adjoining a park any foreign material or chemicals
that would pollute the water or potentially cause harm to marine
life or public health.
(22) Misuse, damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any trees,
shrubs, flowers, or other plant; or attach any rope, wire, chain, or
other object to any tree or shrub.
(23) Possess, transport, consume, serve or cause to be served, or sell
alcoholic beverages, narcotics, or illegal drugs of any kind in any
park, except for alcoholic beverages specifically authorized by the
Park Board through issuance of a special park use permit.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(24) Use any rest room in an inappropriate manner or unauthorized
purpose. Male persons shall not resort to any rest room set apart
for women, and female persons shall not resort to any rest room set
apart for men, except this shall not apply to children accompanied
by an adult. No person shall loiter in or about such facilities nor
shall any person use such facilities for purposes other than those
intended.
(25) Enter upon any of the public land belonging to the City of Lapeer
and dig up the earth or deposit any earth, rock or other substances,
nor shall any person erect or attempt to erect any structures of any
kind, or in any other manner attempt to appropriate or encumber
any portion of the real estate belonging to the City of Lapeer, unless
such person shall have first obtained proper authority to do so.
(26) Operate or park motor vehicles of any kind, including motorcycles,
on other than designated roads and within parking areas
designated for motor vehicle use, leave, or cause to be left, any
§ 24-1 LAPEER CODE § 24-1
1:572
§ 24-2. Permits for specialized use of park.
motor vehicle upon park property when the park is closed, repair
or wash a motor vehicle in a park, except for emergency repairs,
or operate a motor vehicle in an unreasonable manner without
reasonable regard to the safety of others. This provision shall not
prevent maintenance and security vehicles from entering off-road
areas to perform maintenance or security work.
(27) Peddle or solicit business of any nature whatsoever; distribute
handbills or other advertising matter; post any unauthorized sign
on any park land, water, structure or property; or use such land,
water, structure or property for peddling or soliciting, except as
specifically authorized by the Park Board through issuance of a
special park use permit.
A. Park facilities are intended for the use of the general public for
recreational purposes, such as picnicking, exercise, nature study, and
similar activities on an informal basis. A special park use permit shall be
required for organized group activities and for uses that otherwise
would not be allowed by this chapter. The City of Lapeer Park Board is
hereby authorized to issue special permits for the exclusive use of any
section of the City of Lapeer park system. The issuance of such special
permits shall be governed by rules and/or procedure adopted by the
Park Board. Any rules and/or procedure adopted by the Park Board for
the issuance of special permits shall be consistent with this chapter and
the full use of the park system by the public. The rules and/or procedure
adopted by the Park Board for the issuance of special permits shall be
available at the Park and Recreation Department.
B. Applications for special permits under this section shall be made on
such forms as the Park Board may approve and shall be presented at
the Lapeer City Park and Recreation Department. Any applications
which the Park Board has determined, by its adopted rules, require
approval at a regular meeting of the Park Board shall be filed at least
seven days prior to the regular Park Board meeting at which such
application is to be considered. During such meeting, the applicant may
appear in person, by attorney, or by an agent.
C. No special permit shall be granted if it appears that any of the purposes
or activities of the applicant will unreasonably interfere with the use of
the remainder of the park by the general public; will be likely to damage
the park or its facilities or any part thereof, will create a hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or will endanger or be likely to endanger
the health, welfare, or safety of the public.
D. Any applicant for a special permit which proposes the use of any portion
of any park for a circus or carnival or other use which may generate
substantial litter or refuse, shall be required to deposit as listed on the
City of Lapeer Fee Schedule to cover the cost of any park cleanup and/
or repairs by the City. Any portion of the deposit remaining after the
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:573
§ 24-3. Administration and enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 25
FRANCHISES; UTILITIES
cleanup and/or repairs shall be returned to the applicant and the
applicant shall pay the difference, if any, between said deposit and the
actual cost to the City for the cleanup and/or repairs.
E. Material evidence in support of this application before a majority of the
Park Board; and any departments of the City and any interested citizens
may also present any relevant and material evidence with reference to
the granting or denial of the application. Written minutes of the hearing
shall be made, but a transcript of exact testimony shall not be
necessary. A majority of the Park Board present at the hearing shall
render its decision within three days of the conclusion of the hearing. If
the application is denied, the applicant shall have 20 days in which to
appeal the decision of the Park Board to the Lapeer County Circuit
Court, or to such other court as may be permitted by law or court rule
to hear such an appeal. Such appeal shall be on the record of the
hearing.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting park
employees or agents from performing work or activities in any park at a
time and in a manner directed by the City of Lapeer.
B. The City of Lapeer may establish emergency rules necessary to protect
the health, welfare and safety of park visitors and to protect park
property, including, but not limited to, ordering all persons off park
property and closing all or any portion of a park.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by
Michigan Statute and in accordance with Chapter 62, Civil Infractions,
which shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500, along
with costs, which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which
the City of Lapeer has incurred in connection with the municipal civil
infraction. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Lapeer from seeking
appropriate restitution for damage to parks or park facilities. A violator
of this chapter shall also be subject to such additional sanctions and
judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan Law.
D. This chapter and each of the various parts, sections, subsections,
provisions, sentences, and clauses are severable. If any part, section,
subsection, provision, sentence or clause is found to be invalid or
unenforceable for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
finding shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 24-2 LAPEER CODE § 24-3
1:574
ARTICLE I
Consumers Power Company
[Adopted as Ch. 16, Sec. 16.02, of the 1978 General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 9-17-2018]
§ 25-1. Grant and term.
The City of Lapeer, Lapeer County, Michigan, hereby grants to Consumers
Energy Company, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called
"consumers," the right and authority to lay, maintain and commercially
operate gas lines and facilities, including but not limited to mains, pipes,
services and valves on, under, along, and across public places, including
but not limited to highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and waterways, and to
conduct a local gas business in the City of Lapeer, Lapeer County, Michigan,
for a period of 30 years.
§ 25-2. Conditions.
No highway, street, alley, bridge, or public place used by consumers shall be
obstructed longer than necessary during construction or repair, and shall
be restored to the same order and condition as when work was commenced.
All of consumers' gas lines and related facilities shall be placed as not
to unnecessarily interfere with the public's use of highway, street, alley,
bridge, or public places, for the use thereof for vehicular or pedestrian
purposes. Consumers shall have the right to trim or remove trees if
necessary in the conducting of such business.
§ 25-3. Hold harmless.
Consumers shall save the City and its officers, employees or agents free
and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject
by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the lines and
related facilities hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced
against the City and/or its officers, employees or agents on account of the
permission herein given, consumers shall, upon notice, defend the City and
its officers, employees or agents and hold them harmless from all loss, costs
and damage arising out of such negligent construction, maintenance or
operation.
§ 25-4. Extensions.
Consumers shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within
said City, and shall furnish gas service to applicants residing therein in
accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.
§ 25-5. Franchise not exclusive.
The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6
1:575
§ 25-6. Rates and conditions.
Consumers shall be entitled to provide gas service to the inhabitants of
the City at the rates and pursuant to the conditions as approved by the
Michigan Public Service Commission. Such rates and conditions shall be
subject to review and change upon petition to the Michigan Public Service
Commission.
§ 25-7. Revocation.
The franchise granted by this article is subject to revocation upon 60
days' written notice by either party. Upon revocation, this article shall be
considered repealed and of no effect past, present or future.
§ 25-8. Michigan Public Service Commission jurisdiction.
Consumers remains subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the
Michigan Public Service Commission applicable to gas service in the City
and those rules and regulations preempt any term of any ordinance of the
City to the contrary.
§ 25-9. Repealer.
This article, when enacted, shall repeal and supersede the provisions of
any previous gas franchise ordinance adopted by the City including any
amendments.
§ 25-10. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon publication thereof; provided, however, it
shall cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within
said period the grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the City
Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this article shall constitute
a contract between the City and Consumers.
§ 25-6 LAPEER CODE § 25-10
1:576
ARTICLE II
Detroit Edison
[Adopted 11-7-1966; amended in its entirety 4-8-199776 (Ch. 16,
Sec. 16.01, of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 25-11. Permission granted to transact local electric business.
Permission is hereby granted to the Detroit Edison Company, a Michigan
corporation, its successors and assigns, to construct, maintain and operate
in the public streets, highways, alleys and other public places in the City
of Lapeer, Lapeer County, Michigan, all needful and proper poles, towers,
wires, pipes, mains, conduits and all such lines and other apparatus
requisite for the transmission, transforming and distribution of electricity
for public and private use, and to transact a local electric business within
said City; subject, however, to all conditions and restrictions hereinafter
contained.
§ 25-12. Conditions of grant.
The conditions of the foregoing grant are as follows:
A. The grantee shall do no injury to any street, highway, alley or other
public place, or to any shade trees, or in any manner disturb or
interfere with any water or gas pipes, or with any public or private
sewer, now or hereafter laid or constructed by any authorized person or
corporation.
B. To ensure the reliability of service and the safety of the general public,
line clearance of trees shall be done in compliance with all existing
governmental laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
C. The construction of the said lines shall be in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its
successor.
D. The said grantee, before entering upon any street, highway, alley or
other public place for the purpose of erecting and constructing any
poles, wires, pipes, mains, conduits, or other apparatus, shall notify, in
writing, the City or its representatives of the proposed construction,
and shall, if the City so requires, file with them a sufficient plan and
specification, showing the nature and extent of the proposed erection
and construction.
E. No street, highway, alley or public place shall be allowed to remain
open or encumbered by the construction work of the said grantee for a
longer period than shall be necessary to execute the said work, and the
grantee shall at all times conform to all ordinances of the City now or
hereafter in force, relative to the fencing and lighting of obstructions
and excavations.
76.Editor's Note: Passed by a three-fifths vote at an election held 4-7-1997.
§ 25-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-12
1:577
§ 25-13. Electric service rates and charges.
In consideration of the granting of this franchise, grantee agrees that
its rates and charges for electric service in the City of Lapeer shall not
exceed its rates and charges for like service elsewhere in its service area,
as evidenced by its uniform rate schedules at the time on file with and
approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. It is understood
that the grantee is subject to regulation by the Michigan Public Service
Commission and that any order, rule, or regulation by that Commission, or
its successor, will prevail over any regulation herein contained or provided
for in case of conflict.
§ 25-14. When effective; confirmation by electors required.
This grant shall take effect if said grantee shall, within 15 days from the
date of the passage of the article, file with the City Clerk, its written
acceptance of the terms of the same, and upon the confirmation of this grant
by the affirmative vote of a 3/5 majority of the electors of said City voting
on the franchise at a regular election to be held on Monday, April 7, 1997,
as provided for by the statutes and the State Constitution. If not confirmed
by the electors voting on the franchise at said election, this article shall be
null and void.
§ 25-15. Duration.
This franchise and article shall be and remain in force for 10 years from
and after the date of its confirmation by the electors of the City of Lapeer,
Lapeer County, Michigan.
§ 25-16. Removal of grantee's facilities.
If grantee's facilities are no longer use to serve customers in the City of
Lapeer, then grantee will remove all of its facilities at the discretion of the
City of Lapeer.
§ 25-17. City's rights not curtailed.
Nothing in this grant shall be construed to alienate the title of the public
in and to any street, highway, alley or public place or any portion thereof,
neither shall anything herein be construed in any manner as a surrender
F. The grantee shall save the City harmless from any judgment that may
be recovered against the City by reason of the wrongdoing or
negligence of the said grantee in the erection and maintenance of said
poles, mains, wires and other apparatus or construction.
G. Said grantee shall make due provisions, upon five days' notice in
writing, by raising its wires or otherwise, for the passage of any barn,
building or other structure on or over any street, highway, or public
place occupied by the poles, mains, wires, and other apparatus of said
grantee.
§ 25-12 LAPEER CODE § 25-17
1:578
by the City of Lapeer of its legislative power with respect to the subject
matter hereof, or with respect to any other matter whatsoever; nor as in any
manner limiting the right of the said City of Lapeer to lawfully regulate the
use of any street, avenue, highway or public place within its jurisdiction, as
to all other matters.
§ 25-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-17
1:579
Chapter 26
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND CABLE TELEVISION
REGULATIONS AND FRANCHISES
§ 25-17 LAPEER CODE § 25-17
1:580
ARTICLE I
Telecommunications Regulatory
[Adopted 2-17-2003 (Ch. 57 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 26-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002)77 ("Act") and other
applicable law, and to ensure that the City qualifies for distributions under
the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the
Act.
§ 26-2. Conflict.
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
§ 26-3. Definitions.
A. The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from
time to time.78
CITY — The City of Lapeer.
CITY COMMISSION — The City Commission of the City of Lapeer or its
designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the City Commission.
PERMIT — A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way
in the City for its telecommunications facilities.
B. All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including, without limitation, the
following:
AUTHORITY — The metropolitan authority created under the Local
Community Stabilization Authority Act.79[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, and shall have the same meaning
77.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
78.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 123.1341 et seq.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3
1:581
§ 26-4. Permit required.
as the term "Commission" in the Act.[Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. "Public right-ofway"
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The equipment
or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires,
switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or
facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas,
equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial
mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332, and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in
Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
MCLA § 484.2102. "Telecommunication provider" does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also
includes all of the following:
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(2)
(3) A person providing broadband Internet transport access service.
A. Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-ofway
in the City for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and
obtain a permit pursuant to this article.
B. Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
§ 26-3 LAPEER CODE § 26-4
1:582
6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of
the application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager,
one copy with the City Engineer, and one copy with the City Attorney.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by
the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location
of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with
Section 6(5) of the Act.
C. Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, that is
exempt from public disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act,
1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the
Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on
the face of each map.
D. Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of $500.
E. Additional information. The City may request an applicant to submit
such additional information which the City deems reasonably necessary
or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information
established by the City. If the City and the applicant cannot agree on the
requirement of additional information requested by the City, the City or
the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the
Act.
F. Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the City under Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA
§ 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the City to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall
satisfy the permit requirements of this article.
G. Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-ofway
in the City as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA § 484.2251, shall submit
to the City an application for a permit in accordance with the
requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this
subsection is not required to pay the $500 application fee required
under Subsection D above. A provider under this subsection shall be
given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if
allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act.
§ 26-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-5
1:583
§ 26-5. Issuance of permit.
§ 26-6. Construction/engineering permit.
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the City without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under Chapter
94 of the Code of Ordinances,80 as amended, for construction within the
public rights-of-way. No additional fee shall be charged for such a
construction or engineering permit.
§ 26-7. Conduit or utility poles.
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
A. Approval or denial. The City Manager shall have the authority to
approve or deny an application for a permit. Pursuant to Section 15(3)
of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a
permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider
files an application for a permit under § 26-4B of this article for access
to a public right-of-way within the City. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the
Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City Manager has
granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on
which the application was filed and the date on which permit was
granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit.
B. Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with
or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with
Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.
C. Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the
public right-of-way.
D. Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on Subsection C above, the City Manager may require that a
bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of
the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost
to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original
condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access
and use.
80.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 26-5 LAPEER CODE § 26-8
1:584
§ 26-8. Route maps.
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the City, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
City. The route maps should be in paper and electronic format unless and
until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of
the Act.
§ 26-9. Repair of damage.
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the City, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all
damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below,
or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public rightof-
way to its preexisting condition.
§ 26-10. Establishment and payment of maintenance fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the City set forth
in § 26-4D above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the City's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance
fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act.
§ 26-11. Modification of existing fees.
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the City
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date
of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under
the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the
requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the City also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in
public rights-of-way within the City's boundaries, so that those providers
pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The City shall
provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of
this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act.
To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess
of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent
with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the City's
policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the
City, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
§ 26-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-12
1:585
§ 26-12. Savings clause.
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to
be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 26-11 above
shall be void from the date the modification was made.
§ 26-13. Use of funds.
Pursuant Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the City from the
Authority shall be used by the City solely for rights-of-way related purposes.
In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the City from
the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local
Street Fund maintained by the City under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of
1951.81
§ 26-14. Annual report.
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the Director of Financial Services shall
file an annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds
annually distributed by the Authority if the population of the City is greater
than 10,000.
§ 26-15. Cable television operators.
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the City shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband Internet transport access services.
§ 26-16. Existing rights.
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the City may have under a permit issued
by the City or under a contract between the City and a telecommunications
provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
§ 26-17. Compliance.
The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is
to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof
should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The City
shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but
not limited to the following:
81.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 247.651 et seq.
§ 26-12 LAPEER CODE § 26-17
1:586
§ 26-18. Reservation of police powers.
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the City's
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and
A. Exempting certain route maps from public disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246,
as provided in § 26-4C of this article;
B. Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with § 26-4F of this article;
C. Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with § 26-4G of this article;
D. Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the City, in
accordance with § 26-5A of this article;
E. Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with § 26-5A of this article;
F. Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with § 26-5A of this article;
G. Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 26-5B of this
article;
H. Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-ofway,
in accordance with § 26-5C of this article;
I. Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to
its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's
access and use, in accordance with § 26-5D of this article;
J. Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 26-6 of this
article;
K. Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the City's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with § 26-11
of this article;
L. Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
§ 26-14 of this article; and
M. Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 26-15 of this article.
§ 26-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-18
1:587
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the City's authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
§ 26-19. Authorized City officials.
The City Manager or City Manager's designee is hereby designated as the
authorized City official to issue civil infraction citations (directing alleged
violators to appear in court) for violations under this article.
§ 26-20. Civil infraction.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a civil infraction, and shall be
subject to a civil fine, sanctions and remedies.
§ 26-21. Severability.
This article and each section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, part,
provision, sentence, word and portion thereof are hereby declared to be
severable, and if they or any of hem are declared to be invalid or
unenforceable for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is
hereby provided that the remainder of this article shall not be affected
thereby.
§ 26-18 LAPEER CODE § 26-21
1:588
ARTICLE II
BRE Communications
[Adopted 8-26-1998 (Ch. 55 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 26-22. Short title.
This shall be known and cited as the "BRE Communications LLC,
Telecommunications Franchise Ordinance."
§ 26-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant a telecommunications franchise to
BRE Communications, a Michigan LLC.
§ 26-24. Grant of franchise.
The City hereby grants a nonexclusive telecommunication franchise to BRE
Communications, LLC, pursuant to the franchise agreement between the
City and BRE Communications, LLC, set forth in this article.
§ 26-25. Franchise agreement.
The franchise agreement between the City and BRE Communications, LLC,
shall be in form and content as set forth herein.
§ 26-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-25
1:589

ARTICLE III
Cable Television Regulation and Regulatory Board
[Adopted 12-30-1992; amended in its entirety 3-31-2016 (Ch. 28 of
the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 26-26. Repealed and renamed.
By adoption and enactment of this article, former Chapter 28 of the City
of Lapeer's General Ordinances, entitled "Community Antenna Television
Franchise Regulatory Ordinance," is repealed in its entirety and renamed
Cable Television Regulation and Regulatory Board.
§ 26-27. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Cable Television Regulation and
Regulatory Board."
§ 26-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to preserve a means and mechanism by which
the City may continue to fulfill its responsibilities concomitant with receipt
of cable television franchise fees and provide a mechanism of continued
control over local access programming, which may include the appointment
of a Board to regulate and administer local cable and communication
franchisee's in the future as law may allow.
§ 26-29. Regulatory authority.
The City may exercise appropriate regulatory authority, financial oversight
of cable television franchise fees, and be the depository of cable television
franchise fees under the provisions of this chapter and applicable law, as
may be appropriate and advisable. This authority may be manifested in one
of two ways under the terms and provisions of this article.
A. The Commission may, by resolution, establish and appoint a fivemember
Cable Television Regulation and Regulatory Board, which shall
be advisory in nature and which shall make recommendations to the
Commission on matters pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter
and on such other matters, including authority to take such actions and
make such decisions with respect to preservation, maintenance and
restoration of community access equipment and the selection and
oversight of content, as well as the administration of such duties and
powers, including those related to such duties and to have such powers
as this chapter and the Commission may determine; or
B. Through the office of the City Manager, who in the absence of an
authorizing resolution of the Commission appointing a Cable Television
Regulation and Regulatory Board, shall have the full authority to take
such actions and make such decisions with respect to preservation,
maintenance and restoration of community access equipment and the
selection and oversight of content, as well as the administration of such
§ 26-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-29
1:591
duties and powers, including those relating to such duties and to have
such powers as this chapter and the Commission may determine.
§ 26-29 LAPEER CODE § 26-29
1:592
ARTICLE IV
C-Tec Cable Systems of Michigan, Inc.
[Adopted 5-23-1979 (Ch. 31 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 26-30. Short title. [Amended 10-11-1989]
This article shall be known as the "City of Lapeer Community Antenna
Television Franchise Ordinance to C-TEC Cable Systems of Michigan, Inc."
§ 26-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the issuance of a nonexclusive
franchise for the regulation and control of Community Antenna Television
(CATV) Systems in the City of Lapeer, pursuant to Chapter 14 of the Charter
of the City of Lapeer, as revised.
§ 26-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CABLE TV SERVICE — The simultaneous delivery by the Company to
television receivers of subscribers of all signals of over-the-air television
broadcasters required by the FCC to be carried by a Community Antenna
Television System; the Company channels; City channels; public channels;
and at least five additional channels at the option of the Company, or as
directed by the City.[Amended 11-16-1983]
CHANNEL — A band of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum that is
capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of
non-video signals, or several thousand non-video signals.
CITY — The City of Lapeer, a Michigan municipal corporation.
CITY CHANNEL — A channel on the system which is reserved by this article
for use by the City or reserved for City use by the allocation or reallocation
of channels.
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM, CATV or SYSTEM — Any
facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly or indirectly, over the air,
or otherwise, and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting
programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations as well as
signals transmitting any information of any kind whatsoever and distributes
such signals by wire or cable, or otherwise to the public.
COMPANY — C-TEC Cable Systems of Michigan, Inc. or any other person,
firm, or corporation being holder of a franchise to operate CATV system in
the City of Lapeer.[Amended 10-11-1989]
COMPANY CHANNEL — A channel on the system which is reserved by
this article for the carriage of program material originated by the Company
or by another person in accordance with the FCC's cablecasting rules and
regulations.
§ 26-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-32
1:593
EXPANDED CABLE TV SERVICE — The simultaneous delivery of at least
four additional (or at least nine total) channels by the Company in addition
to services provided by cable TV service.[Amended 11-16-1983]
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — The grant of authority to the Company to operate a CATV
system in the City of Lapeer.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES — The total revenues received by the
system from subscribers to its services who are located in the City of Lapeer
and includes all forms of consideration, such as initial lump sum payments
or connection charges.
MINI-BASIC SERVICE — The simultaneous delivery by the Company to
television receivers of 12 over-the-air TV channels as required by the FCC
to be carried by a community antenna television system.[Amended
11-16-1983]
PAY TELEVISION or PAY TV — An arrangement under which a charge is
made to a television receiver for receiving a particular television program.
PERSON — Person, firm, corporation, or association, and any other legally
recognized entity.
PREMIUM CHANNEL SERVICE — The delivery by the Company to
television receivers of subscribers certain individual channels not included
in and in addition to the cable TV services.[Amended 11-16-1983]
PUBLIC CHANNEL — A channel on the system which is reserved for
carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time
from the Company for the presentation of programs in accordance with this
article.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A purchaser of any service delivered over
the system to an individual dwelling unit, where the service is not to be
utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession.
STREETS — Streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses,
driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, alleys, all other
public rights-of-way, and public grounds or waters within or belonging to
the City.
§ 26-33. Award of nonexclusive franchise.
A. The transfer of franchise from Centel Cable Television Company of
Michigan is approved, and there is hereby awarded to C-TEC Cable
Systems of Michigan, Inc., a nonexclusive franchise for the occupation
or use of the streets within the City for the construction, operation and
maintenance of a CATV system. [Amended 10-11-1989]
B. This franchise shall become effective on the date ratified by the
Company in writing after having been awarded by the Commission in
accordance with applicable law. It shall remain effective until December
§ 26-32 LAPEER CODE § 26-33
1:594
§ 26-34. Revocation of franchise.
§ 26-35. Limitation of franchise.
A franchise granted pursuant to this article applies only to the operation
of a CATV system as provided for herein, and does not take the place of
any other franchise, license, or permit which might be required by federal,
state, or local law.
§ 26-36. Transfer and change of control of franchise.
31, 1996, unless sooner terminated as herein provided in § 26-34.
[Amended 8-14-1996]
C. Nothing in this article shall affect the right of the City to grant to any
other person a franchise to occupy and use the streets or any part
thereof for the construction, operation, and maintenance of a CATV or
similar facility within the City, and the Company shall not take a legal
position contesting the Commission's right to authorize such use of the
streets or any part thereof; provided, however, that the City shall give
the Company no less than two weeks' notice of the hearing date of any
application for any additional franchise, to another, and nothing
contained in this article shall prohibit the Company from appearing
before the Commission and being heard on any application for any
additional franchise to another.
A. The franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the right of the City
by resolution of a majority of its governing body to revoke the franchise
at will.
B. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of City ordinances, and the City Charter, and any
amendments thereto, whether made prior to or after the inception of
the franchise.
C. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable state
and federal laws, including rules and regulations promulgated by the
FCC.
A. Each franchise granted pursuant to this article is nontransferable by
the holder of the franchise to any other person, except with the express
approval of the Lapeer City Commission and meeting all terms,
conditions, and requirements of the Code of the City of Lapeer.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. A franchise issued pursuant to this article shall automatically terminate
where ownership or control of more than 25% of the right of control of
the holder of the franchise is acquired by a person or group of persons
acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 25% or more of
such right of control, singularly or collectively, and an application for a
§ 26-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-36
1:595
§ 26-37. Construction and installation of system.
§ 26-38. Conditions on street occupancy.
new franchise shall be made or said franchise transferred pursuant to
§ 26-36A.
A. Subject to the provisions and restrictions of this article and the Code of
the City of Lapeer, the Company shall have the right to construct, erect,
operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or
dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the City
of Lapeer, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation in the City of Lapeer a CATV system.
B. To lease, rent, or in any other lawful manner, obtain the use of towers,
poles, lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities from any and all
holders of public licenses and franchises within the corporate limits of
the City of Lapeer, including, but not limited to, Consumers Power
Company, Detroit Edison Company and Michigan Bell Telephone
Company, and to use same on such terms as agreed upon subject to all
existing and future ordinances of the City. The poles used for the
Company's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained
by Consumers Power Company, Detroit Edison Company and/or
Michigan Bell Telephone Company when and where applicable,
providing mutually satisfactory rental arrangements can be entered
into with said companies.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the Company within the City shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other
public ways and public places and to cause minimum interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin
any of the said streets, alleys or public ways and public places.
B. In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved
area, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner
approved by the Lapeer City Manager or the Manager's representative,
replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public ways or paved
area in as good a condition as it was in before the work involving such
disturbance was done.
C. If, at any time during the period of a franchise granted pursuant to this
article, the City shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, the Company, upon
reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its
own expense.
§ 26-36 LAPEER CODE § 26-38
1:596
§ 26-39. Safety requirements.
§ 26-40. Erection, removal and common use of poles.
D. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the Company
shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel
on such public way.
E. The Company shall, on the request of any person holding a buildingmoving
permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal
or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting
the same, and the Company shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. The Company shall be given not less that 48 hours'
advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
F. The Company shall, after giving notice to and obtaining the approval of
the Lapeer City Manager or the Manager's representative, have the
authority to trim trees upon and hanging over streets, alleys, sidewalks,
and public ways and places of the City so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
CATV System, except that at the option of the Lapeer City Manager,
such trimming may be done by the City or under the supervision and
direction of the City at the expense of the Company.
G. In all sections of the City where the cable, wires or other like facilities
are placed underground, the Company shall place its cables, wires or
other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing
technology reasonably permits the Company to do so.
A. The company shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injuries, or nuisances to the public.
B. The Company shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and
other equipment in accordance with all applicable federal, state and
local laws and rules and regulations, and in such manner that they will
not interfere with any installations of the City or of a public utility
serving the City.
C. All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under
and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways or places of the
City, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and
maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order
and repair.
A. No poles or other wire holding structures shall be erected by the
Company without prior approval of the Lapeer City Manager with
regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect.
However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the
§ 26-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-40
1:597
§ 26-41. Rights reserved to City.
§ 26-42. Maps, plats and reports.
The Company shall, on or before the first day of April of each year, file
with the City Clerk true and accurate maps or plats, showing the location
of all existing and proposed installations, which shall include all receiving
and transmitting stations, all trunklines, whether leased or owned outright,
feeder lines, whether leased or owned outright, and attached to such maps
or plats shall be a list by address of current subscribers.
Company shall be a vested interest and such pole and structure shall be
removed or modified by the Company at its own expense whenever the
Lapeer City Manager determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby.
B. Where poles or other wire-holding structures already in existence for
the use in serving the City are available for use by the Company, but it
does not make arrangements for such use, the Lapeer City Manager
may require the Company to use such poles and structures if said
Manager determines that the public convenience would be enhanced
thereby and terms of the use available to the Company are just and
reasonable.
C. Where the City or a public utility serving the City desires to make use of
the poles or other wire holding structures of the Company, but
agreement therefor with the Company cannot be reached, the City may
require the Company to permit such use for such consideration and
upon such terms as the City, through its governing body, shall
determine to be just and reasonable, if said governing body determines
that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not
unduly interfere with the Company's operation.
A. The City shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon
the poles and cables of the Company any wire and pole fixtures
necessary for a police or fire alarm system, on the condition that such
wire or pole fixtures do not interfere with the cable communications
operations of the Company and that such installations shall be installed
in a safe manner in conformance with state and City regulations.
B. The City shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation
work performed subject to the provisions of this article and make such
inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with the
terms of the article and all other pertinent provisions of law. At the
expiration of this franchise or upon its termination or cancellation, as
provided for herein, the City shall have the right to require the
Company to remove at its own expense all portions of the cable
communications systems from all public streets, alleys, ways, and areas
within the City.
§ 26-40 LAPEER CODE § 26-43
1:598
§ 26-43. Carriage of signals.
The Company shall comply with all rules and regulations, both present
and future, of the United States Federal Communications Commission with
respect to the reception, carriage and distribution of signals.
§ 26-44. Signal quality requirements.
§ 26-45. Operation and maintenance of system.
A. The facilities used by the Company shall be capable of distributing color
TV signals, and when the signals the Company distributes are received
in color by the Company, they shall be distributed in color by the
Company.
B. The Company shall produce a picture, whether in black and white or in
color, that is undistorted, free from ghost images, and accompanied
with proper sound on typical standard production television sets in
good repair and as good as the state of the art allows, and shall transmit
signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound
at all outlets without causing cross-modulation in the cables or
interfering with other electrical or electronic systems. For purposes of
the section, the standards to be applied in determining whether or not
the Company is producing a good picture or transmitting signals of
adequate strength to produce same are those acceptable standards as
set forth in the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission relative to community antenna television systems as
amended or as shall be amended hereafter.
C. The Company shall demonstrate by instruments and otherwise to
subscribers, upon request, that a signal of adequate strength and
quality is being delivered. Such demonstration shall be made by taking
a standard production television set with a screen of sufficient area as
to clearly demonstrate the relative merit of the receiving signal.
A. The Company shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Such interruptions, insofar as is possible, shall be preceded by notice
and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the System.
B. The Company shall maintain an office in the City, or in a location
acceptable to the City, which shall be open during all usual business
hours, have a listed telephone, and be so operated that complaints and
requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time, 24
hours each day.
C. The Company shall limit failures to a minimum by locating and
correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 24 hours
after receiving notice of same; should it be impossible or impractical to
correct any such malfunctions within 24 hours or less, then each
subscriber whose television reception is so disrupted shall receive a
§ 26-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-45
1:599
§ 26-46. Rates.
rebate from the Company in the amount of $0.25 for every additional
twenty-four-hour period, or any portion thereof, that said subscriber's
television reception is so disrupted, unless the Company can show to
the satisfaction of the Lapeer City Manager that said disruption in
service was entirely beyond its control. Provided, however, that the
rebate to any subscriber under this section, in any month, shall not
exceed said subscriber's normal monthly fee paid to the Company. In
the event a disruption of service, for any reason, extends beyond three
days from the time the Company is notified of such disruption, affected
subscribers shall receive a rebate as herein provided above.
D. The Lapeer City Manager shall be the official of the City having primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and
implementation of any reasonable complaint procedures.
E. Any complaint procedures implemented by the Lapeer City Manager, in
addition to any procedures outlined in this article, shall be given to each
subscriber by the Company at the time of initial subscription to the
CATV System.
A. The rates and charges for television and radio signals distributed
hereunder shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to
meet all costs of service within the City (assuming efficient and
economical management), including a fair return on the original cost
within the City, less depreciation, of the properties devoted to such
service within the City.
B. The following maximum rates and charges are hereby authorized and
shall not be increased by the Company without prior approval of the
Lapeer City Commission following a public hearing. The Company shall
have the right to discount these rates and charges. [Amended
11-11-1983]
(1) One-time charges: [Amended 11-30-1983]
(a) Initial service connection: $20.
(b) Upgrading, downgrading, or switching converters requiring a
company technicians' visit to the subscriber's premises: $10.
(c) Installation of additional services, not covered above, ordered
after the initial connection of any of the above services,
including multiple outlets, FM or stereo connections,
relocation of outlets, or the addition of remote control
switches: $10.
(d) Reconnection services: $10.
(2) Monthly rates.
(a) Community antenna service: $6.
§ 26-45 LAPEER CODE § 26-46
1:600
§ 26-47. Capacity and commencement of system.
(b) Cable TV service: $8.95.
(c) Expanded cable TV service: $11.45.
(d) Premium channel service: $10.45 per channel.
(e) Radio service: $2 per connection.
(f) Additional TV set connection: $5 per set.
C. The community shall receive no consideration whatsoever for, or in
connection with, its service to its subscribers other than in accordance
with this section.
D. If, in the future, the State of Michigan regulates the rates of the
Company for the services provided under this article, this section shall
be of no effect during such state regulation to the extent of any conflict
therewith.
E. The Company shall bill subscribers no more than one month in advance
of the services being provided. [Amended 11-16-1983]
F. The Company shall keep the Lapeer City Commission advised of
channels delivered for the above services and regular discounts offered.
[Amended 11-16-1983]
A. The Company shall extend the installation of cables, amplifiers and
related equipment throughout the City as rapidly as is practicable.
Within three years from the effective date of this franchise, the
Company's trunkline installations of cables, amplifiers, and related
equipment shall be capable of providing basic service to every City
dwelling unit. Thereafter, the Lapeer City Commission may impose such
further construction obligations as are necessary to bring basic service
to any building within the City.
B. The Company shall apply the FCC certification within 30 days from the
effective date of this article.
C. Within one year from the date of certification from the FCC, the
Company shall be providing basic service on a regular basis to at least
300 residential subscribers.
D. As soon as possible, but in no event later than two years from the
effective date of this franchise, the Company shall transmit over the
system the signals of all channels, both VHF and UHF, as may be
required by the FCC.
E. Initial channels.
(1) Initial channel capacity of the system (utilizing no less than 20
channels) shall be as follows:
§ 26-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-47
1:601
§ 26-48. Liability insurance and indemnification.
(a) VHF and UHF channels required by FCC: all.
(b) Public channels: one.
(c) City channels, including those for public schools, libraries, and
for educational purposes: two.
(d) Company channels: remainder.
(2) The initial channel use authorized in this subsection shall be
subject to allocation or reallocation subject to representations to
the Lapeer City Commission as to the proper allocations to be made
in light of the developments in the state of the art, the use of CATV
as communications, educational, and entertainment media, and
subject to the regulations of the FCC.
F. The Company shall transmit and deliver over City channels the signals
designated therefor by the Lapeer City Commission.
G. The Company shall provide basic service to one outlet on each floor of
all existing or future police and fire stations, the Lapeer City Hall, and
all public and private schools located in the City, without any charge
therefor.
H. In the event of an emergency situation, the City may interrupt signals
otherwise being distributed by the Company for the delivery of signals
necessitated by such emergency.
I. In the operation of its system, the Company shall not interfere in any
way with the signals of any electrical system located in buildings which
house any part of the system, and shall not deprive an inhabitant of any
building, by contract or otherwise, of any existing right to use an
individual or master antenna for the purpose of receiving television
signals.
A. The Company shall maintain throughout the term of its franchise,
liability insurance insuring the City and the Company with regard to all
damages for which the City and/or the Company may be liable,
including, but not limited to, damages arising out of copyright
infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of the cable communications system
that is the subject of this franchise, whether or not any act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article.
B. The liability insurance referred to in Subsection A of this section shall
be in the following minimum amounts:
(1) Five hundred thousand dollars for bodily injury or death to any one
person, within limits, however, of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or
death resulting from any one accident;
§ 26-47 LAPEER CODE § 26-48
1:602
§ 26-49. Annual franchise fee. [Amended 10-11-1989]
Commencing one year from the effective date of this article, and each year
thereafter, the Company shall pay to the Lapeer City Clerk a franchise
fee equal to 5% of the Company's gross subscriber revenues or $1,000,
whichever is greater.
§ 26-50. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional, by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
(2) Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage resulting from
any one accident;
(3) Five hundred thousand dollars for infringement of copyright;
(4) Five hundred thousand dollars for all other types of liability.
C. The Company shall pay, and by its acceptance of this franchise, the
Company agrees that it will pay as a result of granting this franchise,
and the Company shall save the City harmless from any and all liability
arising out of this franchise, the granting of the same or the operation
of the system hereunder. The Company shall pay for expenses incurred
by the City in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties
which the City may be required to pay as a result of granting this
franchise, including, but not limited to, all reasonable investigation,
witness, and attorney fees.
D. The Company shall maintain throughout the term of its franchise, a
faithful performance bond running to the City and to the subscribers of
a CATV system, with at least two good and sufficient sureties approved
by the City, in the penal sum of $75,000, conditioned that the Company
shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition
of the bond, and all damages proximately resulting from the failure of
the Company to well and faithfully observe any provisions of this article
shall be recoverable by the City from the principal and sureties.
E. The insurance policies and bond obtained by the Company in
compliance with this section must be approved by the Lapeer City
Commission and such insurance policy and bond, along with written
evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed with the
Lapeer City Clerk.
F. The City shall annually review the above insurance and bond provision;
and, if it is determined that the insurance coverage and performance
bond is inadequate, additional insurance and/or bond may be required
as reasonable determined by the Lapeer City Commission and shall be
provided by the Company.
§ 26-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-51
1:603
§ 26-51. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, association, or corporation violating any of the
foregoing provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days in the Lapeer County Jail, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 26-52. Annual report. [Amended 11-16-1983]
The Company shall provide within 60 days following the conclusion of each
franchise year an annual report showing the yearly total gross subscriber
revenues and payments to the City. This report shall be submitted with
such other reasonable information as will clearly reveal the extent of the
applicant's CATV operations, including investment in CATV facilities,
revenues and expenses of operations within the City of Lapeer.
§ 26-51 LAPEER CODE § 26-52
1:604
ARTICLE V
DAS/Small Cell/Wireless Facilities in the Right-of-Way
[Adopted 3-23-2017 (Ch. 66 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 26-53. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms and phrases shall be
defined as follows:
DAS/SMALL CELL/WIRELESS FACILITIES or DAS/SMALL CELL/
WIRELESS NETWORK FACILITIES — Structures of any nature installed
and/or operated for the provision of telecommunication or wireless services
including, without limitation, antennas, supporting structures for antennas,
poles, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment.
DAS/SMALL CELL/WIRELESS NETWORK — Any distributed antennas
system or small cell telecommunication or data wireless network.
§ 26-54. License agreement.
No person shall install or operate, in whole or in part, DAS/small cell/
wireless facilities or DAS/small cell/wireless network facilities in a City
public right-of-way or other public place without first applying for and
receiving a DAS/small cell/wireless license from the City in a form and
subject to such terms and conditions as is acceptable to the City. Nothing
herein shall be interpreted to require the City to issue such a license and
the City reserves to itself discretion to grant, deny or modify a request for
such a license as it determines to be in the best interest of the City and its
citizens.
§ 26-55. METRO Act permit.
No person shall install or operate "telecommunications facilities," as
defined in the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Oversight Act, Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, as amended (the
"Act"),82 without first obtaining a permit under the Act from the City,
including any part of a DAS/small cell/wireless system constituting
telecommunication facilities.
§ 26-56. Design parameters.
Where permitted by the City, the following minimal design parameters shall
apply to DAS/small cells/wireless network facilities in City public rights-ofway:
A. The required map(s) for proposed DAS/small cell/wireless facilities
shall be legible, to scale, labeled with streets, and contain sufficient
detail to clearly identify the proposed DAS/small cell/wireless network
82.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.
§ 26-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-56
1:605
§ 26-57. Compliance with applicable law. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The City, through its Department of Public Works, in reviewing and
authorizing a permit under the Act and/or a license referred to in this
section, and the licensee, in the establishment and operation of any DAS/
small cell/wireless network facilities, shall comply with all applicable
federal and state laws.
§ 26-58. Fees.
Fees for the agreement and permits required shall be as provided for in the
Act or those documents and as periodically authorized by resolution of the
City Commission.
§ 26-59. Effective date.
This article will become effective as of its publication of adoption in a
newspaper in general circulation within the City as provided by law.
facilities' locations and surroundings. Where applicable, the required
map or list shall include and identify any requested pole height(s).
B. The maximum height of a pole or other supporting structure installed to
accommodate a DAS/small cell/wireless network shall be 40 feet.
C. Unless otherwise permitted in § 26-56F, DAS/small cell/wireless
facilities shall be located no closer than 18 inches from an existing
sidewalk/face of curb or 18 inches from a proposed future sidewalk/face
of curb location. [Amended 4-17-2017]
D. Unless otherwise permitted in § 26-56-F, DAS/small cell/wireless
facilities shall be located no closer than 10 feet from any driveway.
[Amended 4-17-2017]
E. In residential areas, DAS/small cell/wireless facilities shall be located in
line with a side lot line whenever possible and not in front of a house.
F. The licensee shall field-stake all proposed locations for DAS/small cell/
wireless facilities which shall be subject to the approval of the City,
Lapeer County Road Commission and/or the Michigan Department of
Transportation, as applicable. All approved DAS/small cell/wireless
facilities' locations shall be on a per pole/equipment/other basis. Such
approvals shall be memorialized by the City and licensee.
G. Once precise locations have been approved in accordance with
§ 26-56F, the licensee shall provide latitude and longitude coordinates
for the DAS/small cell/wireless facilities' locations to the City's
Department of Public Works.
H. The licensee shall be responsible to obtain such other permits and
approvals as required by law.
§ 26-56 LAPEER CODE § 26-59
1:606
Chapter 27
SOIL EROSION
§ 27-1. Title.
This is a chapter to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from
nonagricultural development within the City of Lapeer requiring proper
provisions for water disposal and the protection of soil surfaces during
and after construction, in order to promote the safety, public health,
convenience and general welfare of the community, which shall be known
and cited as the "City of Lapeer Soil Erosion Ordinance."
§ 27-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ACCELERATED SOIL EROSION — The increased lay of the land surface
that occurs as a result of man's activities.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The chief of the Building Department of the City
of Lapeer or his duly authorized representative.
CERTIFICATION OF COMPLETION — A signed written statement by the
Building Inspector that specific construction has been inspected and found
to comply with all grading plans and specifications.
EARTH CHANGE — A man-made change in the natural cover or topography
of the land, including cut-and-fill activities, which may result in or
contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state.
EROSION — The process by which the ground surface is worn away by
action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
FLOODPLAIN — That area which would be inundated by storm runoff or
floodwater equivalent to that which would occur with a rainfall or flood
of one-hundred-year recurrence frequency after total development of the
watershed.
GRADING — Any stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling or and
combination thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled
condition.
GRADING PERMIT — A permit issued to authorize work to be performed
under this chapter.
LAND USE — A use of land which may result in an earth change, including
but not limited to subdivision, residential, commercial, industrial,
recreational or other development, private and public highway, road and
§ 26-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-2
1:607
street construction, drainage construction, logging operations, agricultural
practices and mining.
PERMANENT SOIL EROSION CONTROL MEASURE — Those control
measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and
which are maintained after project completion.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.
TEMPORARY SOIL EROSION CONTROL MEASURES — Interim control
measures which are installed or constructed for the control of soil erosion
until permanent soil erosion control is effected.
§ 27-3. Compliance with chapter required for site plan plat
approval.
No site plan or plot plan or plat shall be approved under Chapter 6, Land
Division, or Chapter 7, Zoning, of this Code unless said site plan, plot plan
or plat shall include soil erosion and sediment control measures consistent
with the requirements of this chapter and related development regulations.
§ 27-4. Compliance with chapter required for occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy for any building will be issued under Chapter
8, Article II, Buildings Code, of this Code unless the applicant for said
certificate shall have obtained a certification of completion of all permanent
soil erosion measures.
§ 27-5. Permits and fees.
A. Permit requirement. Except as exempted by § 27-15 of this chapter, no
person shall do any grading, stripping, excavation or filling nor
undertake any earth change unless he has a valid grading permit issued
by the Building Inspector.
B. Permit application. A separate application shall be required for each
grading permit. Plans, specifications and timing schedules shall be
submitted with each application for a grading permit. The plans shall be
prepared or approved and signed by a professional engineer or by an
architect. The City Building Inspector may waive the preparation or
approval and signature by the professional engineer or architect when
the work entails little hazard to the adjacent property and does not
include the construction of a fill upon which a structure may be erected.
C. Application data required. The plans and specifications accompanying
the grading permit application shall contain the following data:
(1) A vicinity sketch at the scale of one inch equaling 200 feet
indicating the site location as well as the adjacent properties within
§ 27-2 LAPEER CODE § 27-5
1:608
500 feet of the site boundaries and the location of any lake, stream
or drainage within 500 feet of earth change boundaries.
(2) A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be
performed.
(3) A plan of the site at a scale of one inch equaling 100 feet showing:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer
and petitioner.
(b) A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence and the time of
exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective
erosion and sediment control measures.
(c) A certified statement of the quantity of excavation and fill
involved.
(d) Existing topography at a maximum of five-foot contour
intervals.
(e) Proposed topography at a maximum of five-foot contour
intervals.
(f) Location of any structure or natural feature on the site.
(g) Location of any structure or natural feature on the land.
(h) Location of any proposed additional structure or development
on the site.
(i) Elevations, dimensions, locations, extent and the slope of all
proposed grading (including building and driveway grades).
(j) The estimated total cost of the required temporary and
permanent soil erosion control measures.
(k) Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, cribbing,
planting, anti-erosion devices, or other temporary or
permanent soil erosion control measures to be constructed in
connection with, or as a part of, the proposed work together
with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the
site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains.
(l) Other information or data as may be required by the City
Building Inspector such as a soil investigation report which
shall include, but not be limited to:
[1] Date regarding the nature, distribution and supporting
ability of existing soils and rock on the site.
D. Fees. Nonrefundable fees shall be charged at the time of filing an
application for the grading permit as listed on the City of Lapeer Fee
§ 27-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-5
1:609
§ 27-6. Bond requirement.
§ 27-7. Extension of time.
If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified time,
he may, at least 10 days prior to the expiration of the permit, present
in writing to the Building Inspector a request for an extension of time
setting forth the reasons for the requested extension. In the event such an
extension is warranted, the Building Inspector may grant additional time for
the completion of the work, but no such extension shall release the owner
or the surety on the bond or the person furnishing the instrument of credit
of cash bond.
§ 27-8. Failure to complete work.
In the event of failure to complete the work or failure to comply with all
the requirements, conditions, and terms of permit, the Building Inspector
may order such work as is necessary to eliminate any danger to persons
or property and to leave the site in a safe condition and he may authorize
completion of all necessary, temporary or permanent soil erosion control
measures. The permittee and the surety executing the bond or person
issuing the instrument of credit or making the cash deposit shall continue
to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all
necessary costs and expenses that may be insured or expended by the City
in causing any and all such work to be done. In the case of a cash deposit,
unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the permittee.
Schedule. Such fees shall not be required where a building permit is
also obtained for such work. [Amended 9-19-2011]
A. A grading permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post
with the City Clerk a bond executed by the owner and a corporate
surety with authority to do business in this state as a surety. The bond
shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney, payable to the City, and
in the amount of the estimated total cost of all temporary or permanent
soil erosion control measures. The total cost shall be estimated by the
City Building Inspector. The bond shall include penalty provisions for
failure to complete the work on schedule as specified on the grading
permit. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file with the City
Clerk a cash bond or an instrument of credit approved by the City
Attorney in the amount equal to that which would be required for the
surety bond.
B. Every bond and instrument of credit shall include and every cash
deposit shall be made on the conditions that the permittee shall comply
with all of the provisions of this chapter and all of the terms and
conditions of the grading permit, and shall complete all of the work
contemplated under the grading permit within the time limit specified
in the grading permit, or if no time limit is specified, within 180 days
after the date of the issuance of the grading permit.
§ 27-5 LAPEER CODE § 27-9
1:610
§ 27-9. Denial of permit.
Grading permits shall not be issued where:
§ 27-10. Modifications of approved plans.
All modifications of the approved grading plans must be submitted and
approved by the Building Inspector. All necessary sustaining report shall
be submitted with any proposal to modify the approved grading plan. No
grading work in connection with any proposed modification shall be
permitted without the approval of the City Building Inspector.
§ 27-11. Responsibility to permittee.
During grading operations, the permittee shall be responsible for:
A. The proposed work would cause hazards to the public safety and
welfare;
B. The work as proposed by the applicant will damage any public or
private property or interfere with any existing drainage course in such
a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property or result in the
deposition of debris or sediment on any public way or into any
waterway or create any unreasonable hazard to persons or property;
C. The land area for which the grading is proposed is subject to geological
hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can
eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any
other such hazard to persons or property; or
D. The land area for which the grading is proposed may lie within the
floodplain of any stream or watercourse (not specifically designated and
delineated by the City as an area submitted to flood hazard), unless a
hydrologic report, prepared by a professional engineer, is submitted to
certify that the proposed grading will have, in his opinion, no
detrimental influence on the public welfare or upon the total
development of the watershed.
A. The prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within the
limits of grading and along any routs of travel of the equipment.
B. The prevention of damage to adjacent property.
C. No person shall grade on land so close to the property line as to
endanger any adjoining public streets, sidewalk, alley or any public or
private property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking or other damage which might result.
D. Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans
and in compliance with all the requirements of the permit and this
chapter.
§ 27-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-11
1:611
§ 27-12. General requirements.
E. The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris or other materials
applied, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways,
sidewalks, or other thoroughfares during transit to and from the
construction, where such spillage constitutes a public nuisance or
hazard in accordance with § 12-4G.
A. Any earth changes shall be conducted in such a manner which will
effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation.
B. All persons engaged in earth changes shall design, implement and
maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation and control
measures, in conformance with MCLA § 324.9101 et seq., Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control, and all official rules of the Michigan Water
Resources Division in the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality promulgated pursuant thereto, which effectively reduce
accelerated soil erosion. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. All earth changes shall be designed, constructed and completed in such
a manner which shall limit the exposed area of any disturbed land for
the shortest possible period of time.
D. Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from
runoff water before it leaves the site of the earth change.
E. Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for the
conveyance of water around, through or from the earth change area
shall be designed to limit the water flow to a nonerosive velocity.
F. Temporary soil erosion control facilities shall be removed and earth
change areas graded and stabilized with permanent soil erosion control
measures pursuant to approved standards and specifications as
prescribed by the Michigan Water Resources Division in the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality rules. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
G. Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels,
ditches or any disturbed land area shall be completed within 15
calendar days after final grading or the final earth change has been
completed. When it is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed
area after an earth change has been completed or where significant
earth change activity ceases, temporary soil erosion control measures
shall be implemented within 30 calendar days.
H. All temporary soil erosion control measures shall be maintained until
permanent soil erosion control measures are implemented.
§ 27-11 LAPEER CODE § 27-13
1:612
§ 27-13. Maintenance requirements.
Persons carrying out soil erosion and sediment control measures under this
chapter, and all subsequent owners of property upon which such measures
have been taken, shall maintain all permanent anti-erosion devices,
retaining walls, structures, plantings, and other protective devices.
§ 27-14. Minimum design standards for erosion and sediment
control. [Amended 8-6-1975]
All grading plans and specifications including extensions of previously
approved plans shall include provisions for erosion and sediment control in
accordance with, but not limited to, the Lapeer Soil and Water Conservation
District Standards and Specifications. Copies of said standards and
specifications shall be available for inspection in the offices of the City Clerk
or the Building Inspector.
§ 27-15. Variances and exceptions.
A. No permits shall be required for the following:
(1) Agricultural use of land zoned agricultural.
(2) Grading or an excavation below finished grade for basements,
footings, retaining walls or other structures on plots in zoning
districts zoned R-1 through R-3 of less than 20,000 square feet, or
where such grading or excavation is located more than 500 feet
from any lake, stream or drainage course. [Amended 8-6-1975;
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(3) A sidewalk or driveway authorized by a valid permit.
(4) Where the Building Inspector certifies in writing that the planned
work and the final structures or topographical changes will not
result in, or contribute to soil erosion, sedimentation of the waters
of the state, will not interfere with any existing drainage course in
such a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property or
result in the deposition of debris or debris or sediment on any
public way, will abate any hazard to any persons or property, and
will have not detrimental influence upon the public welfare or upon
the total development of the watershed.
(5) Although no permits are required under Subsection A(1), (2), (3)
and (4) of this section, the operations and constructions exempted
from obtaining permits must comply with the rules and regulations
concerning grading and erosion specified in this chapter.
B. Where it is alleged that there is error or misinterpretation in any order,
requirements, decisions, grant or refusal made by the Building
Inspector, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear
specific applications and may amend or change such order
§ 27-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-15
1:613
§ 27-16. Inspection.
§ 27-17. Enforcement.
§ 27-18. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on the 15th day of January 1975 at
12:01 a.m.
§ 27-19. Severability. [Amended 8-6-1975]
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this entire chapter is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or unenforceable by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter
or sections thereof, it being the legislative intent that the provisions of
requirements, decisions, grant or refusal so that it is in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of the requirements. The procedural
requirements for appeals under Chapter 7, Article XXII, Zoning Board
of Appeals, of the Code shall be applicable to appeals under this
chapter. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector. The Building Inspector shall inspect the work and shall
require adequate inspection of compaction by a soil engineer or by a
soil testing agency, approved by the Building Inspector, unless he
determines that such inspection requirements may be waived due to
the nonhazardous nature of the grading.
B. Upon satisfactory execution of all approved grading plans and other
requirements, the Building Inspector shall issue a certification of
completion. If the City Engineer or Building Inspector find any existing
conditions not as stated in any application, grading permit or approved
plan, he may refuse to approve further work until approval of reviewed
grading plan which will conform to the existing conditions.
A. Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy, the City
of Lapeer may maintain an action in its own name in any court of
competent jurisdiction for an injunction or other process against any
person to restrain or prevent violations of this chapter.
B. The Building Inspector, or his duly authorized agents, may enter at all
reasonable times in, or upon any private or public property for which
the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions and practices
which may be a violation of this chapter, or the rules of the Water
Resources Division in the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality promulgated pursuant to MCLA § 324.9101 et seq., Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 27-15 LAPEER CODE § 27-19
1:614
this chapter are separable and that the chapter shall continue in effect
notwithstanding the invalidity of such section, sentence, clause or phrase.
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
§ 30-1. Incorporation.
§ 30-2. Board of Directors.
§ 30-3. Filing and publication.
A. The application for permission to incorporate an economic development
corporation and the proposed Articles of Incorporation submitted to the
Lapeer City Commission on January 5, 1979, are hereby approved.
B. The incorporation of the Economic Development Corporation of the City
of Lapeer is hereby approved.
A. The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the City
Commission, the members of the Board of Directors of the corporation.
B. The Board of Directors shall consist of nine regular members, not more
than three of whom shall be officials or employees of the City.
C. Of the directors first appointed, four shall be appointed for terms of six
years, one for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for
two years and one for one year.
D. Whenever the corporation shall undertake a project plan, two
additional directors shall be appointed who shall be representative of
neighborhood residents likely to be affected by that project plan. The
terms of such additional directors shall terminate upon the completion
or abandonment of the project plan for which they were appointed.
A. The City Clerk shall file one copy of the chapter and the Articles of
Incorporation with the Lapeer County Clerk and one copy of each shall
also be filed with the Secretary of State.
B. The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this chapter and a copy of the
Articles of Incorporation to be published in the Lapeer County Press.
§ 27-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:615
§ 30-4. Effective date.
Chapter 31
(RESERVED)
Chapter 32
FLOODPLAIN CONTROL
§ 32-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 32-2. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. This chapter shall become effective upon the date of publication
thereof.
B. This chapter shall be void if incorporation is not accomplished within 90
days after the effective date of this chapter.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 30-4 LAPEER CODE § 32-2
1:616
§ 32-3. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Building Official's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to
three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equalled or
exceeded in any given year.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located
within the area of special flood hazard.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is
completed before the effective date of this chapter.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 32-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:617
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities,
either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of
streets).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, and the water surfaces elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:[Amended
9-13-2007]
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see definition of "flooding").[Amended 9-13-2007]
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.[Amended 9-13-2007]
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance), and other applications of police power that provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.[Amended 9-13-2007]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood.
HABITABLE FLOOR — Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof.
A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor."
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by the waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature,
such a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding, as defined
in Subsections A and B of this definition.
C.
§ 32-3 LAPEER CODE § 32-3
1:618
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lot (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the
construction of streets) is completed on or after the effective date of this
chapter.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first placement of permanent
construction of a structure (other than a manufactured home) on a site,
such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage
of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation
of streets, and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main
structure. For a structure (other than a manufactured home) without a
basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first
permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its
piling or foundation. For manufactured homes not within a manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, "start of construction"
means the affixing of the manufactured home to its permanent site. For
manufactured homes within manufactured home parks or manufactured
home subdivisions, "start of construction" is the date on which the
construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the manufactured
home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets,
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of
utilities) is completed.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, liquid or gas storage facility,
or manufactured home that is principally above ground.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 32-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:619
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 32-4. General provisions.
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored before the
damage occurred.
(2)
A.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
B.
The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
(2)
C.
A. Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Lapeer.
B. Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
Entitled Flood Insurance Study Lapeer County, Michigan and dated
September 19, 2007, and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) panel
numbers of 26087C: 0254E, 0258E, 0261E, 0262E, 0263E, 0264E,
0266E, and 0268E and dated September 19, 2007, as pertains to the
City of Lapeer, are adopted by reference for the purpose of
administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a
part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide
the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the
Michigan Residential Code. [Amended 9-13-2007]
C. Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provision of the State
Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the
Public Acts of 1972, as amended,83 Appendix G of the Michigan Building
Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of
Lapeer. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
83.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1508b(6).
§ 32-3 LAPEER CODE § 32-4
1:620
§ 32-5. Administration.
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter. [Amended 9-13-2007]
D. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenant or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the City of Lapeer, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages
that result in reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
A. Establishment of building permit. A building permit shall be obtained
before construction or development begins within any area of special
flood hazard established in § 32-4B. Application for a building permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Lapeer and shall
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 32-7B(2); and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Agency designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the
Public Acts of 1972, as amended,84 the Building Official of the City of
Lapeer is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the
84.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1508b(6).
§ 32-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-5
1:621
responsibility of the City of Lapeer under Act 230, of the Public Acts
of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Lapeer assumes
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
through out the corporate limits of the community adopting this
chapter. [Amended 9-13-2007]
C. Duties and responsibilities of the Building Official. Duties of the
Building Official shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit review.
(a) Review of all development permits to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all building permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects carrying capacity of the area of
special flood hazard. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely
affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
(2) Information to be obtained and maintained.
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures.
(b) For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures:
[1] Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level); and
[2] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 32-5A(3).
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Alteration of watercourses.
(a) Notify adjacent communities, including the County Drain
Commission and the Department of Natural Resources, prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
§ 32-5 LAPEER CODE § 32-5
1:622
§ 32-6. Variance procedure.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(4) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§ 32-6.
D. Schedule of fees. The Schedule of fees shall be as listed in the City of
Lapeer Fee Schedule approved by the City Commission. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Board of Survey as established by the City Commission, City of
Lapeer, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Survey shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision, or
determination made by the City of Lapeer's Building Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Survey, may appeal
such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by law.
(4) In passing upon appeals and request for variance, the Board of
Survey shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands that
may injure persons and or properties;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
§ 32-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-6
1:623
(f) The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use
that are less subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, including but not limited to, such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
(5) The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration
upon request.
(6) The applicant will be informed in writing that if the variance is for
the purposes of lowering the flood protection level of a building, the
cost of flood insurance may be as high as $25 per $100 of
insurance.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
harmful increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(3) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient causes;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in harmful increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in
§ 32-6A(4), or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
§ 32-6 LAPEER CODE § 32-7
1:624
§ 32-7. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and
frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be
that:
[1] Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of
a manufactured home. One additional tie shall be provided
at an intermediate location for manufactured homes under
50 feet long. Two additional ties shall be provided at
intermediate locations for manufactured homes over 50
feet long.
[2] Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with
five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with
manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four
additional ties per side;
[3] All components of the anchoring system be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and
[4] Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly
anchored.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the system into
floodwaters; and
§ 32-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-7
1:625
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
B. Specified standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in § 32-4B,
Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas, the following
provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
§ 32-5C.
(3) A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
(a) The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl
space, walls, stilts, piles, or other foundation, provided:
§ 32-7 LAPEER CODE § 32-7
1:626
[1] The walls have permanent openings no more than one foot
above grade; and
[2] The walls and floor are not subject to damage by
hydrostatic pressures associated with the base flood.
(b) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as
to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
(c) All areas below the Floodplain Elevation (FPE) shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest
floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and
utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE. Water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be
located below the FPE.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 32-7A(1)(b).
(b) For new manufactured home parks and manufactured home
subdivisions; for expansions to existing manufactured home
parks and manufactured home subdivisions where the repair,
reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads
equals or exceeds 50% of value of the streets, utilities and pads
before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has
commenced; and for manufactured homes not placed in a
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision,
require that:
[1] Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings
so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be
at or above the base level;
[2] Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are
provided; and
[3] In the instance of elevation of pilings, that:
[a] Lots are large enough to permit steps;
[b] Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more
than 10 feet apart; and
[c] Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six
feet above the ground level.
§ 32-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-7
1:627
§ 32-8. Violation and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, firms, corporation, or corporations, or anyone
acting in behalf of such person, persons, firm, firms, corporation, or
corporations, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 and the cost
of prosecution or imprisonment for a period of 90 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation
is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 32-9. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or part of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter; and
the application of those provisions to any person or circumstances shall not
be affected thereby.
§ 32-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on January 3, 1992.
Chapter 33
(c) No manufactured home shall be placed in a floodway, except in
an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured
home subdivision.
(5) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in § 32-4B are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
(a) To prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development, unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result
in any harmful increase in flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
(b) If § 32-7B(4) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 32-7, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction.
(c) To prohibit the placement of any manufactured homes, except
in an existing manufactured home park or existing
manufactured home subdivision.
§ 32-7 LAPEER CODE § 32-10
1:628
DISPOSITION OF LOST, ABANDONED OR UNCLAIMED
PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 33-1. Leaving property with City.
No person shall leave or cause to be left any property within the custody of
the City of Lapeer or upon any premises owned or controlled by the City of
Lapeer except by the express consent of the City of Lapeer.
§ 33-2. Expenses for safekeeping of lost or stolen property.
For any and all property coming into the possession of the City of Lapeer
in violation of § 33-1, including lost, stolen, abandoned or other property
surrendered to any agent of the City, or recovered by any agent of the City,
other than motor vehicles, the City of Lapeer is hereby authorized to charge
a reasonable fee for services rendered in the safekeeping of said property,
plus all other expenses incurred in moving, packaging, storing, handling, or
otherwise safekeeping of said property.
§ 33-3. Custody of property; conditions prior to release.
The City Manager shall have custody of said property. The property shall be
surrendered to the true owner or last lawful possessor upon proper proof
thereof and upon payment of the charges as provided herein; provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed as obligating
release of property being held as evidence or pursuant to court order.
§ 33-4. Disposition of money.
After the expiration of six months from the date the City first acquired
custody of any money, said money shall be placed in the general fund of the
City of Lapeer.
§ 33-5. Disposition of property other than money.
If any article is not claimed and charges paid within six months from the
date the City first acquired custody, the City Manager may proceed to sell
the articles at public sale in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Prior to any public sale, the Lapeer City Manager shall post a notice
thereof in the Lapeer City Hall and shall publish said notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Lapeer at least one week
prior to sale.
B. Said notice of publication shall describe any property held for sale,
together with the time and place of public sale at which said property
may be purchased by the highest bidder. The highest bidder shall
receive a bill of sale for the property purchased form the City of Lapeer.
C. If no bids received for the purchase of any property, it shall be
conclusively presumed that said property is of no value, and it shall be
§ 32-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-5
1:629
§ 33-6. Disposition of proceeds.
After the holding of the public sale, the money received from such sale, after
deducting the cost of conducting the sale and all expenses incurred in the
safekeeping of said property, to the extent permitted by law, shall be turned
over to the City Treasurer to be credited to the general fund.
§ 33-7. Liability.
Neither the Lapeer City Manager nor the Manager's representative or
designee shall be liable to the owner of property disposed of in the manner
provided by this chapter.
§ 33-8. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to property being disposed of
pursuant to the direction or order of any court or magistrate, or to motor
vehicles, or to contraband or other forfeited property, where other statutory
sale procedures are provided.
§ 33-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on the 15th day of June 1979.
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
TAX INCREMENT FINANCE AUTHORITY
destroyed or otherwise disposed of as directed by the Lapeer City
Commission.
§ 33-5 LAPEER CODE § 33-9
1:630
ARTICLE I
Tax Increment Financing Plan and Development Plan No. 1
[Adopted 5-19-1982 (Ch. 35 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 35-1. Purpose.
This is an article to encourage economic development and activity and to
promote growth within an area in the City of Lapeer.
§ 35-2. Establishment of Tax Increment Financing Plan No. 1 and
Development Plan No. 1.
The Tax Increment Financing Plan and Development Plan adopted by the
Tax Increment Financing Authority of the City of Lapeer on April 22, 1982,
are hereby established and approved. The Tax Increment Financing Plan
and Development Plan are authorized by Act No. 450 of the Public Acts of
198085 and shall be implemented in accordance with its provisions.
§ 35-3. Effective date.
This article shall become effective May 19, 1982.
85.Editor's Note: Said act was repealed by PA 2018, No. 57, effective 1-1-2019. See now the
Recodified Tax Increment Financing Act, MCLA § 125.4201 et seq. (PA 2018, No. 57).
§ 35-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-3
1:631

ARTICLE II
Tax Increment Financing Plan and Development Plan No. 2
[Adopted 5-18-1983 (Ch. 37 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 35-4. Purpose.
This article to encourage economic development and activity and to
promote growth within an area in the City of Lapeer.
§ 35-5. Establishment of Tax Increment Financing Plan No. 2 and
Development Plan No. 2.
The Tax Increment Financing Plan Number Two and Development Plan
Number Two adopted by the Tax Increment Finance Authority of the City of
Lapeer on March 28, 1983, and modified by the Lapeer City Commission on
May 5, 1983, are hereby established and approved with the modifications
of May 5, 1983. The Tax Increment Financing Plan Number Two and
Development Plan Number Two are authorized by Act No. 450 of the Public
Acts of 198086 and shall be implemented in accordance with its provisions.
§ 35-6. Effective date.
This article shall become effective May 18, 1983.
86.Editor's Note: Said act was repealed by PA 2018, No. 57, effective 1-1-2019. See now the
Recodified Tax Increment Financing Act, MCLA § 125.4201 et seq. (PA 2018, No. 57).
§ 35-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-6
1:633
Chapter 36
LAPEER DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 35-6 LAPEER CODE § 35-6
1:634
ARTICLE I
Lapeer Downtown Development Authority
[Adopted 11-24-1982 (Ch. 36 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ 36-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lapeer Downtown
Development Authority Ordinance."
§ 36-2. Purpose. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
The purpose of this article shall be to establish a Downtown Development
Authority pursuant to Act 197 of 1975, which was repealed and recodified
under the Recodified Tax Increment Financing Authority Act, Act 57 of 2018
(the "Act").87 The Act provides for the continuation of the taxing authority
as authorized and established pursuant to Act 197 of 1975 to define the
boundaries of the downtown district; to provide for the number of members
for the Board governing the Authority; and to provide for all other matters
necessary and related thereto.
§ 36-3. Definitions.
The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given to
them in the Act or as hereinafter in this section provided, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. As used in this article, the following
terms have the meaning provided:
ACT — Act 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 as repealed and
recodified under the Recodified Tax Increment Financing Authority Act, Act
57 of 2018.88[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
AUTHORITY — The Lapeer Downtown Development Authority created by
this article.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER — The Mayor of the City of Lapeer.
THE AGENCY WHICH IS CHIEFLY RESPONSIBLE FOR PLANNING IN THE
MUNICIPALITY — The Lapeer City Planning Commission.
§ 36-4. Determination of necessity.
The Lapeer City Commission hereby ratifies its earlier determination that
it is necessary for the best interests of the public to halt property value
deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in its
business district, to eliminate the cause of the deterioration, and to promote
economic growth by establishing a Downtown Development Authority
pursuant to the Act.
87.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.4201 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.4201 et seq.
§ 36-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-5
1:635
§ 36-5. Creation of authority.
There is hereby created, pursuant to the Act, a Downtown Development
Authority for the City of Lapeer, Michigan. The Authority shall be a public
body corporate and shall be known and exercise its power under the name
of the "Lapeer Downtown Development Authority."
§ 36-6. Powers and duties.
§ 36-7. Boundaries.
The Lapeer Downtown Development Authority shall exercise its powers and
duties within the downtown district, the boundaries of which are as follows:
A. The Authority shall develop whatever plans are appropriate, in the
opinion of the Lapeer City Commission, to aid in the economic growth of
the downtown district. Once the plans are approved by the Lapeer City
Commission, the Authority shall implement the plans for developments
in the downtown districts so as to best achieve the goals set by the
Lapeer City Commission consistent with the purpose of the Act.
B. The Authority shall also have all the powers and duties as set forth in
the Act.
A. Beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of Calhoun and
State Street; thence east along the north line of State Street to the
north line of Law Street; thence northeasterly along said north line of
Law Street to the east line of Saginaw Street; thence northwesterly
along said east line of Saginaw Street 120 feet more or less to the south
line of Mill Street; thence northeasterly along said south line of Mill
Street to the northeasterly corner of Lot 14, Block 16, of the original
plat of the City of Lapeer, Northeast Division; thence southeasterly
along the east line of Lots 14 through 8 of said Block 16 to the north
bank of the Flint River; thence southerly along an intermediate traverse
line of said river to its intersection with the north line of Genesee
Street; thence westerly along the north line of Genesee Street to the
west line of Monroe Street; thence northerly along the west line of
Monroe Street to the northwest corner of Monroe Street and Liberty
Street, thence easterly along the north line of Liberty Street to the west
line of Calhoun Street, thence northerly along the west line of Calhoun
Street to the point of beginning; [Amended 7-27-1983]
B. DDA westerly expansion. Beginning at the intersection of center lines of
Genesee Street and Monroe Street, thence northerly along the center
line of Monroe Street to the center line of Liberty Street; thence
westerly along the center line of Liberty Street to the center line of
Harrison Street as shown and described on the original plat of the City
of Lapeer, Northwest Quarter, said center line being 30 feet westerly of
the northwest corner of Block 68 of said original plat, Northwest
Quarter; thence southerly along the center line of said Harrison Street
to the center line of Genesee Street; thence easterly along the center
§ 36-5 LAPEER CODE § 36-7
1:636
§ 36-8. Governing Board. [Amended 12-29-1982]
The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board as
provided for in the Act. The Board shall consist of 12 members in addition
to the Mayor.
§ 36-9. Director's bond.
If the Board of the Authority employs a director, the bond required to be
furnished by the director shall be in the penal sum of $25,000, payable to
the Authority for use and benefit of the Authority and filed with the Lapeer
City Clerk.
§ 36-10. Termination of authority.
An Authority which has completed the purpose for which it was organized
shall be dissolved by ordinance of the City of Lapeer. The property and
assets remaining after the termination shall belong to the City of Lapeer.
line of Genesee Street to the point of beginning; and [Added
5-11-2014]
C. DDA easterly expansion. Part of the northeast quarter of Section 5 and
the northwest quarter of Section 4, T7N, R10E, commencing at the
intersection of the center lines of Genesee Street and the Flint River,
thence northerly along the center line of Flint River to the south line of
the of Audubon Park Addition to the City of Lapeer; thence continue
northeasterly along Flint River center line to the west line of said
Audubon Park to the point of beginning. Thence from point of beginning
northerly along the westerly line of said Audubon Park to the northwest
corner of Lot 13 in Block 1 of said Audubon Park; Thence northeasterly
along the North line extended of lots 13, 12, 11 and 6 Block 1; Lots 20
and 11 Block 2; Lots 20, 19, 18, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13, 12, 11 Block 3; Lots
20 and 11 Block 4 to the west line of Nightingale Avenue; thence
northwesterly along the west line of Nightingale Avenue to its
intersection with the south line of Oregon Street; thence westerly along
the south line of Oregon Street to the center line of Railroad Street;
thence southerly along the center line of Railroad Street to the center
line of Park Street; thence westerly along the center line of Park Street
to the easterly line of abandoned MCRR right-of-way; thence
northwesterly along the easterly line of said abandoned right-of-way to
the north traverse line of the Flint River; thence southwesterly along
said river traverse line to Flint River center line; thence southwesterly,
then southerly, then southeasterly along said river center line to the
West line of Audubon Park Addition to the City of Lapeer and point of
beginning. [Added 5-11-2014]
§ 36-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-11
1:637
§ 36-11. Severability.
If any provision of this article shall be held to be invalid, the invalidity of
such provision shall not affect any other provision, and for this purpose, the
provisions of this article are severable.
§ 36-11 LAPEER CODE § 36-11
1:638
ARTICLE II
Downtown Development Authority Tax Increment Financing Plan
and Development Plan
[Adopted 6-21-2004; amended 6-16-20104 (Ch. 40 of the 1978
General Ordinances)]
§ 36-12. Purpose.
This is an article to amend the Tax Increment Financing Plan and
Development Plan of the Downtown Development Authority of the City of
Lapeer previously adopted in this article.
§ 36-13. Adoption of amended and restated Tax Increment
Financing Plan and Development Plan.
The development plan as amended and restated in 2014 and the Tax
Increment Financing Plan 2014-2024, adopted by the Downtown
Development Authority of the City of Lapeer on April 23, 2014, are hereby
approved. The development plan as amended and restated in 2014 and
the Tax Increment Financing Plan 2014-2024 amend and restate the
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan that were approved by
the City Commission on June 21, 2004.
§ 36-14. Effective date.
These ordinance amendments shall become effective June 19, 2014.
§ 36-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-14
1:639
Chapter 37
(RESERVED)
Chapter 38
BLIGHT
§ 38-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight in the
City of Lapeer by the prevention or elimination of contributing factors and
causes of blight which exist or which may in the future exist in the City of
Lapeer.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
The following words or terms, when used herein, shall be deemed to have
the meanings set forth below:
BLIGHTED STRUCTURE — Any dwelling, garage, or outbuilding, or any
factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse, or any other structure or
part of a structure which:[Amended 3-30-1988]
BUILDING MATERIAL — Any lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks,
plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or
equipment, shingles, mortar, cement, nails, screws, or other material
commonly used in the construction or repair of any buildings or structures.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Lapeer City Building Inspector, any
Lapeer City police officer, or any other person designated by the Lapeer City
Commission to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
JUNK — Any abandoned, discarded, unusable, or unused objects or
equipment including, but not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans, implements, parts of motor vehicles, tires, machinery, cloth,
rubber, bottles, any metals, boxes, cartons, or crates.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Because of fire, wind, other natural disaster, or physical deterioration,
is no longer habitable as a dwelling or useful for the purpose for which
it was originally intended;
A.
Is partially completed and which is not presently being constructed
under an existing, valid building permit issued by or under the authority
of the City of Lapeer;
B.
C. Is not structurally sound, weathertight, waterproof or verminproof; or
Is not covered by a water-resistant paint or other waterproof covering
so as to protect said structure from the adverse effects of the elements
or from physical deterioration.
D.
§ 36-14 LAPEER CODE § 38-2
1:640
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation.
VACANT BUILDINGS — Any building which is unoccupied and which is
not securely locked, with the windows glazed or neatly boarded up and
protected against the elements and from vandals and rodents and other
animals.
§ 38-3. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 12-28-1988]
Except as may otherwise be permitted by the holding of a specific business
license or by other City of Lapeer ordinance, no person in the City of Lapeer
shall:
§ 38-4. Enforcement. [Amended 1-10-1996]
A. Store, accumulate, or permit the storage or accumulation of junk on
premises owned, leased, rented, or occupied by him.
B. Store, accumulate, or permit the storage or accumulation of any
building materials on property owned, leased, rented or occupied by
him for any period longer than reasonably necessary for the immediate
use of such materials, but in no event longer than 60 days.
C. Maintain or permit the maintenance or existence of any vacant building
on property owned, leased, rented or occupied by him.
D. Maintain or permit the maintenance or existence of any blighted
structure on property owned, leased, rented or occupied by him.
E. Store or permit the storage of firewood on property owned, leased,
rented or occupied by him except in a neat, orderly stack to a height no
greater than five feet. The storage of firewood shall be restricted to the
rear yard or an interior side yard of the premises.
A. Before commencing prosecution under this chapter, for the first
violation, the enforcement officer shall notify the violator(s) of the
existence of a violation under § 38-3 above. Such notice shall be in
writing and served upon the violator(s), either personally or by firstclass
mail sent to the last known address of the violator(s) or to the
common address of the property upon which the violation exists. The
violator(s) shall be given five days from the date of personal service or
seven days from the date of mailing the notice in which to remedy the
violation.
B. Prosecution may be commenced against a violator(s), without prior
notice, in any instance where a violation notice had previously been
sent, within the previous 12 months, relating to the same address.
C. Each day that a violation under this chapter continues to exist shall be
considered a separate violation subject to the penalties hereinafter set
forth.
§ 38-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-5
1:641
§ 38-5. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with the notice given by the enforcement officer within
the time allowed shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 38-6. Appeal.
Where the enforcement of any part of this chapter constitutes a hardship,
and upon appeal by the proprietor, the City Commission may waive any such
part of this chapter as it deems necessary.
§ 38-7. Severability.
The sections and provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable and
any portion which is declared inoperative or invalid for any reasons by a
court of competent jurisdiction shall in no way affect the remaining sections
or provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 39
(RESERVED)
Chapter 40
(RESERVED)
Chapter 41
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 41-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Appearance Ticket
Authorization Ordinance."
§ 41-2. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to identify and authorize certain
public servants of the City to issue and serve appearance tickets as provided
by Public Act No. 366 of 1984 (MCLA § 764.9c et seq.).
§ 41-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
§ 38-5 LAPEER CODE § 41-3
1:642
APPEARANCE TICKET — A complaint or written notice, on a form
determined by the attorney general, state court administrator and director
of the department of state police as modified with the prior approval of
said state officials to accommodate local enforcement and court procedures
and practices, issued and subscribed by a public servant authorized by
this chapter, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local
criminal court at a designated future time in connection with an alleged
designated violation of a City ordinance for which the maximum permissible
penalty does not exceed 90 days in jail and/or fine of $500. This chapter
shall not apply to civil infractions written as uniform traffic citations or as
authorized under the Uniform Traffic Code.
ISSUE — Preparing an appearance ticket by placing on it all known and
available information required on the ticket for the alleged violation and
person to whom it is directed.
SERVE — Personal delivery or mailing by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, delivery restricted to addressee, receipt of which is
acknowledged by signature of the addressee on the return receipt.
§ 41-4. Authorized officials.
Pursuant to MCLA § 764.9c (1) and (2), the City Manager, Building Official,
ordinance officer, any member of the police department or fire department,
and such other officers, employees, inspectors or public servants of the
City who are authorized or responsible for the enforcement of one or
more City ordinances pursuant to state law, City ordinances and codes or
resolutions of the City Commission, are hereby authorized to issue and
serve appearance tickets when they have reasonable cause to believe that
a person has violated a City ordinance, enforcement of which is the
responsibility or within the authority of the public servant or applicable
statute has occurred pursuant to MCLA § 764.9f.
§ 41-5. Responsibility for enforcement.
Except where otherwise specifically required by ordinance, any police
officer, building enforcement officer or other person charged with enforcing
any City ordinance as set forth in § 41-4 above may proceed as provided in
this section upon discovering a violation of a City ordinance. The officer or
other person enforcing a City ordinance may issue an appearance ticket,
otherwise known as a "citation," on forms prepared by the City. Blanks on
the form shall be filled in, informing the person receiving the ticket of the
following information:
A. The date of the alleged violation.
B. The nature of the alleged violation, such as "driving 40 miles per hour in
a 35 miles per hour zone," or "failure to obtain a building permit."
C. The place where the alleged violation took place.
D. The number of the ordinance and section violated.
§ 41-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-5
1:643
§ 41-6. Warning ticket.
§ 41-7. Other remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City or any authorized officer
from proceeding by any other enforcement method.
Chapter 42
(RESERVED)
Chapter 43
(RESERVED)
Chapter 44
(RESERVED)
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
Chapter 46
CEMETERIES
§ 46-1. Intent.
This is a chapter to provide for the health, safety, welfare and preservation
of the Mt. Hope Cemetery and the Oakdale Cemetery; to regulate conduct
of those persons entering on cemetery grounds, and conduct during
ceremonies conducted in the cemeteries.
§ 46-2. Conduct in cemetery.
No person shall, in Mt. Hope or in Oakdale Cemetery:
E. A date, time and place when the matter will be heard in court.
A. In lieu of issuance of an appearance ticket for any ordinance violation
as authorized herein, any police officer or other person enforcing a City
ordinance may issue a warning ticket. The warning ticket shall contain
the information required in § 41-5A through D of this chapter.
B. No court appearance and no fine shall be involved in any warning
ticket.
§ 41-5 LAPEER CODE § 46-2
1:644
§ 46-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Throw, discard or leave any papers, litter, garbage or rubbish, unless
the same is deposited in containers furnished by the City for this
purpose.
B. Pick or mutilate any flowers, either wild or domestic, or disturb any
tree, shrub or other plant material.
C. Possess, transport or consume any alcoholic beverage.
D. Permit any dog (except leader dogs for the blind), cat, or other domestic
animal to enter or remain in the cemetery.
E. Discharge any firearm. This prohibition shall not apply to volleys
authorized by the Sexton at burial or memorial services or to cemetery
employees or police officers when such discharge is done in the course
of employment.
F. Discharge any BB gun or pellet gun. This prohibition shall not apply to
cemetery employees or police officers when such discharge is done in
the course of employment.
G. Plant trees, flowers, weeds or vegetables without the consent of the
Sexton.
H. Operate any motor vehicle, as defined in Chapter 14, Vehicles and
Traffic, of the Code of the City of Lapeer in a manner which is
prohibited by the provisions of Chapter 14.
I. Operate or ride as a passenger on any motorcycle, motorbike, minibike,
skateboard, go-cart or snowmobile. This prohibition shall not
apply to police officers or cemetery employees traveling to, from or in
the course of their employment.
J. Who is under the age of 18 years, ride any bicycle unless accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian.
K. Use cemetery property as a shortcut or an area in which to learn
driving.
L. Operate a motor vehicle or bicycle off the established roads unless
permission is given in writing by the Sexton.
M. Start or maintain any fire.
N. Enter, remain in, use or occupy any portion of the cemetery between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless prior written approval has
been obtained from the Sexton.
O. Use cemetery grounds as a park, playground or for recreational
purposes, including, but not limited to, hitting golf balls, playing
football, baseball, or throwing frisbees.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-3
1:645
Chapter 47
(RESERVED)
Chapter 48
COST RECOVERY
§ 48-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to enable the City to require reimbursement
from:
§ 48-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ACCIDENT, INCLUDING NATURAL DISASTER — An unforeseen or
unexpected happening or occurrence which of itself causes great harm
or damage, or which creates the potential for great harm or damage to
individuals and/or property, and which requires immediate and prudent
A. Persons violating § 46-2D, F, G, I, J, K, L, N and/or O shall be
responsible for a civil infraction with a maximum fine of $500.
[Amended 9-19-2011]
B. Persons violating § 46-2H shall be subject to the same penalty as
contained in Chapter 14 for the section violated.
C. Persons violating § 46-2A, B, C, E and M shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $500 and/or
imprisonment for 90 days, or both.
A. Those responsible for (either intentionally, accidentally, or as a result of
actions by others) or owning or controlling property affected by, the
leaking, spilling, releasing or allowing certain hazardous substances or
materials to escape containment, or for damaged and/or downed power
lines, electric service lines, gas mains, gas service conduits, water
mains, sanitary sewer mains, storm sewer mains, occupancy leads,
telephone lines, cable television lines, traffic signals or signs; thereby
requiring the City and/or its agents, to provide emergency containment,
cleaning, and/or disposal of hazardous substances or materials, or for
the securing and prudent monitoring of the site of an accident or
natural disaster, including those involving public or private utilities.
B. Those responsible for (either intentionally, accidentally, or as a result of
actions by others) or owning or controlling property affected by or
involved in an emergency incident including bomb threats, vehicle fires,
illegal fires, extrication from vehicles involved in accidents, and
accident-related cleanup.
§ 46-3 LAPEER CODE § 48-2
1:646
securing and monitoring by the City, and/or agents of the City, to reduce the
potential for such damage, but not including emergency incidents.
BOMB THREAT — The verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive
device which if discharged as threatened would:
DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES OR MATERIALS — Any
substance (including gases or vapors) which if spilled, leaked, or otherwise
released from its container, is dangerous or harmful to the environment or
human or animal life, health, or safety, or otherwise constitutes a danger,
threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or welfare. Hazardous
materials shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as chemicals
and gases, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum based
products, poisons, biologic agents, flammable, combustibles, hazardous
wastes, or corrosives. The Fire Chief or the Chief's designee shall have
reasonable discretion to determine whether any particular substance
constitutes a hazardous material.
EMERGENCY INCIDENT — A bomb threat, vehicle fire, an illegal fire,
extrication from vehicles involved in accidents, and accident-related
cleanup.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The providing, sending and/or utilization of
public works, police, fire and/or rescue services by the City at an emergency
incident or at an incident involving release of a dangerous or hazardous
substance or material, or an accident requiring immediate and prudent
securing and monitoring by the City and/or agents of the City.
EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE —
ILLEGAL FIRE — A fire set or determined to have been set in violation of
a federal, state or local law and shall include an arson fire, a fire set in
violation of a "no burning" ban or order and/or a fire set without a required
permit.
A. Violate a federal, state or local law; or
B. Cause property damage and/or personal injury or death.
The expense for an emergency incident shall be according to a fee
schedule adopted by the Lapeer City Commission.
A.
For all other emergency responses, the direct costs incurred by the
City in making an appropriate emergency response to an accident or
incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue
services, public works and/or other City personnel, or the services
of other agents of the City, at the scene of an incident or accident.
Related administrative costs, which for agents of the City shall be 15%
of the actual charge to the City, accruing after the occurrence of such
incident or accident, are also included. Such costs and expenses shall
include the salaries or wages, workers' compensation benefits, and
fringe benefits of the personnel responding to the incident or accident
and the costs of equipment and materials used.
B.
§ 48-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-2
1:647
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government
entity or any other legal entity responsible for an emergency incident or any
owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of real and/or personal property
from which, onto which or related to which there is a public safety or fire
emergency incident and their heirs, estates, successors and assigns.
§ 48-3. Duty to remove and clean up.
It shall be the duty of any person, firm, corporation, public or private
utility, or any other entity directly or indirectly causing, contributing to,
or allowing the leakage, spillage or any other release of dangerous or
hazardous substances or materials, or owning or controlling property
affected thereby or requiring the securing and monitoring of sites or
locations of accidents and/or natural disasters, including downed power
lines and electric service lines, ruptured gas mains, gas service conduits,
water mains, occupancy leads, telephone lines, or cable television lines,
to immediately secure, monitor, and clean up the area or location in such
manner that the area or location involved is fully restored to the condition
existing prior to such occurrence. The City shall have no duty to contain,
clean up or dispose of any release of hazardous substances or materials,
or other materials, but in emergency situations, the Fire Chief or Chief
of Police, or their designees, shall have the authority to take whatever
action is reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the general public including securing and monitoring sites of accidents or
providing for or arranging for the containment, removal or clean up of any
hazardous substances or materials. The City shall inspect the site to insure
that cleanup has been fully completed.
§ 48-4. Failure to remove and clean up.
Any person or entity failing to comply with § 48-3, and/or where a nonemergency
incident, emergency response is provided by the City, shall be
liable to the City and shall reimburse the City for all costs and expenses,
including the costs incurred by the City or any agents the City engages,
for the complete abatement, cleanup, restoration and/or securing of the
affected area.
§ 48-5. Submittal of bill.
The Department of Financial Services shall, within 10 days of receiving
itemized costs incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for the
same by first-class mail or personal delivery to any person or entity liable
for these expenses as previously enumerated under this chapter. The bill
shall require full payment within 30 days from date of billing.
§ 48-6. Enforcement.
If any person or entity fails to reimburse the City as above provided, the City
shall have the right to bring an action in the appropriate court to collect
§ 48-2 LAPEER CODE § 48-6
1:648
such costs. If such person or entity is the owner of real property affected
or partially affected by the release of hazardous materials, or requiring
emergency securement or monitoring, the City shall have the right to add
any and all costs of cleanup, restoration and/or of any emergency response,
to the tax roll of such property and to levy and collect such costs in the same
manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against
said property.
Chapter 49
TREES
§ 49-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tree Ordinance of the
City of Lapeer."
§ 49-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular
include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY — The City of Lapeer.
LARGE TREES — Those trees attaining a height of 45 feet or more at
maturity.
MEDIUM TREES — Those trees attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet at
maturity.
MUNICIPAL ARBORIST — The person(s) designated by the City Manager
and assigned to enforce and otherwise carry out the provisions of this
chapter.
PARK — All City parks having individual names.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY LINE — The person owning such property as shown by the
property tax records at the City.
PUBLIC PLACES — All other grounds owned or controlled by the City.
PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS — All shade and ornamental trees, shrubs,
bushes, and all other woody vegetation, now or hereafter growing in any
street right-of-way, public parks, or public places.
SMALL TREES — Those trees attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet at maturity.
§ 48-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:649
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway,
including alleys, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
TREE LAWN — That part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk
or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the
street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
§ 49-3. City Tree Commission.
§ 49-4. Municipal Arborist.
A. Establishment. There is hereby created a commission to be known as
the "City Tree Commission." The City Tree Commission shall be
comprised of the City Manager, Superintendent of Parks, Director of the
Department of Public Services, and the Director of the Parks and
Recreation Department.
B. Duties. The duties of the City Tree Commission shall be as follows:
(1) To study and determine the needs of the City in connection with its
tree planting and maintenance programs.
(2) To recommend to the City Commission the type and kind of trees to
be planted in street or highway rights-of-way, parks or other public
places, and to recommend appropriate programs and procedures
for the maintenance of trees in public rights-of-way, parks and
other public places.
(3) To assist the City Commission and citizens of the City by the
dissemination of information regarding the selection, planting, and
maintenance of trees within the City, whether the same be on
public or private property.
(4) To recommend to the City Commission such ordinance or
regulation amendments concerning the tree program and activities
as may, from time to time, be appropriate.
A. Authority. The Municipal Arborist shall have the authority to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Supervision. The Municipal Arborist shall have the authority and duty
to supervise or inspect all work done under a permit issued in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
C. Master Street Tree Plan. The Municipal Arborist shall work with the
City Tree Commission to formulate a Master Street Tree Plan which
may, among other things, identify the species and location of trees to be
planted in City streets, parks, and other public places. The Master
Street Tree Plan shall be approved by the City Commission. From and
after the effective date of the Master Street Tree Plan, or any
amendment thereof, all tree planting shall conform to that plan.
§ 49-2 LAPEER CODE § 49-5
1:650
§ 49-5. Permits for utility companies.
§ 49-6. Permits; general.
A. Permit required. Except as provided in Subsection E, no public utility
company shall plant, spray, fertilize, prune, remove, trim, cut above
ground, or otherwise disturb any tree in any street, park, or other
public place without first having obtained a permit from the Municipal
Arborist.
B. Application. Applications for permits may be obtained from the City
Clerk's office or from the Municipal Arborist and shall be made not less
than five business days in advance of the time the proposed work is to
commence.
C. Standards of issuance. The Municipal Arborist shall issue the permit
provided for herein if the proposed work is reasonably necessary and
the proposed method and manner of the work to be performed complies
with the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice and
other regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
D. Notice of completion. Notice of completion of the work shall be given to
the Municipal Arborist within five business days after the work has
been completed so the Municipal Arborist may inspect the work to
insure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit.
E. Emergency. In cases of emergency, such as ice storms, rain storms,
wind storms, snow storms, accidents, or other suddenly occurring
circumstances, a utility company may do such cutting, trimming and
removing of trees in street rights-of-way, parks or other public places,
as may be reasonably necessary to restore or maintain utility service to
the public, without first having obtained a permit. Notice of completion
of said work shall be given to the Municipal Arborist within three
business days after such emergency work has been completed so that
the Municipal Arborist may inspect the work to insure compliance with
the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice and other
applicable regulations contained in this chapter.
A. This section shall not apply to public utility companies.
B. Permit required. No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune,
remove, cut above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree located in any
street, park, or other public place without first filing an application and
procuring a permit from the Municipal Arborist. The person receiving
the permit shall abide by the conditions set forth in the permit and the
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice and other
regulations adopted pursuant tot his chapter.
C. Applications. Applications for permits must be made at the City Hall not
less than five business days in advance of the time the work is to be
done.
§ 49-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-6
1:651
§ 49-7. Rules and regulations.
§ 49-8. Corner clearance.
All shrubs and bushes located in the triangle formed by two right-of-way
lines at the intersection of two streets, and extending for a distance of 25
feet each way from the intersection of the right-of-way lines on any corner
lot within the City, shall be limited to a height of not more than 30 inches
from the top of the curb at street level in order to permit drivers of vehicles
approaching such intersection to have an unobstructed view. Trees existing
in such triangles, whether on private property or in public rights-of-way or
publicly owned property, may continue to be so located provided that all
branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of 12
feet above the roadway surface, and provided there is sufficient spacing
between trees so that there is no vision obstruction creating a potential
hazard for drivers using the street.
D. Standards of issuance. The Municipal Arborist shall issue the permit
provided for herein if the proposed work is reasonably necessary and
the proposed method and manner of work to be performed complies
with the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice and
other regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. Permits shall
contain a date of expiration and the work shall be completed by the
expiration date. Any permit issued under this provision shall be void if
its terms are violated.
E. Notice of completion. Notice of completion shall be given to the
Municipal Arborist within five business days after the work has been
completed in order that the Municipal Arborist may inspect the work to
insure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit.
A. Promulgation and content. The Municipal Arborist is hereby authorized
to make such rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to carry
out the intent of this chapter, provided that such rules are not in conflict
with this or any other law of the City or other appropriate governmental
unit, and provided further that such rules are approved by the City
Commission. The rules and regulations may include, among other
things, information to be included in any permits issued under this
chapter, specifications regarding spacing of trees, species and types of
trees permitted in certain circumstances, details regarding types of
sprays permitted.
B. Adherence. Failure to observe any approved rule or regulation shall be
a violation of this chapter.
C. Availability. Such rules and regulations as are approved by the City
Commission shall be published and available for distribution at the City
Clerk's office.
§ 49-6 LAPEER CODE § 49-9
1:652
§ 49-9. Abuse or mutilation of trees.
With regard to trees in City streets, parks, or public places, unless
specifically authorized by permit, no person shall:
§ 49-10. Interference with Municipal Arborist.
No person shall interfere with, hinder, or attempt to hinder or prevent the
Municipal Arborist or any of his/her designees from the performance of
their duties under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 49-11. Trees constituting obstructions.
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of real property upon which
trees are growing to maintain such trees so the trees do not:
§ 49-12. Private trees.
A. Damage, cut, or carve any such tree.
B. Attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to
such trees.
C. Allow any gaseous, solid or liquid substance which is harmful to such
trees to come into contact with any such tree.
D. Set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the hear thereof
may injure any portion of any such tree.
A. Obstruct or shade streetlights.
B. Obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks.
C. Obstruct the vision of traffic signs.
D. Obstruct the view at any street or alley intersection.
E. In any way present a public menace or hazard. The minimum clearance
of any overhanging potion of any such tree shall be eight feet over
sidewalk, and 12 feet over all streets except those designated as truck
thoroughfares, in which case, the minimum overhang shall be 16 feet.
A. Investigation by Municipal Arborist. The Municipal Arborist or his/her
designee may enter onto private property whereon there is located a
tree, shrub, plant, or part thereof, that is suspected to be a public
nuisance. Such nuisance may include, but is not limited to, any tree,
plant or shrub with an infectious disease or insect problem; dead or
dying trees; a tree, limb, or plant that obstructs streetlights, traffic
signs, or the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; a tree, plant or
shrub that otherwise poses a threat to the general health, safety and
welfare of the public.
§ 49-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-12
1:653
§ 49-13. Severability.
Should any section, clause, or provision of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not affect the validity
of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 49-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to a maximum penalty of 90 days in jail and/or a $500 fine.
Chapter 50
SMOKING IN CITY-CONTROLLED AREAS
§ 50-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the City of Lapeer Smoking Control
Ordinance.
§ 50-2. Findings and purpose.
B. Notice to correct. Should any person owning or occupying real property
fail to maintain trees on such property as required in this chapter, the
Municipal Arborist, or his/her designee, may issue a ten-day notice to
correct such violation.
C. Failure to comply. When a person to whom a notice provided for herein
shall fail to comply with the said notice to correct a violation of this
chapter. It shall be lawful for the City to immediately remove and/or
maintain such tree, plant or shrub creating the violation and bill the
total cost thereof to the occupant of said premises, or the owner of said
premises according to the tax records of the Assessor for City. Failure to
pay any such bill within 30 days from the date thereon shall create a
right in the City to add the amount of such bill to the real property tax
rolls for said property, to be collected the same as other real property
taxes in the City.
A. The Lapeer City Commission does hereby find that:
(1) Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major
contributor to indoor air pollution;
(2) Reliable studies have shown that breathing secondhand smoke is a
significant health hazard for several population groups, including
elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and
individuals with impaired respiratory functions, including
asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease;
§ 49-12 LAPEER CODE § 50-2
1:654
§ 50-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed by the City of Lapeer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any
person who volunteers his or her services for nonprofit.
EMPLOYER — The City of Lapeer, Michigan.
ENCLOSED AREA — All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed
on all sides by solid walls or windows which extend from the floor to the
ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not
(3) Health hazards induced by breathing secondhand smoke include
lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance,
decreased respiratory functions, bronchoconstriction, and
bronchospasm;
(4) Nonsmokers who suffer allergies, respiratory diseases and other ill
effects of breathing secondhand smoke may experience a loss of job
productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of
such adverse reactions;
(5) Courts are increasingly awarding compensation for disability,
workers' compensation, unemployment, and entitlement to
damages under traditional common law tort liabilities;
(6) Smoke is a potential cause of fires, and cigarette and cigar burns
and ash staining on fixtures and furniture cause unnecessary
losses; and
(7) The State of Michigan has passed the Clean Indoor Air Act with
amendment (1986 P.A. 198, as amended by 1988 P.A. 294, 296, and
315,89 and as amended by P.A. 188 of 2009) which states that an
individual shall not smoke in a public place or at a public meeting
except in a designated smoking area. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Accordingly, the City of Lapeer finds and declares that the purpose of
this chapter is:
(1) To protect the public in health and welfare by prohibiting smoking
in enclosed areas of City facilities,; and
(2) To strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who
smoke and the need of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; to
recognize that when these needs conflict, that the need to breathe
smoke-free air shall have priority.
89.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.12601 et seq.
§ 50-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-3
1:655
extend to the ceiling or are not solid. Also, confined space areas such as
trenches and manhole areas are considered enclosed areas.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT OR WORK AREA — Any enclosed area under the
control of the City of Lapeer which employees normally frequent during the
course of employment, including employee lounges, rest rooms, conference
and class rooms, hallways and corridors, entryways and lobbies, stairs and
stairwells, and closets and storerooms and including all City vehicles.
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed, indoor area owned or operated by the City
of Lapeer and used by the general public or serving as a place of work for
public employees or a meeting place for a public body.
SMOKING or SMOKE — Inhaling exhaling burning or carrying any lighted
cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or other lighted smoking device.
§ 50-4. Application of chapter.
All buildings and facilities, enclosed areas, public places, and work areas
owned, operated or controlled by the City of Lapeer shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 50-5. Prohibition of smoking.
§ 50-6. Enforcement.
§ 50-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-19-2011; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
the following penalties:
A. No person shall smoke in a public place, enclosed area, work area, or at
any meeting of a public body in such areas.
B. No person who supervises manages, operated or otherwise controls the
use of a public place, enclosed area, or work area owned, operated, or
controlled by the City of Lapeer shall knowingly and willingly permit a
violation of this chapter, nor shall such a person fail or refuse to
promptly act on a reliable report of a violation of this chapter.
A. Any person observing a violation of this chapter may report it to the
appropriate manager, supervisor, department head, City Manager (or
Manager's designee) or to any peace officer.
B. In addition to any other enforcement action authorized by law, a person
alleging a violation of this chapter may bring a civil action for
appropriate injunctive relief.
A. A civil fine not exceeding $200 for a first violation.
B. A civil fine not exceeding $500 for a second or subsequent violation.
§ 50-3 LAPEER CODE § 50-8
1:656
§ 50-8. Other applicable laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws.
§ 50-9. Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter on the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter, or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
§ 50-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective December 6, 1993.
Chapter 51
(RESERVED)
Chapter 52
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 52-1. Purpose.
This is a chapter to establish procedures and requirements for conducting
special events in the City in order to properly provide for traffic and crowd
control, for street, park, and property maintenance, for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare; and to provide penalties for violation of
this chapter.
§ 52-2. Special event permit required.
No special event, including parades, demonstrations, concerts, fairs,
marches, assemblages, or other gatherings, shall be held upon any City
street, park or other public area of the City unless a permit is first obtained
for such event. Peaceful demonstrations (including lawful picketing)
conducted on public sidewalks so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic are not considered special events.
§ 52-3. Permit application.
Application to conduct a special event shall be made to the City Manager,
in writing, by the person or persons in charge or responsible therefor. All
applications for special event permits shall be made at least 30 days prior
to the date on which the special event is sought to be held, unless the
City Commission waives the time requirement for good cause shown. Such
application shall set forth the following information:
§ 50-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-3
1:657
§ 52-4. Rules or regulations.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and/or
regulations, not in conflict with this chapter, to supplement and specify
in more detail requirements relating to special events, provided that such
rules or regulations are approved by the City Commission. Failure to
observe any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this section shall be a
violation of this chapter. Any rules and/or regulations adopted under this
provision shall be available at the City Clerk's office.
§ 52-5. Considerations for issuance; denial.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the
permit.
B. The name and address of the organization or group involved.
C. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as
director or person in charge of the special event and be responsible for
the conduct thereof.
D. The purpose of the event and the number of persons expected to attend.
E. The date the event is to be conducted and the hours it will commence
and terminate.
F. The specific assembly and dispersal locations, and specific route plans,
if any.
G. Such other information as the City reasonably deems necessary to
properly prepare for and/or evaluate the potential impact on the public
health, safety and welfare.
A. In determining whether to approve a special event permit, the City
Commission may consider any factors reasonably deemed relevant for
the proposed event including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Whether the special event appears to be held for any unlawful
purpose.
(2) Whether it appears the special event may be conducted in a
manner so as to cause a breach of the peace.
(3) Whether the special event will unnecessarily interfere with the
public use of the streets, sidewalks, parks and/or other public
areas.
(4) Whether the special event appears to be primarily for commercial
purposes with no general benefit to the City or the public.
(5) Whether the special event may have some special right or priority
under the law.
§ 52-3 LAPEER CODE § 52-5
1:658
§ 52-6. Restrictions and conditions.
The permit evidencing approval under this chapter may include reasonable
time, place and manner restrictions as a condition to granting any permit
if such restrictions are reasonable and necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 52-7. Prohibited conduct.
§ 52-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Each
person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed.
Chapter 53
PRIVATE ROADS
§ 53-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the design, construction,
inspection, approval, and maintenance of private roads within the City.
§ 53-2. General requirements.
(6) Whether the special event would, in any way, be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.
B. Denials of requests for a special event permit shall be made in writing,
setting forth the reasons for such denial.
A. No person shall knowingly participate in a special event for which no
permit has been obtained.
B. No person shall continue to organize, or participate in the further
planning or organizing, of a special event that is conducted without a
permit after a permit has been denied.
C. No person in a position of influence or control over a special event shall
allow the conduct of a special event without a permit.
D. No person shall violate any condition of a special event permit.
E. No person shall violate any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to
§ 52-4.
§ 52-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-2
1:659
§ 53-3. Requirements for private road approvals.
§ 53-4. Standards for private roads. [Amended 10-15-2003; at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 53-5. Inspections, fees, and permits for private roads.
A. No land division approval, zoning compliance permit, building permit,
or certificate of occupancy shall be issued within the City unless the
parcel or lot fronts on a public street or a private road improved to the
standards of this chapter.
B. Every lot or parcel of land shall have road frontage equal to the
minimum lot width required by the applicable provisions of Chapter 7,
Zoning.
C. Any private road constructed within the City shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
D. Private roads shall not be dedicated to the City.
E. Private roads shall not be maintained by the City.
A. Plans for a private road shall be submitted to the City Planning
Commission for review. Materials submitted shall include:
(1) A legal description and survey of all properties to be served by the
private road, together with a letter from the City Assessor that all
proposed parcels are in compliance with Chapter 7, Zoning, and
Chapter 6, Land Division. [Amended 10-15-2003]
(2) A legal description and survey of the proposed private road
easement.
(3) Drawings showing the existing and proposed structures, roads,
drives, drains and other significant physical features on the
property.
(4) Engineering plans for the proposed private road done by a
registered land surveyor or by licensed civil engineer.
(5) A copy of the proposed, private maintenance agreement to be used.
B. No private road construction shall begin until the Planning Commission
has approved the proposed road by a recorded vote.
A. A private road shall be built in accordance with the City of Lapeer
Construction Specifications, as amended from time to time.
B. A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the City Attorney for
review and approval prior to construction of a private road. The
maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the sale of each lot
served by a private road.
§ 53-2 LAPEER CODE § 53-5
1:660
§ 53-6. Performance bond. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Prior to commencement of construction, the applicant shall file with the
Building Department a cash deposit, money order, cashier check, certified
check, certificate of deposit, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond
acceptable to the City sufficient to cover the total cost of the required road
improvements. When the work is completed by the applicant and approved
by the City, the bond will be released to the applicant.
Chapter 54
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
§ 54-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and welfare of the people of the City of Lapeer, by
establishing minimum standards of duties and responsibilities of parents
and guardians for delinquent acts of their minor children.
§ 54-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DELINQUENT ACTS — Those acts which violate the laws of the United
States, or the statutes of this state or the ordinances of the City, or those
acts which would cause, or tend to cause, a juvenile to come under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court as defined by MCLA
§ 712A.2, but does not include traffic violations classified as civil infractions.
ILLEGAL DRUGS — Any controlled substance, as defined by the Michigan
Public Health Code, obtained without a legal prescription.
JUVENILE DELINQUENT — Those juveniles who engage in any delinquent
act, whose behavior interferes with the rights of others, or whose behavior
menaces the health or welfare of the community.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years residing with a parent.
PARENT — Mother, father, legal guardian or any other person having the
care, or custody of a minor, or any person acting in the parent's stead who
has the care, custody or control of the minor.
A. The City shall not grant final approval for the use of any private road
until the completed road has been inspected for compliance with this
chapter.
B. The City may contract with a public agency or a civil engineer to inspect
or review private road plans or improvements.
C. The City may establish fees to cover the cost of review and inspections.
§ 53-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:661
§ 54-3. Parental duties.
§ 54-4. Notification of parents; record of notification.
§ 54-5. Parental violation and penalty.
A. It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise
reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any
delinquent act.
B. Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable
parental control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent
act are the following parental duties, which require each parent,
independently, to take all reasonable steps:
(1) To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home.
(2) To keep legal firearms locked in places that are inaccessible to
those minors who are not of suitable age, discretion, or maturity to
handle firearms.
(3) To know the Curfew Ordinance of the City of Lapeer,90 and to
require the minor to observe the Curfew Ordinance.
(4) To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to forbid
the minor to be absent from class without parental or school
permission.
(5) To arrange proper supervision for those minors who are not of
suitable age, discretion, or maturity to remain unsupervised, when
the parent must be absent.
(6) To take reasonably necessary precautions to prevent the minor
from maliciously or willfully destroying real, personal, or mixed
property which belongs to the City of Lapeer, or is located in the
City of Lapeer.
(7) To take reasonable precautions to prevent the minor from keeping
stolen property or illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs.
(8) To seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or private
agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary.
A. Whenever a minor is arrested, or detained, for the commission of any
delinquent act within the City of Lapeer, the City of Lapeer Police
Department shall take reasonable steps to contact the parent(s) of that
minor, advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason
therefor, and the parent's responsibility under this chapter.
B. A record of such notification shall be kept by the Lapeer City Police
Department.
90.Editor's Note: See § 19-8, Minor curfew.
§ 54-3 LAPEER CODE § 54-5
1:662
§ 54-6. Severability.
Should any section, subdivision, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared
by the courts to be invalid or unenforceable, such holding shall not affect
the validity or enforceability of the chapter as a whole or of any part thereof,
other than such part(s) so invalidated or declared unenforceable.
Chapter 55
(RESERVED)
Chapter 56
FALSE ALARM CHARGES
§ 56-1. Purpose.
This is a chapter to establish a civil infraction violation for false alarms
for emergency services pursuant to Michigan Public Act 33 of 1951, as
amended;91 to provide additional charges for multiple false alarms and
A. No parent of any minor under the age of 18 years shall fail to exercise
reasonable parental control over such minor.
B. In addition to the provisions of Subsection C of this section, any parent
who has violated any provision of this chapter shall be civilly
responsible for all the damages and costs caused by commission of any
delinquent act by a minor for whom the parent has the care, custody or
control, or caused by any other violation of this chapter by the
parent(s), within the City of Lapeer.
C. A parent violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as follows:
(1) Upon the first conviction of a violation of this chapter, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75, nor more than $500.
(2) Upon the second conviction of a violation of this chapter, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $500,
and in addition, shall be sentenced to probation with the condition
that the parent participate in, through completion, a court
approved, community based treatment program (such as parenting
skills, family services, employment and training, etc.) or, at the
discretion of the court, be imprisoned for a period up to 30 days.
(3) Upon the third or subsequent conviction of a violation of this
chapter, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250,
nor more than $500, and/or, in the discretion of the court,
imprisoned for a period up to 90 days.
91.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 41.801 et seq.
§ 54-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:663
methods for collection of such charges and exemption therefrom; and to
protect the health, safety and welfare of public. It is the purpose of this
chapter to discourage, and recoup expenses incurred for City emergency
services due to, false alarms which cause the City to incur unnecessary
expenses and cause a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of City
residents by diverting emergency personnel and equipment to sites where
no legitimate need exists, thereby creating a risk that the emergency
service provider will take a longer amount of time, or be unable to respond,
to a legitimate call. This chapter has become necessary due to the
proliferation of private fire, carbon monoxide, and intruder alarms and the
corresponding increase in false alarms due to defective, malfunctioning,
overly sensitive, improperly installed or improperly used equipment, or
equipment which triggers an alarm when no legitimate hazard exists.
§ 56-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases set forth below shall have the following
meanings as used in this chapter:
EMERGENCY SERVICES — This phrase shall include any service provided
by, but not limited to, fire vehicles and personnel, rescue vehicles and
personnel, ambulance vehicles and personnel, and police vehicles and
personnel.
FALSE ALARM — The summoning of emergency services as a result of a
fire, carbon monoxide or intruder alarm under circumstances where there is
no fire, carbon monoxide or intruder problem or hazard. This shall include,
but not be limited to, circumstances in which a fire, carbon monoxide or
intruder alarm is triggered due to defective equipment, malfunctioning
equipment, overly sensitive equipment, improper installation or alarm
equipment, or improperly used fire, carbon monoxide or intruder alarms
or equipment which triggers an alarm when no legitimate hazard exists
which, directly or indirectly, calls for emergency services. An intruder alarm
triggered by an animal from the inside of the building where the alarm is
located shall constitute false alarm.
§ 56-3. Charges. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
Restitution charges shall be as set forth in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule
as approved by the City Commission, as amended from time to time, which
shall be hereafter due and payable to the City from a recipient of an
emergency service for the third and any subsequent false alarm within a
three-hundred-sixty-five-day period. Moreover, the Schedule of False Alarm
Fees is in addition to any fines and costs ordered by the District Court.
§ 56-4. Notice of alarm violation. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The City of Lapeer Police and Fire Departments, within seven working
days, shall by first-class mail notify the owner, occupant, and/or person
§ 56-1 LAPEER CODE § 56-4
1:664
in possession or control of the property of the false alarm violation, the
number of false alarm occurrences within 365 days prior to the violation
date, a schedule of false alarm fees, and any applicable violation charges.
§ 56-5. Appeal of alarm violation.
A person wishing to appeal a false alarm violation and the associated fee
may do so pursuant to the normal procedures of the 71A District Court
regarding civil infraction violations.
§ 56-6. Exemptions.
The following properties and services shall be exempt from the provisions
of §§ 56-3 and 56-5 above:
§ 56-7. Obligation.
This chapter does not constitute a contract for the City of Lapeer or
emergency service providers to answer any alarms, whether false or
otherwise. Further, this chapter does not guarantee that the emergency
service providers will respond to any alarm from any source.
§ 56-8. Severability.
Should any provision of this chapter be declared by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not affect the
validity or enforce ability of the balance of this chapter which shall remain
in full force and effect.
A. False alarms recorded within the first 14 days after installation.
B. False alarms caused by railroad trains which are the specific statutory
responsibility of railroad companies.
C. False alarms involving township, county, or other municipal buildings,
grounds and/or property.
D. Emergency services performed outside the jurisdiction of the City
pursuant to a mutual aid contract, or other contract, with another
municipality.
E. False alarms recorded as a result of storms, earthquakes or other
violent conditions beyond the control of owners, occupants or persons
in possession or control.
F. False alarms activated by a person working on the alarm system with
prior notification to the Lapeer Central Dispatch offices.
G. Alarms which can be substantiated as being activated by disruption or
disturbance of telephone company facilities or motor vehicle-utility pole
accidents.
§ 56-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-9
1:665
§ 56-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on the first day of November 1999.
Chapter 57
(RESERVED)
Chapter 58
(RESERVED)
Chapter 59
BUSINESS REGISTRATION
§ 59-1. Purpose.
The purpose of business registration in the City of Lapeer is to promote the
general health, safety and welfare of the citizens by identifying business
locations and operations within the City to enhance the efficient delivery of
City services, including police, fire, water and wastewater services and to
promote compliance with all planning, zoning, building, tax, and all related
City ordinances and codes.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning respectively ascribed to them except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — Any trade, occupation, work, commerce, profession, and all
devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, any of which
are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly on
any premises in this City or anywhere else within its jurisdiction.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, or corporation sharing
in the profits of the business.
§ 59-3. License; registration required.
A. No person shall engage in a business without having first obtained a
business registration from the City of Lapeer in the manner provided
for in this chapter. Any person duly registered on the effective date of
this chapter shall be deemed registered hereunder for the balance of
the current registration year.
B. It shall be the duty of every person or registered business to report any
changes in the information furnished with the current registration
within five business days of such change occurring.
§ 56-9 LAPEER CODE § 59-3
1:666
§ 59-4. License year.
§ 59-5. Registration application.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, every person or business
required to obtain a registration from the City of Lapeer to engage in a
business shall make application for such registration to the City Clerk,
or designee, upon forms provided by the City Clerk, or designee, and
shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for, or
applicable to, the granting of such registration.
§ 59-6. Registration; conditions of issuance.
§ 59-7. Registration fees.
C. Multiple businesses. The granting of a business registration shall not
relieve the person to whom such registration is granted from the
necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for each individual
business.
D. State-licensed business. The granting of a business registration to any
person or business by the state in the operation, conduct or carrying on
of any trade, profession, business, or privilege shall not exempt such
person from the necessity of securing a business registration from the
City if such registration is required by this chapter.
A. The registration year shall begin July 1 of each year and shall terminate
at midnight on June 30 of the following year. No registration will be
issued until the required fees are paid.
B. The registration fees for periods of less than one year shall be the same
as a full registration year and the effective date of such registration
shall commence with the date of issuance thereof.
A. The issuing of a business registration from the City of Lapeer does not
waive mandated licenses (i.e., state, health, building inspection, fire
inspection, etc.).
B. Acceptance by any person or business of a business registration under
this chapter shall constitute permission to any officer of the City to
enter upon and inspect the licensed premises at all reasonable times.
A. The initial fee, renewal fee, and late fees for registration shall be set
forth in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule as approved by the City
Commission.
B. No registration shall be issued until the required fees are paid.
C. All fees for the renewal of any business registration which are not paid
at the time such fees are due shall incur late fees as outlined in the City
of Lapeer Fee Schedule.
§ 59-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-8
1:667
§ 59-8. Registration transferal.
No registration may be transferred from one business to another. A
registration may be transferred for a change in location of a business within
the City of Lapeer's jurisdiction. Each registration holder shall immediately
notify the Clerk's office, or designee, of any change in location of a business,
address, or any other change in the information provided in the registration
application.
§ 59-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $500 and/or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and any other relief that may be
imposed by the court.
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
Chapter 61
(RESERVED)
Chapter 62
CIVIL INFRACTIONS
§ 62-1. Establishment and purpose.
A procedure to handle certain violations of City ordinances as civil
infractions, subject to the provisions below, is hereby established. To
accommodate the City's desire to address these matters as such, an
infraction procedure has been established for the purpose of
decriminalizing penalties for violations of ordinances of the City and for the
purpose of providing a convenient and practical forum for the hearing and
determination of cases arising out of the violation.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are herein defined:
ACT — Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, as codified in
MCLA § 600.101 et seq. and MCLA § 600.8701 et seq.
AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL — Any public officer, agent or personnel
authorized by ordinance to issue municipal civil infractions and any police
officer having jurisdiction within the City.
§ 59-8 LAPEER CODE § 62-2
1:668
FINE; FINE SCHEDULE — The penalty to be imposed for an infraction is
a fine or other civil penalty. The appropriate fine shall be determined by
reference to the fine schedule in § 62-4 below. The procedure established
herein shall be the exclusive procedure for imposing a fine. However, this
section shall not be read to prohibit in any way alternative remedies,
including abatement, nor shall the City be prohibited from recovering any
expense incurred in an abatement procedure.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION — An act or omission that is prohibited
by any ordinance, but which is not a crime, and for which civil sanctions,
including without limitation, fines, damages, expenses, and costs, may be
ordered, as authorized by MCLA § 600.8727, as amended. A municipal civil
infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this chapter that
is a criminal offense.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION — A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION — A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized official, directing a person to appear in court
regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction
violation by the person cited.
PERSON — A person, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
§ 62-3. Application.
The procedures set forth herein shall apply to those code and ordinance
violations classified as civil infractions by the City.
§ 62-4. General penalties and sanctions for violations of ordinances;
continuing violations; injunctive relief.
A. Unless a violation of an ordinance is specifically designated in the
ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed
to be a misdemeanor.
B. The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be
a civil fine in an amount as provided by this chapter or any ordinance,
plus any cost, damages, expenses, and other sanctions, as authorized
under MCLA § 600.8727, as amended, and other applicable laws, not to
exceed the sum $500, unless otherwise provided by law.
(1) Unless otherwise specifically provided for, the civil fine for a
particular municipal civil infraction violation shall be not less than
$150, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction.
(2) Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a
person of any ordinance provision. As used in this section,
"repeated offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal
civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision:
committed by a person within any six-month period, unless some
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-4
1:669
§ 62-5. Action; commencement.
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing
the alleged violator to appear in court. The Uniform Traffic Citation and
Complaint form may be used as the citation, complaint, and summons for
purposes of enforcing civil infractions.
§ 62-6. Citations; issuance and service.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized
officials as follows:
other period is specifically provided by ordinance; and for which
the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible.
Unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance for a particular
municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat
offense shall be as follows:
(a) The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
no less than $200, plus costs.
(b) The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $250, plus
costs.
(c) The fine for any offense which is a third repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500, plus
costs.
(d) A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited by any
ordinance or any omission or failure to act where the act is
required by any ordinance.
(e) Each day on which any violation of any ordinance continues
constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties
or sanctions as a separate offense.
(f) In addition to any remedies available at law, the City may bring
an action for an injunction or other process against a person to
restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of the ordinance.
A. The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
B. The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the District
Court.
C. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation shall
be filed with the District Court. Copies of the citation shall be retained
by the authorized official and issued to the alleged violator as provided
by MCLA § 600.8705.
§ 62-4 LAPEER CODE § 62-6
1:670
§ 62-7. Contents.
D. A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized official
shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the
citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint
and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above
the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of
perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my
information, knowledge, and belief."
E. An authorized official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil
infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as
completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.
F. An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if:
(1) Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or
(2) Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for an infraction and if the municipal attorney approves
in writing the issuance of the citation.
G. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized
official as follows:
(1) Except as provided by § 62-6G(2), an authorized official shall
personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.
(2) If the municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of
land, a building, or other structure, a copy of the citation does not
need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be
served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building, or
structure by posting the copy of the citation or attaching the copy
to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall
be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or
structure at the owner's last known address.
A. A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of
the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place
where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
B. Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may
do one of the following:
(1) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance;
§ 62-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-7
1:671
§ 62-8. Effect of statement in explanation or mitigation.
If a defendant has submitted to the court a written statement as provided in
§ 62-7B(2) above, it constitutes a waiver of hearing and consent to judgment
by the court on the basis of the statement and any testimony or written
(2) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or in
person; or
(3) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either
of the following:
(a) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or
district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a
judge is requested by the authorized official or municipal
attorney.
(b) Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
C. The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1) That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with
explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator
must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain
a scheduled date and time for an appearance.
(2) That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for
hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
(3) That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the authorized official.
(4) That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or district court magistrate without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(5) That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
D. The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of
the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or
at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged
violator on the municipal civil infraction.
§ 62-7 LAPEER CODE § 62-8
1:672
statement of the official, officer or other witnesses which may be presented
to the court.
§ 62-9. Trial; burden of proof.
§ 62-10. Enforcement.
A. The trial of a civil infraction shall be by either informal hearing or
formal hearing before the court without a jury. The trial of an infraction
shall not commence until such time as directed by the court.
B. The City shall have the burden of proving the alleged code or ordinance
infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.
C. The defendant may be represented by counsel in a formal hearing only,
but counsel shall not be provided at public expense. If defense counsel
is to appear, written notice shall be provided to the court and the City
prosecuting official prior to the hearing date prior to the date of
hearing, if possible.
D. The person alleged to have committed the infraction may subpoena
witnesses in his/her/its defense as allowed by MCLA § 600.8721.
Likewise, the complaining official or City Attorney, as appropriate, may
also issue subpoenas to witnesses on the City's behalf at the hearing.
E. After due consideration of the evidence and arguments presented at the
hearing, the court shall determine whether the infraction as alleged in
the complaint has been established. If the infraction is not established,
an order dismissing the complaint shall be entered in the court records.
If a determination is made that an infraction has been committed, an
appropriate order shall be entered in the court records. In addition to
any fine, forfeiture, or both, or other civil penalty, the court shall assess
court costs.
A. Delinquent fines, and those brought to default judgment which were
assessed for infractions occurring on real property, may be held as City
liens against the real property and collected in the same manner as
other such debts owing to the City if the owner of property is notified of
the infraction before entry of judgment on the lien docket.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from revoking or denying
any City license or permit held or desired by a person owing a fine to
the City.
C. If any person neglects or refuses to pay a fine imposed within the time
allowed by the court, the court shall have the authority to issue a bench
warrant requiring the defendant to appear and show cause why the
defendant should not be found in contempt of court. In determining
whether or not the person is in contempt, the court shall follow the
procedures set forth in MCLA § 600.8729.
§ 62-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:673
§ 62-11. Severability.
The various parts, sections, and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared
to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby.
§ 62-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on the date of publication.
Chapter 63
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 63-1. Establishment and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of a Fee
Schedule that incorporates a comprehensive listing of fees charged by
the City of Lapeer and to provide for the creation, amendment, or
discontinuance of fees charged by the City of Lapeer.
§ 63-2. Adoption of Fee Schedule. [Amended 8-8-2013]
§ 63-3. Amendments to adopted Fee Schedule.
Amendments to the adopted City of Lapeer Fee Schedule shall be made by
motion of the City Commission.
§ 63-4. Fee authorization.
Each department, office, or other administrative unit of the City of Lapeer
may, subject to authorization by the City Commission, create, amend, or
discontinue user fees or regulatory fees in connection with their
department, office, or other administrative unit. Each fee so created,
amended, or discontinued shall be authorized by amending the City of
Lapeer Fee Schedule.
A. The City Commission shall adopt an annual Fee Schedule.
B. Adoption of the Fee Schedule shall be by motion.
C. Fee Schedule to be named "City of Lapeer Fee Schedule."
D. Effective date of the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule shall be July 1 of each
year, with the exception of the first adopted Fee Schedule, which shall
take immediate effect.
E. In the event the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule is not adopted by July 1 of
each year, the previously adopted Fee Schedule, as amended, shall
remain in effect until such time as a new Fee Schedule shall be adopted
by the City Commission.
§ 62-11 LAPEER CODE § 63-5
1:674
§ 63-5. Conflicts between Fee Schedule and ordinances.
In the event that an ordinance conflicts with the Fee Schedule regarding the
existence or amount of a fee, the ordinance shall control.
§ 63-6. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this Fee Schedule
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this chapter; and the application of those provisions to any
persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 63-7. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective on the date of publication.
Chapter 64
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
§ 64-1. Purpose.
This is a chapter to provide for the mechanism and procedure to effect
improvements by special assessment through such power as reserved to the
City by statute.
§ 64-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COST — When referring to the cost of any public improvement, includes
the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices,
advertising, financing, construction and legal fees and all other costs
incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments
therefor and the financing thereof.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any public work or public improvement for
which any part of the cost is to be assessed against one or more lots or
parcels to be specially benefited thereby.
§ 64-3. Initiation of special assessment projects.
A. The City Commission, by resolution, may initiate proceedings for
making public improvements and defraying the entire cost or any part
thereof by special assessment upon the property specially benefited
and assessments may be levied before, during, or after construction.
The resolution shall refer the matter to the City Manager, who shall
make an investigation of the proposed public improvement and report
findings to the City Commission. The Commission, in order to ascertain
§ 63-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-3
1:675
§ 64-4. City Manager investigation and report.
whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed
desire a public improvement to be made under the provisions of this
chapter, may request that a petition thereof be presented to it, but in
the event a petition be so filed, it shall be advisory only and shall not be
jurisdictional.
B. Initiation of public improvements may be by petition to the City
Commission, signed by 66% of property owners whose property is
subject to being benefited. Such petition shall be printed on forms
approved by the City Attorney and set forth the location, extent and
character of the desired public improvement, and include an affidavit
by one or more of the circulators that the signatures appearing thereon
are genuine and that each signer declares himself to be the owner of
interest in the land indicated. Such petitions shall be filed with the City
Clerk and presented to the Commission within 60 days after being filed.
All such petitions shall be deemed advisory only, and shall not obligate
the Commission to act favorably thereon. Should the City Commission
consider commencement of any petition for public improvements, such
petition shall proceed in the same manner as provided in this chapter
for public improvements initiated by the City Commission.
A. The City Manager's investigation and report referred to in § 64-3 shall
include an analysis of the estimated cost of the proposed public
improvements; map showing the public improvement and location
thereof, estimate of the life of the improvement; necessity of the
proposed improvement; what part or proportion thereof should be paid
by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and what
part, if any, should be paid by the City at large; if a petition is filed, it
shall be reviewed by the City Assessor for determination that said
petition contains the required number of valid signatures; and other
pertinent information as will permit the Commission to consider the
cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and how the
improvement shall be financed.
B. The City Manager shall file such report with the City Clerk; it shall be
presented to the City Commission and shall be available for public
examination. Whenever any land which should be included in the
special assessment district may not be assessable for any reason, a
written agreement may be reached providing for the payment of the
owner's share of the cost of the improvement.
C. The Commission shall not finally determine to proceed with the making
of any public improvement until such report of the City Manager has
been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the
Commission for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such
public improvement.
§ 64-3 LAPEER CODE § 64-5
1:676
§ 64-5. Approval of report by City Commission; determination of
necessity; notice of necessity public hearing.
Upon receipt of the report of the City Manager, the Commission may
then proceed with the proposed public improvement by resolution. The
resolution shall declare that the City Manager's report be filed with the
City Clerk for public examination; determine the necessity of the public
improvement and setting forth the nature thereof; and designate the special
assessment district to be affected and describe the lands to be assessed;
determine what part or proportion of such cost shall be paid by special
assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any,
shall be borne by the City at large; and determine the estimated life of such
improvement. The City Commission shall also fix a time and place when
it will meet and hear objections to the necessity of the proposed public
improvement and to the special assessment district(s); direct the City Clerk
to give notice of a public hearing on the necessity of the proposed public
improvement at which time and place opportunity will be given interested
persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a
newspaper published or circulated within the City and by first-class mail
addressed to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as
shown on the current assessment roll for the City, such publication and
mailing to be made at least 10 full days prior to the date of the hearing; the
notice shall state that the proposed map and estimate are on file with the
City Clerk and contain a description of the proposed assessment area. The
hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or
special meeting of the Commission. (State law references: MCLA § 211.741)
§ 64-6. Objections to necessity of public improvement.
If, at or prior to the hearing on the public improvement, property owners
whose property in the special assessment district object to the necessity
of the proposed public improvement by more than 60%, the public
improvement shall not be made by proceedings authorized by this chapter
without a 4/5 vote of the members of the Commission.
§ 64-7. Hearing on necessity.
At the public hearing on the necessity of the proposed public improvement,
all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which
the Commission may revise, correct, amend or change the plans, estimates
and/or district, provided that no property shall be added to the district until
notice is provided upon such owners and a hearing afforded such owners.
Should the Commission modify the scope of the public improvement, if
necessary, in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest
of the City as a whole, provided that the amount of work is increased
or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held
pursuant to notice as described in § 64-5.
§ 64-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-8
1:677
§ 64-8. Deviation from plans and specifications.
No preconstruction deviation from original plans or specifications as
adopted shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the City without
authority of the Commission by resolution. A copy of the resolution
authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the City Clerk
and attached to the original plans and specifications on file. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit changes or adjustments to the plans, specifications, or
materials as may become necessary to address site conditions or unforeseen
circumstances during the course of construction of such public
improvement.
§ 64-9. Limitations on preliminary expenses.
No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of bonding, public
notifications, preparation of necessary plans, specifications and estimates of
costs, for any public improvement to be financed in whole or part by special
assessment shall be made before the confirmation of the special assessment
roll for such public improvement.
§ 64-10. Preliminary special assessment roll.
After the public hearing on the necessity of the proposed public
improvement as provided in § 64-7, the Commission may proceed with
such public improvement by resolution. The resolution shall declare the
determination of the Commission to proceed with the public improvement
and approve necessary plans, specifications and estimates of cost, as
originally presented or as revised corrected, amended or changed. The
City Commission shall also direct the Assessor to prepare a preliminary
special assessment roll in which shall be entered and described all the
lots and parcels of lands to be assessed, with the names of the respective
owners thereof, if known, and the amount to be assessed against each
lot or parcel of land, which amount shall be such relative portion of the
whole sum to be levied against all the lots and parcels of land in the
special assessment district. There shall also be entered upon said roll the
amount, if any, which has been assessed to the City at large. When the
Assessor shall have completed the preliminary assessment roll, he shall affix
thereto a certificate stating that it was made pursuant to a resolution of
the Commission of said City adopted on a specified date and that in making
such assessment roll he has, according to his best judgment, conformed in
all respects to the directions contained in such resolution, the City Charter,
and this chapter and file said report with the City Clerk for presentation to
the City Commission.
§ 64-11. Review of preliminary special assessment roll; notice of
preliminary special assessment roll public hearing.
Upon receipt of the preliminary special assessment roll, the City
Commission may accept the same by resolution. The resolution shall order
the preliminary special assessment roll be filed with the City Clerk for
§ 64-8 LAPEER CODE § 64-11
1:678
public examination; shall fix a time and place when it will meet and hear
objections to the preliminary special assessment roll; direct the City Clerk
to give notice of a public hearing on the preliminary special assessment
roll at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons
to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper
published or circulated within the City and by first-class mail addressed
to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as shown on
the current assessment roll for the City; such publication and mailing to be
made at least 10 full days prior to the date of the hearing; the notice shall
include a statement that objections to said preliminary special assessment
roll may be made in writing prior to the close of hearing or by personal
appearance at the time of hearing is required in order to appeal the amount
of the special assessment to the State Tax Tribunal; and a copy of the
preliminary special assessment roll shall be attached to each notice. The
hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or
special meeting of the Commission. (State law references: MCLA § 211.741)
§ 64-12. Objections to preliminary special assessment roll.
Objections to the preliminary special assessment roll and/or persons
deeming themselves aggrieved by a preliminary special assessment roll may
file objections in writing prior to the close of the hearing or by personal
appearance at the time of the hearing to review said preliminary special
assessment roll. Such objection shall specify, in detail, in what respect the
objectors deem themselves aggrieved. A written protest filed prior to the
close of said hearing or an oral protest made by an owner or party of
interest or his or her agent at the time of said hearing is required in order
to appeal the amount of the special assessment to the State Tax Tribunal.
A written appeal of the special assessment may be filed with the State Tax
Tribunal within 30 days after confirmation by the City Commission of the
special assessment roll.
§ 64-13. Hearing on preliminary special assessment roll; changes
and corrections.
At the public hearing on the preliminary special assessment roll, the
Commission shall consider any objections thereto, after which the
Commission may confirm such special assessment roll as reported to it by
the Assessor, or may correct the same as to any matter or other errors
appearing thereon and confirm it as so corrected, or may refer it back to
the Assessor for revision, or may annul it and any proceedings connected
herewith and direct a new roll to be made, in which case the same
proceedings shall be followed as in the case of original assessment. If
any changes are made which result in additions to the special assessment
district or increases in the special assessment roll, the same proceedings
shall be followed as in the case of the original assessment. Any hearing may
be adjourned from time to time without further notice.
§ 64-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-14
1:679
§ 64-14. Confirmation of special assessment roll; installments; due
date; interest rate chargeable; collection fee.
After the public hearing on the preliminary special assessment roll, the
Commission may determine to proceed with the public improvement and
confirm the roll with such changes as it may have made, if any, by
resolution. The resolution shall confirm such roll and place it on file in
the City Clerk's office; establish the number of annual installments, not
to exceed 10, and the due date of the first installment and subsequent
installments; establish the rate of interest chargeable on the unpaid balance
from and after the due date; establish penalties for late payments; establish
a collection fee not exceeding 5% of the unpaid balance or installment
to compensate for the accounting services required if installments are
established; and direct the City Clerk to attach a warrant certifying the
amounts appearing therein and authorizing the spread of the various sums
on a special assessment roll or upon the tax rolls for the City for the
full amounts or in annual installments as directed by Commission. Upon
confirmation, the roll shall be final and conclusive for the purpose of the
improvement to which it applies, subject only to conform to the actual costs
of the improvement.
§ 64-15. Special assessment constitutes lien.
All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including
any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall from the date of confirmation
of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land
assessed and, until paid, shall be a charge against the respective owners
of the several lots and parcels of land. Such lien shall be of the same
character and effect as the lien created for City taxes and shall include
accrued interests, collection fees, and penalties. No judgment or decree,
nor any act of the Commission vacating a special assessment, shall destroy
or impair the lien of the City upon the premises assessed for such amount
of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a
regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon.
§ 64-16. Collection.
A. The special assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Clerk to the
Treasurer for collection, immediately after its confirmation. The
Treasurer shall divide the assessments into installments when so
ordered by the Commission. The Treasurer shall mail statements of the
several assessments to the respective owners, as indicated by the roll
and the records of Treasurer of the several parcels of land assessed,
stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may
be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall
not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of
time within which to pay the assessment.
§ 64-14 LAPEER CODE § 64-16
1:680
§ 64-17. Special assessment delinquencies.
B. The whole or part of any special assessment may be paid at any time
after the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll until such
time as the Commission shall prescribe, without interest or penalty.
C. All special assessments or special assessments deferred by
installments, except the first, shall bear interest from the date the first
installment is due, at a rate not in excess of that authorized by law, as
authorized by the City Commission, which will be the net interest cost
of the bond plus 1%, or if bonds are not issued, 6%, payable annually;
provided, however, that a different period of time was not provided for
as prescribed in § 64-16B.
D. The City Treasurer shall add to all special assessments or installments a
collection fee, as authorized by the City Commission in § 64-14, not
exceeding 5% of the unpaid balance of the amount of the special
assessment or installment. Every special assessment or installment
thereof one month in default because of nonpayment shall have added
thereto a collection penalty fee of 1% for each month or fraction thereof
so in default. All collection fees shall belong to the City and shall be
collectible in the same manner as the collection fee for City taxes.
E. Any special assessment or installments which has not been spread upon
the tax rolls may be discharged by paying the face amount thereof
together with interest, penalties, and/or collection fees from the date of
confirmation to date of payment.
F. The City's portion of the cost of any improvement may be divided into
installments the same as the assessments against lands in the district,
and in such case, the provisions of this chapter relative to such
installments shall apply to the City installments insofar as they are
applicable.
G. In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien
therefor, any delinquent special assessment or installments, together
with interest, collection fees and penalties, may be collected in an
action of assumpsit in the name of the City against the person assessed
or liable for the same, in any court having jurisdiction thereof. If in any
such action it shall appear that, by reason of any irregularities or
informalities, the assessment has not been properly made against the
defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may,
nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expenses has been incurred by
the City, which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises
in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable
against such defendant or upon such premises.
A. The Treasurer shall be charged with collecting all special assessments
as stated in the resolution confirming the special assessment roll by the
City Commission. After an assessment or any installment becomes
delinquent, the Treasurer may add the entire assessment or installment
§ 64-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-17
1:681
§ 64-18. Special assessment delinquencies seizure and auction of
property.
If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment upon demand,
the Treasurer may seize and levy upon any personal property belonging to
such person, found within the City or elsewhere in the State of Michigan,
and sell the same at public auction, first giving six days' notice of the time
and place of such sale by posting such notice in three of the most public
places in the City or township where such property may be found, the
proceeds of such sale, or so much thereof as may be necessary for that
purpose, shall be applied to the payment of the assessment and the cost and
expense of such seizure and sale, and the surplus shall be paid to the person
entitled thereto.
§ 64-19. Determination of actual cost of improvement.
Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof,
the City Manager shall report to the City Commission the total cost of the
improvement, together with the amount of the original special assessment
roll for such improvement.
§ 64-20. Deficiency; additional assessments.
Should the assessments in any special assessment roll prove insufficient for
any reason, including the noncollection thereof, to pay for the improvement
for which they were made or to pay the principal and interest on the
bonds issued in anticipation of the collection of such assessments, then
the Commission may make additional pro rata assessments to supply the
deficiency, but the total assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not
exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvements.
thereof, with any interest, collection fees or penalty to the annual tax
bill of the City attributable to the lot or premises involved with the same
rights and remedies as provided in the Charter for the collection of
taxes, or he may collect it separately by tax sale procedure as provided
in this chapter.
B. Any delinquent special assessment or installment shall be certified as
delinquent listing the name, property number, and amount of such
delinquency including interest, collection fees, and penalties to the City
Commission by the City Treasurer prior to placement on the City tax
roll.
C. Any delinquent special assessment or installment added to the City tax
roll shall appear in a column headed special assessments together with
any interest, collection fees, or penalties, together with an additional
penalty of 5% of such total amount.
§ 64-17 LAPEER CODE § 64-21
1:682
§ 64-21. Disposition of excessive special assessments; refunds.
Should the special assessment or the proceeds of sale of any special
assessment bonds prove larger than necessary to meet the costs of the
improvement or to meet the principal and interest requirements of any
special assessment bonds and expenses incidental thereto, the excess, if
less than 5% of the total project costs, shall be placed in the General Fund of
the City. If such excess is more than 5%, the entire excess shall be refunded
on a pro rata basis to the then-owners of the property assessed as shown
by the current assessment roll of the City. Such refund shall be made by
credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments
then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds
may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence
of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessment.
If the City shall have been assessed for any portion of the cost of the
improvements, then it shall be considered in the same category as the
owner of private lands and shall be entitled to its share of any excess.
§ 64-22. Correction of invalid special assessments; reassessment.
Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Commission,
be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or
for any reason whatever or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Commission shall, whether the
improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment
has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made
for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All
proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be
conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment,
and whenever the assessment, or any part of thereof, levied upon any
premises has been so set aside, if the same has been paid and not refunded,
the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the
reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. No judgment or
decree, or any act of Commission, vacating a special assessment, shall
destroy or impair the lien of the City upon the premises assessed for such
amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same
had such charge been lawfully assessed thereupon in accordance with the
procedure established or authorized in this chapter.
§ 64-23. Division or combination of lots after assessment confirmed.
Should any lot or parcel of land be divided or combined after a special
assessment thereon has been confirmed and before the collection thereof,
the Commission may require the Assessor to apportion the uncollected
amounts upon the several parts of such lot or parcel of land. The report of
such reapportionment when confirmed shall be conclusive upon all parties,
provided that before such confirmation, notice of hearing shall be given to
all the interested parties either by personal service or by publication as
above provided in case of an original assessment roll.
§ 64-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-24
1:683
§ 64-24. Single-lot assessments; responsibility of private owner for
City expenses incurred on premises.
A. When any expenses shall have been incurred by the City upon or in
respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against
such premises and the owner thereof under the provisions of the
Charter, this chapter or any ordinance of the City, or law of the State of
Michigan, which by this chapter the Commission is authorized to
charge and collect as a single lot special assessment against the lot,
parcel of land or premises, which is not of that class required to be
prorated among the several lots and parcels of land in a special
assessment district, an account of the labor, material and service for
which such expense was incurred, with a description of the premises
upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of
the owner, if known, shall be reported to the Treasurer, who shall
immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. The Treasurer, at the
end of each quarter, shall report to the Commission all sums so owing to
the City and which have not been paid within 30 days after the mailing
of the bill therefor. The Commission shall, at such times as it may deem
advisable, direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll
covering all such charges reported to it, together with a penalty of 10%.
Such roll shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall present the same to the
Commission. The preceding sections of this chapter with reference to
pro rata special assessments and the proceedings necessary to be had
before making the improvement shall not apply to single-lot
assessments contemplated in this section.
B. The Commission shall review such single-lot special assessment roll
and set a time and place to hear objections to said roll and to meet for
the purposes of adopting said roll. Such notice to be sent to the
property owners affected by first-class mail no sooner than 10 days
prior to date of meeting. After hearing any objections, the Commission
may adopt such single-lot special assessment roll by resolution. The
resolution shall require all of the several amounts so reported and
determined and the several lots or premises chargeable therewith
respectively to be reported by the City Clerk to the Treasurer, who shall
spread such amounts against the real property chargeable therewith on
the next tax roll for the collection of general City taxes, and shall
thereafter be collected and returned in the same manner as general
City taxes. Such single-lot special assessments and all charges thereon
shall, from the date of adoption of the roll, be and remain a lien upon
the property assessed, of the same character and effect as a lien
created by general law for state and county taxes, until paid. The
resolution referred to in this section shall be treated as the confirmation
of a single-lot special assessment.
§ 64-24 LAPEER CODE § 64-25
1:684
§ 64-25. Use of single-lot assessments for recovery of cost of
abating public nuisances and hazards.
When any lot, building or structure, because of accumulation of solid waste,
the uncontrolled growing of weeds, age or dilapidation, construction or
maintenance of any sidewalk, or because of any other condition or
happening, becomes a public hazard or nuisance which is detrimental to
the health or safety of the inhabitants of the City or of those residing or
habitually going near such lot, building or structure, the Commission may
order such hazard or nuisance abated and the cost of such abatement
assessed against the lot, premises or description of real property upon
which such hazard or nuisance was located as a single lot assessment.
§ 64-26. Special assessment accounts.
Except as otherwise provided by law or the Charter of the City, moneys
raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be
segregated in a special fund or account and shall be accounted for
according to generally accepted accounting principles and may be used only
to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied
and expenses incidental thereto or to repay any money borrowed thereafter.
(State law references: Funds for public improvements or buildings, MCLA
§ 141.261)
§ 64-27. Combination of special assessment projects.
The City Commission may combine several districts into one project for the
purpose of effecting a savings in the costs, provided that for each district,
there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost
of the same and shall be accounted for according to generally accepted
accounting principles.
§ 64-28. Deferred special assessment payments; poverty provisions.
The City Commission may provide for the deferred payment of special
assessments from persons who, in the opinion of the City Commission and
the City Assessor, by reason of poverty, are unable to contribute towards
the costs thereof. In all cases, as a condition to granting of such deferred
payment, the City may take from the owner a trust deed or assignment of
the property so assessed, in lieu of the payment of such assessments in
cash. Such trust deed shall not deprive the owner of such property of full
right to use and occupy such property so long as he shall live and shall
contain a clause to the effect that such deed shall cease to be effective upon
the payment of the assessments which have accrued and become payable
upon the property. This shall be in addition to and not in conflict with the
deferral authorized for senior citizens by PA 225 of 1976 (MCLA § 211.761
et seq.), as amended.
§ 64-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-29
1:685
§ 64-29. Contested assessments.
No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the
purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment:
§ 64-30. All real property liable for special assessments.
All real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, shall be
liable for the cost of local improvements assessed in accordance with this
chapter, unless specifically exempted from special assessments by law.
§ 64-31. Additional procedures.
When the sections of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry
into full effect the making of any improvement or the special assessment
therefor, the City Commission shall provide any additional steps or
procedure required to effect the improvement by special assessment in the
resolution declaring the determination of the City Commission to make such
improvement in the first instance.
Chapter 65
(RESERVED)
Chapter 66
(RESERVED)
Chapter 67
(RESERVED)
Chapter 68
MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES
§ 68-1. Purpose.
A. Unless within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment
roll written notice is given to the City Commission of intention to file
such suit or action stating the grounds on which it is claimed such
assessment is illegal; and [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Unless such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days after
confirmation of the roll.
A. It is the intent of this chapter to authorize the establishment of certain
types of medical marihuana facilities in the City of Lapeer and provide
for the adoption of reasonable restrictions to protect the public health,
§ 64-29 LAPEER CODE § 68-1
1:686
§ 68-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:
safety, and general welfare of the community at large; retain the
character of neighborhoods; and mitigate potential impacts on
surrounding properties and persons. It is also the intent of this chapter
to help defray administrative and enforcement costs associated with
the operation of a marihuana facility in the City of Lapeer through
imposition of an annual, nonrefundable fee of not more than $5,000 on
each medical marihuana facility licensee. Authority for the enactment
of these provisions is set forth in the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq.
B. Nothing in this chapter is intended to grant immunity from criminal or
civil prosecution, penalty, or sanction for the cultivation, manufacture,
possession, use, sale, or distribution of marihuana, in any form, that is
not in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated
Law 1 of 2008, MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana
Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq.; the Marihuana
Tracking Act, MCLA § 333.27901 et seq.; and all other applicable rules
promulgated by the State of Michigan. This chapter permits
authorizations for activity based on the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as allowing persons to engage in conduct that endangers
others or causes a public nuisance, or to allow marihuana uses and
activities not in strict accordance with the express authorizations of the
Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq.
C. As of the effective date of this chapter, marihuana remains classified as
a Schedule 1 controlled substance under the Federal Controlled
Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq., which makes it unlawful to
manufacture, distribute, or dispense marihuana, or possess marihuana
with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marihuana. Nothing
in this chapter is intended to grant immunity from any criminal
prosecution under state or federal laws as they may be enforced by
either the federal or state governments relative to such uses and
activities. Thus, the authorization of activity and the approval of a
license under this chapter shall not have the effect of superseding or
nullifying federal or state law applicable to the cultivation,
manufacture, possession, use, sale, or distribution of marihuana, in any
form, and all applicants and grantees of licenses are on notice that they
may be subject to prosecution and civil penalty, including forfeiture of
property.
A. Any term defined by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCLA
§ 333.26421 et seq., shall have the definition given in the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act.
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-2
1:687
B. Any term defined by the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act,
MCLA § 333.27101 et seq., shall have the definition given in the
Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act.
C. Any term defined by the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCLA § 333.27901 et
seq., shall have the definition given in the Marihuana Tracking Act.
D. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
GROWER — A licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state
that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale
to a processor or provisioning center.
LICENSEE — A person holding a state operating license issued under
the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et
seq.
MARIHUANA FACILITY — An enterprise at a specific location at which
a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq., including a marihuana
grower, marihuana processor, marihuana provisioning center,
marihuana secure transporter, or marihuana safety compliance facility.
The term does not include or apply to a "primary caregiver" or
"caregiver" as that term is defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana
Act, MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.
MARIJUANA or MARIHUANA — That term as defined in the Public
Health Code, MCLA § 333.1101 et seq.; the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, MCLA § 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana
Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana
Tracking Act, MCLA § 333.27901 et seq.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, limited-liability partnership, limitedliability
limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity.
PROCESSOR — A licensee that is a commercial entity located in
Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts
resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for
sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center.
PROVISIONING CENTER — A licensee that is a commercial entity
located in Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower or
processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered
qualifying patients directly or through the patients' registered primary
caregivers. "Provisioning center" includes any commercial property
where marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients
or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by
a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the
caregiver in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act,
MCLA § 333.26421 et seq., is not a provisioning center for purposes of
this article.
§ 68-2 LAPEER CODE § 68-2
1:688
§ 68-3. Authorization of facilities and fee.
SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY — A licensee that is a commercial
entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered
primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for
tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results,
and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility.
SECURE TRANSPORTER — A licensee that is a commercial entity
located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana
between marihuana facilities for a fee.
A. The following medical marihuana facilities may be authorized to
operate in the City of Lapeer by the holder of a state operating license,
subject to compliance with PA 281 of 2016, as may be amended,92 the
rules promulgated thereunder and this chapter:
Facility Number
Provisioning center 6
Grower Unlimited
Processor Unlimited
Safety compliance facility Unlimited
Secure transporter Unlimited
Although the maximum number of each type of marihuana facility
permitted in the City of Lapeer is established above, no marihuana
facility of any type may be located within the Central Business District.
B. The Lapeer City Commission, at any time, but no less frequently than
once per year, shall review the maximum number of each type of
marihuana facility allowed pursuant to this chapter and determine
whether the number should be limited or changed, and if so, determine
a maximum number for each type of marihuana facility. However,
following each annual review, the Lapeer City Commission shall not
limit the number of licenses for each classification of license to a
number less than those currently approved, absent good cause shown,
giving due consideration to the public health and welfare. The review
and its findings shall be recorded in the minutes of the relevant meeting
of the Lapeer City Commission.
C. An annual nonrefundable fee shall be paid by each marihuana facility
licensed under this chapter in an annual amount of not more than
$5,000 as set forth in the City of Lapeer Fee Schedule as approved by
the City Commission.
(1) Should any person, for whatever reason, not receive a license
under § 68-4C(1), Application, or § 68-4C(2), Provisional license, 1/
92.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.27101 et seq.
§ 68-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-3
1:689
§ 68-4. Requirements and procedure for issuing license.
2 of the application fee may be returned, provided that no appeal
process has occurred.
A. No person shall operate a marihuana facility in the City of Lapeer
without a valid marihuana facility license issued by the City of Lapeer
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as authorized by the Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq.
B. A marihuana facility license issued under this chapter is valid for one
year and is not transferable.
C. The procedure in processing a request for a marihuana facility license
will involve three steps as follows:
(1) Application.
(a) File an application with the City Clerk's office upon a form
provided by the City of Lapeer and submittal of the annual
nonrefundable fee.
(b) Upon the applicant's completion of the application form and
furnishing all required information and documentation, the
City Clerk's office shall accept the application. The City Clerk
is authorized to develop a policy that outlines the procedure to
be used in determining the issuance of the provisional licenses
for provisioning centers. Said policy to be approved by the City
Commission.
(c) The City Clerk's office shall refer the application to the
Assessing Department to verify that the proposed site is
outside the buffer zones stipulated in § 7-13.12I of Chapter 7,
Zoning, and to the Planning Department to verify that the
property is located in a zoning district that allows the
permitted use. The Assessing Department and the Planning
Department shall respond to the City Clerk's office within 10
business days.
(d) The City Clerk's office shall act to approve or deny an
application not later than 15 business days from the date the
fully completed application was accepted.
(e) If approved, the City Clerk's office shall issue the applicant a
provisional license.
(2) Standards for issuance of provisional license. The Clerk shall issue
a provisional license under this chapter when, from a consideration
of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, the Clerk determines that:
(a) The application (including any required attachments and
submissions) is complete and signed by the applicant;
§ 68-3 LAPEER CODE § 68-4
1:690
(b) The applicant has paid the nonrefundable application fee and
any other fees required;
(c) The application does not contain a material falsehood or
misrepresentation;
(d) The proposed location of the facility is permitted in the location
sought to be approved as outlined in § 68-4C(3)(a).
(3) Provisional license.
(a) A provisional license means only that the applicant has
submitted a valid application for a marihuana facility license,
that the proposed facility is located in a proper zoning district,
that the proposed facility is not located in a required buffer
zone and the applicant shall not locate or operate a marihuana
facility without obtaining all other permits and approvals
required by all other applicable ordinances and regulations of
the City of Lapeer.
(b) A provisional license will lapse and be void if such permits and
approvals are not diligently pursued as follows:
[1] Existing structure with no site changes: 90 days.
[2] Existing structure with minimal site changes requiring an
administrative zoning review: one year.
[3] Proposed construction of a structure requiring site plan
review by the Planning Commission: one year.
(c) After submission of all other permits and approvals required
under the provisional license, and payment of the annual
nonrefundable fee, the City Clerk's office shall approve or deny
the marihuana facility license with 15 business days.
(4) Marihuana facility license. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter
does not eliminate the need for the applicant to obtain other
required licenses and permits related to the operation of the
facility(ies) sought to be approved hereunder, including, without
limitation, any and all necessary business registration and licenses,
building permits, mechanical permits, plumbing permits, or
electrical permits. Before a marihuana facility license can be issued
under this chapter, all requirements as listed below, including all
other applicable provisions within the City of Lapeer's Code, must
be met.
(a) Submit a photocopy of the applicant's valid and current license
issued by the State of Michigan in accordance with the Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq.
(b) Maintaining a valid marihuana facility license by the State of
Michigan is a condition for the issuance and maintenance of a
§ 68-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-4
1:691
§ 68-5. Denial or revocation of license and appeal process.
marihuana facility license under this chapter and continued
operation of any marihuana facility.
(c) Site plan approval and/or other necessary approved permits
per Chapter 7, Zoning, are required before the City Clerk is
permitted to issue a license.
(d) All City of Lapeer departments are required to sign off on their
review of the provisional license once approval has been
determined. The City of Lapeer Departments and licensed
professionals that are part of the review and approval process
are as follows:
[1] Planning Department, Planner/Planning Consultant.
[2] Department of Public Works, Director of Public Works.
[3] Building Department, Building Official.
[4] Assessing Department, Assessor.
[5] Fire Department, Fire Chief.
[6] Police Department, Police Chief.
[7] City Engineering Consultant (site plan reviews only).
(e) Execute a statement to be initialed by the applicant that the
applicant and the employees of the facility(ies) may be subject
to prosecution under federal marijuana laws.
(f) Execute a statement to be initialed by the applicant that the
City of Lapeer accepts no legal liability in connection with the
approval and subsequent operation of the facility.
A. Denial. An application may be denied by the City Clerk in writing
setting forth the grounds for such denial for one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) A failure to meet the conditions or maintain compliance with the
standards and requirements established by this chapter in
reference to the operation of a licensed facility;
(2) One or more violations of the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, MCLA § 333.27101 et seq., or any City ordinance on
the premises;
(3) Maintenance of a nuisance on the premises;
(4) Nonpayment of real and/or personal property taxes, fines, liens,
income tax, hydrant and sprinkler fees or any fees owed to the City;
§ 68-4 LAPEER CODE § 68-5
1:692
(5) A demonstrated history of excessive calls for public safety (police,
fire and ambulance); or
(6) Applicant has made or provided false information in the application
or has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of a
marihuana facility license within any part of the requirement and
procedure for issuing a license.
B. Revocation. A marihuana facility license may be revoked by the City
Clerk based on the following:
(1) Violation of the standards for approval in § 68-5A of this chapter.
(2) Denial, suspension, revocation or restriction of license by the State
of Michigan.
(3) A violation of the Act, any state or local regulations, the provisions
of this chapter or the provisions of a license.
(4) Convictions.
(a) Conviction of or release from incarceration for a felony under
the laws of this state, or any other state, or the United States of
the applicant or the applicant's managerial employees within
the past 10 years or has been convicted of a controlledsubstance-
related felony within the past 10 years.
(b) Conviction of an applicant or an applicant's managerial
employees of a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance,
theft, dishonesty, or fraud in any state or has been found
responsible for violating a local ordinance in any state
involving a controlled substance, dishonesty, theft, or fraud
that substantially corresponds to a misdemeanor in that state
within the last five years.
(5) Operations have ceased at the facility for more than 90 days,
including during a change of ownership of the facility.
(6) Ownership of the facility has been transferred without the new
owner obtaining a marihuana facility license pursuant this chapter.
C. Notice of decision. The Clerk shall notify the applicant of the decision to
deny an application for or the revocation of a marihuana facility license
under the terms and provisions of this chapter within three business
days of rendering the decision. Notice shall be given by mailing a copy
of the Clerk's decision to the applicant or license holder by certified
mail and/or personal service postage prepaid, at the address shown in
the application. Notice is deemed to have been properly given upon
mailing by certified mail and/or personal service.
D. Appeal process. An applicant or licensee has the right to appeal the
Clerk's denial of an application for or the revocation of a marihuana
facility license to the Lapeer City Commission.
§ 68-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-5
1:693
§ 68-6. License renewal.
§ 68-7. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and facilities
described herein, whether the operations or activities associated with a
(1) Any person whose application or license has been denied,
suspended, revoked or restricted by the State of Michigan has no
recourse through the appeal process with the City of Lapeer.
(2) Any person whose application or license has been denied or
revoked under § 68-5A or 68-5B by the City of Lapeer will have 30
days from the date of the notice to provide a written response to
the City of Lapeer.
(3) The applicant or licensee shall be provided with not less than 10
days' prior written notice of the appeal hearing to be held by the
City Commission.
(4) The burden of proof in an appeal filed under this section shall be on
the applicant or licensee.
(5) If the Lapeer City Commission finds by a preponderance of the
evidence that the decision of the Clerk was correct, the Lapeer City
Commission shall uphold the decision of the Clerk. If the Lapeer
City Commission finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the
decision of the Clerk was incorrect, the Clerk's decision shall be set
aside and the marihuana facility license issued (if it was previously
denied) or reinstated (if it was previously revoked).
(6) Any decision made by the Lapeer City Commission pursuant to this
section shall be a final decision and may be appealed to a court of
competent jurisdiction by any person within 30 days of the date of
the City Commission decision. The applicant's or licensee's failure
to timely appeal the decision is a waiver the applicant's or
licensee's right to contest the denial of the application or the
revocation of the marihuana facility license.
(7) Any person whose license has been denied or revoked shall not be
able to reapply for any type of license allowed under this chapter
for one year from the date a denial or revocation became effective.
A. A marihuana facility license shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance, unless revoked as provided by law.
B. A valid marihuana facility license shall be renewed on an annual basis
by submitting a renewal application upon a form provided by the City of
Lapeer and payment of the annual license fee. Application to renew a
marihuana facility license shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the date
of its expiration.
§ 68-5 LAPEER CODE § 68-7
1:694
marihuana facility were established without authorization before the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 68-8. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 68-9. Severability.
In the event that any one or more sections, provisions, phrases or words of
this chapter shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such holding shall not affect the validity or the enforceability of the
remaining sections, provisions, phrases or words of this chapter.
§ 68-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on April 1, 2018.
Chapter 69
RECREATIONAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES
§ 69-1. Purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter to exercise the City of Lapeer’s authority
to prohibit the establishment or operation of marihuana establishments
within the City as such facilities are defined in the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marihuana Act.93
§ 69-2. Prohibition of recreational marihuana establishments.
Pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act,
Section 6.1,94 the City of Lapeer elects to prohibit recreational marihuana
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the payment
of a civil fine as outlined in Chapter 62, Civil Infractions, § 62-4, of the
Code of the City of Lapeer. A violator of this chapter shall also be
subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and judicial orders as are
authorized under Michigan law.
B. A violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In addition
to any other remedy available at law, the City of Lapeer may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain,
prevent, or abate any violation of this chapter.
C. This chapter shall be enforced and administered by the City of Lapeer
Police Department or such other City of Lapeer official as may be
designated from time to time by resolution of the Lapeer City
Commission.
93.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.27951 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 333.27956.1.
§ 68-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-2
1:695
establishments within its boundaries, including, but not limited to, any
marihuana grower, marihuana safety compliance facility, marihuana
processor, marihuana microbusiness, marihuana retailer, marihuana secure
transporter, or any other type of marihuana-related business licensed by
the State of Michigan under the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act.
§ 69-3. Severability.
In the event that any one or more sections, provisions, phrases or words of
this chapter shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such holding shall not affect the validity or the enforceability of the
remaining sections, provisions, phrases or words of this chapter.
§ 69-4. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective upon publication.
Chapter A100
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM REVENUE BONDS
§ 69-2 LAPEER CODE § 69-4
1:696
ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewer Revenue Bonds
[Adopted 7-15-1987 (Ch. 44 of the 1978 General Ordinances)]
§ A100-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the
context, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT 94 — Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended.95
AUTHORITY — The Michigan Municipal Bond Authority created pursuant to
Act 227 of 1985.96
AUTHORITY'S DEPOSITORY AND TRANSFER AGENT — Comerica Bank-
Detroit, Detroit, Michigan or any successor thereto.
BONDS — The Series 1987 Bonds, together with any additional bonds of
equal standing hereafter issued.
CITY — The City of Lapeer, County of Lapeer, State of Michigan.
COMMISSION — The City Commission of the City.
PROJECT — The repairs, replacements, additions, extensions and
improvements to the system.
REVENUES and NET REVENUES — The revenues and net revenues of the
City and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94,97 including,
with respect to "revenues," the earnings derived from the investment of
moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this ordinance.
SERIES 1987 BONDS — The Sanitary Sewer Revenue Bonds (Series 1987)
of the City in the principal amount of $520,000 authorized by this
ordinance.
SUFFICIENT GOVERNMENT OBLIGATIONS — Direct obligations of the
United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which
is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at
the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which,
without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such
amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the
bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it
comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption.
Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank
or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption
prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption
shall be given to the paying agent.
SYSTEM — The City's sanitary sewer system, including such facilities
thereof as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the project,
95.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
96.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.1051 et seq.
97.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.103.
§ A100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-1
1:697
and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto
hereafter made.
§ A100-2. Necessity; approval of plans and specifications.
It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the City to
acquire the project in accordance with the plans and specifications
prepared by the City's consulting engineers (the "engineers"), which plans
and specifications are hereby approved.
§ A100-3. Costs; useful life.
The total cost of the project is estimated to be $520,000 including the
payment of incidental expenses as specified in § A100-4 of this ordinance,
which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of
usefulness of the project is estimated to be not less than 40 years.
§ A100-4. Payment of cost; bonds authorized.
To pay the cost of acquiring and constructing the project, including payment
of legal, engineering, financial, and other expenses incident thereto and
incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 1987 bonds, the City shall
borrow the sum of $520,000 and issue the Series 1987 bonds therefor
pursuant to the provisions of Act 94.98 The remaining cost of the project, if
any, shall be defrayed from City funds on hand and legally available for such
use and from other funds available to the City.
The purpose of the ordinance is to authorize the issuance of revenue bonds
to finance the cost of acquiring additions, extensions and improvements to
the project.
§ A100-5. Bond details, issuance in series, registration and
execution.
A. The Series 1987 bonds hereby authorized shall be designated
SANITARY SEWER REVENUE BOND (SERIES 1987), shall be payable
out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully in § A100-6 hereof, shall
consist of bonds of the denomination of $5,000, or multiples of $5,000
not exceeding the amount of a single maturity, dated as of August 6,
1987, numbered in order of registration from one upwards, and shall
mature on May 1 in the years and amounts as follows:
Year Amount
1988 $5,000
1989 $5,000
1990 $5,000
1991 $5,000
98.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ A100-1 LAPEER CODE § A100-5
1:698
Year Amount
1992 $10,000
1993 $10,000
1994 $10,000
1995 $10,000
1996 $10,000
1997 $15,000
1998 $15,000
1999 $15,000
2000 $15,000
2001 $20,000
2002 $20,000
2003 $20,000
2004 $25,000
2005 $25,000
2006 $30,000
2007 $30,000
2008 $35,000
2009 $40,000
2010 $45,000
2011 $50,000
2012 $50,000
B. The Series 1987 bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates to be
determined on sale thereof, but in any event not exceeding 10% per
annum, payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year, commencing
May 1, 1988. The bonds shall be sold at a price not less than 97% of the
par value of the bonds. Interest shall be paid by check or draft drawn on
the transfer agent or the Authority's Depository, as applicable, mailed
to the registered owner of the bonds at the registered address, as
shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the transfer
agent or the City. Interest shall be payable to the registered owner of
record as of the 15th day of the month prior to the payment date for
each interest payment. The date of determination of the registered
owner for purposes of payment of interest as provided in this paragraph
may be changed by the City to conform to market practice in the future.
The principal of the bonds shall be payable at the principal corporate
trust office of Comerica Bank-Detroit, Detroit, Michigan as registrar
and transfer agent for the bonds (the "transfer agent") if the Authority
is not the owner of the bonds. The City may select another bank or trust
company located in the State of Michigan to serve as transfer agent
§ A100-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-5
1:699
upon notice to the registered owner of the bonds not less than 60 days
prior to an interest payment date. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this resolution, so long as the Authority is the owner of the bonds:
(1) The bonds are payable as to principal, premium if any, and interest
at the principal corporate trust office of Comerica Bank-Detroit,
Detroit, Michigan or at such other place as shall be designated in
writing to the City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository").
(2) The City agrees that it will deposit with the Authority's Depository
payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the
bonds in immediately available funds at least five business days
prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by
maturity, prepayment or otherwise.
(3) Written notice of any redemption of the bonds shall be given by the
City and received by the Authority's Depository, at least 40 days
prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made.
C. The Series 1987 bonds shall be subject to redemption prior to maturity
at the times and prices and in the manner and with notice as set forth in
the form of the Series 1987 bonds in § A100-18 of this ordinance.
D. In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for
redemption, the transfer agent upon presentation of the bond called in
part for redemption shall register, authenticate and deliver to the
registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of
the original bond not called for redemption. Notice of redemption shall
be given in the manner specified in the form of the Series 1987 bonds
contained in § A100-18 of this ordinance.
E. The bonds shall be signed by the manual or facsimile signatures of the
Mayor and the Clerk of the City and shall have the corporate seal of the
City or a facsimile thereof impressed or imprinted thereon. No bond of
this series shall be valid until authenticated by an authorized
representative of the transfer agent except that, in the event the bonds
are purchased by the Authority, the authentication of the bonds by the
transfer agent shall not be required while the Authority is the owner
thereof and the bonds shall be valid upon execution by the manual or
facsimile signature of the Mayor and manual signature of the Clerk. The
bonds shall be delivered to the transfer agent for authentication, if
required, and be delivered to the purchaser in accordance with
instructions from the City Treasurer upon payment of the purchase
price for the bonds in accordance with the bid therefor when accepted.
Executed blank bonds for registration and issuance to transferees shall
simultaneously, and from time to time thereafter as necessary, be
delivered to the transfer agent for safekeeping.
F. Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept
pursuant to this section by the person whose name it is registered, in
person or by his duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond
for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written
§ A100-5 LAPEER CODE § A100-5
1:700
instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent.
Whenever any bond or bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the City
shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a
new bond or bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer
agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer
of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with
respect to the transfer. The City shall not be required:
(1) To issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a
period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day
of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for
redemption as described in the form of Series 1987 bonds
contained in § A100-18 of this ordinance and ending at the close of
business on the day of that giving of notice
(2) To register the transfer of or exchange any bond so selected for
redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of
bonds being redeemed in part. The City shall give the transfer
agent notice of a call for redemption at least 45 days prior to the
date such notice of redemption is to be given.
G. The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office,
sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which
shall at all times be open to inspection by the City; and, upon
presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such
reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be
transferred, on said books, bonds as hereinbefore provided.
H. If any bond shall become mutilated, the City, at the expense of the
holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall
authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and
substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer
agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond issued under this ordinance
shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or
theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is
satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent
shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including
Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1872, as amended ("Act 354"), being
Sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws
have been met, the City, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and
the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond
of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any
applicable laws hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the
bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such bond shall have matured
or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond the
transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof.
I. If and so long as the bonds be held by the Authority:
(1) The City Clerk shall perform the notification, bond registration and
transfer functions of the transfer agent.
§ A100-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-5
1:701
§ A100-6. Payment of bonds. [Amended 7-27-1987]
§ A100-7. Bondholders' rights; receiver.
(2) Provisions relating to transfer of the bonds may be deleted from the
form of bonds.
A. The Series 1987 bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely
from the net revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby
created a statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues which shall
be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and
interest on all bonds payable from the net revenues, or, until sufficient
cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust
for payment in full of all bonds of a series then outstanding, principal
and interest on such bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to
the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the
redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or sufficient
government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the
statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds,
the holder of that series shall have no further rights under this
ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds
of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this
ordinance.
B. The foregoing lien shall continue until payment in full for the principal
of and interest on all the bonds or, until sufficient cash or direct
obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal
of and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of
America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and
interest payments on which, without reinvestment of interest, come due
at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay, when
due, the principal of, redemption premium, if any, and interest on the
bonds on the stated maturity date or earlier redemption, shall have
been deposited in trust for payment in full for all bonds with respect to
which this ordinance is to be defeased to their maturity, or, if called for
redemption, to the date fixed for redemption. If the bonds are owned by
the Authority at the time of such deposit, the sufficiency of such deposit
shall be verified by a nationally recognized firm of certified public
accountants. Upon such deposit, the pledge and security herein created
shall be terminated with respect to the bonds, the holders of the bonds
shall have no further rights under this ordinance except for payment
from the deposited funds, and the bonds shall no longer be considered
to be outstanding under this ordinance.
A. The holder or holders of the bonds representing in the aggregate not
less than 20% of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding,
may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and
enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may,
by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel
performance of all duties of the officers of the City, including the fixing
§ A100-5 LAPEER CODE § A100-7
1:702
§ A100-8. Management; fiscal year.
The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring of
the project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the City
Commission.
§ A100-9. Rates and charges.
The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system
and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates
shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance.
§ A100-10. No free service or use.
No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at
less than cost, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or
corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.
§ A100-11. Fixing and revising rates; rate covenant.
of sufficient rates, the collection of revenues, the proper segregation
of the revenues of the system and the proper application thereof. The
statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed
as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof.
B. If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest upon
the bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may
appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the
City and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval
of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the City more
particularly set forth herein and in Act 94.99
C. The holder or holders of the bonds shall have all other rights and
remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of
the bonds and the security therefor.
A. Rates and charges presently in effect for the system are estimated to be
sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration
and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are
necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to
provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on all of the
bonds as the same become due and payable, and the creation and
maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other
obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required by law and
this ordinance. In order to accomplish the foregoing such rates shall be
in amounts which will provide annual net revenues equal to or greater
than 115% of the annual debt service requirements of the bonds and
100% of the debt service requirements of any other bond issue to be
paid from the revenues of the system. The rates shall be fixed and
99.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ A100-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-11
1:703
§ A100-12. Operating year.
The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall
coincide with the City's fiscal year.
§ A100-13. Funds and accounts; flow of funds.
Commencing on August 1, 1987, all revenues of the system shall be set
aside as collected and credited to a fund to be designated SANITARY
SEWER REVENUE (SERIES 1987) RECEIVING FUND (the "Receiving
Fund"). In addition, on August 1, 1987 all revenues in any accounts of the
system shall be transferred to the Receiving Fund and credited to the funds
and accounts as provided in this § A100-13. The revenues credited to the
Receiving Fund are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and
shall be transferred or debited from the Receiving Fund periodically in the
manner and at the times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified:
revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these
amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed and maintain rates
for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for
the foregoing.
B. Effective July 1, 1988, the system's rates and charges presently in effect
shall be increased by 30%; provided, however, in the event the City
obtains a report of its engineer that a different rate of increase shall be
necessary to meet the requirements of this section, in which case the
system rates and charges shall be increased by the rate set forth in such
reports.
A. Operation and Maintenance Fund:
(1) Out of the revenues credited to the Receiving Fund there shall be
first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated OPERATION
AND MAINTENANCE FUND (the "Operation and Maintenance
Fund"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the
next month's expenses of administration and operation of the
system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as
may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working
order.
(2) The City, prior to the commencement of each operating year
beginning with the operating year next commencing after the
effective date of this ordinance, shall adopt a budget covering the
foregoing expenses for each year. No payments shall be made to
the City from moneys credited to the Operation and Maintenance
Fund except for services directly rendered to the system by the City
or its personnel.
B. Bond and Interest Redemption Fund:
(1) There shall be established and maintained a separate depository
fund designated BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND (the
§ A100-11 LAPEER CODE § A100-13
1:704
"Redemption Fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to
time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal
of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the bonds. The
moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the bond reserve
account) shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company
where the principal of and interest on the bonds are payable, i.e.,
the transfer agent. Out of the revenues remaining in the Receiving
Fund, after provision for the Operation and Maintenance Fund,
there shall be set aside monthly in the Redemption Fund a sum
proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due
of the current principal of and interest on the bonds, less any
amount in the Redemption Fund representing accrued interest on
the bonds. Commencing November 1, 1987, the amount set aside
each month for interest on the bonds shall be 1/3 of the total
amount of interest on the bonds next coming due. The amount set
aside each month for principal, commencing November 1, 1987,
shall be 1/3 of the amount of principal next coming due by maturity.
Commencing May 1, 1988, the amount set aside each month for
principal shall be 1/12 of the amount of principal next coming due
by maturity. If there is any deficiency in the amount previously
set aside, that deficiency shall be added to the next succeeding
month's requirements.
(2) There is established a separate account in the Redemption Fund to
be known as the BOND RESERVE ACCOUNT (the "Bond Reserve
Account"). On or before the date of delivery of the bonds, there
shall be deposited into the bond reserve account the lesser of 10%
of the outstanding principal amount of the bond or the maximum
annual debt service requirements of the bonds (the "Reserve
Amount"), and thereafter, the Reserve Amount shall be
approximately reduced to reflect any reduction in the outstanding
principal amount and the maximum annual debt service
requirements of the bonds.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the moneys credited
to the bond reserve account shall be used solely for the payment of
the principal of redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the
bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default. If at any time
it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the bond reserve
account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be
replaced from the net revenues first received thereafter which are
not required for current principal and interest requirements until
the amount on deposit equals the revenue amount. If additional
bonds are issued, each ordinance authorizing the additional bonds
shall provide for additional deposits to the bond reserve account
being equal to the maximum annual principal and interest
requirements on the bonds outstanding after issuance of the
additional bonds. If, at the end of any fiscal year, the amount in the
bond reserve account exceeds the reserve amount, then the excess
shall be transferred to the improvement fund or such other fund as
§ A100-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-13
1:705
§ A100-14. Depositary and funds on hand.
Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this
ordinance, except moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the bond
the Commission may designate. Excess amounts attributable to
investment earnings shall be transferred to the Receiving Fund.
C. Replacement Fund. There shall next be established and maintained a
separate depositary fund account, designated REPLACEMENT FUND
(the "Replacement Fund"), the money credited thereto to be used solely
for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the system. On
or before the date of delivery of the bonds there shall be deposited into
the Replacement Fund the sum of $50,000. Out of the revenues and
moneys of the system remaining in the Receiving Fund after provision
has been made for the deposit of moneys in the Operation and
Maintenance Fund and the Redemption Fund (including the bond
reserve account), there may be deposited in the Replacement Fund
such additional funds as the City Commission may deem advisable. If at
any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the Replacement Fund
for the purpose for which the Replacement Fund was established, the
moneys so used shall be replace from any moneys in the Receiving Fund
which are not required by this ordinance to be used for the Operation
and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund (including the bond
reserve account).
D. Improvement Fund. On or before the date of delivery of the bonds,
there shall be deposited into a fund to be designated IMPROVEMENT
FUND (the "Improvement Fund") the sum of $25,000. Out of the
remaining Revenues in the Receiving Fund, after meeting the
requirements of the Operation and Maintenance fund and the
Redemption Fund (including the bond Reserve account), there may be
next set aside in or credited to the Improvement Fund such sums
monthly as the City Commission may deem advisable to be used for
improvements, enlargements or extensions to the system.
E. Surplus moneys. Thereafter, any revenues in the Receiving Fund after
satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this section may, at the
option of the City Commission, be used for any of the following
purposes:
(1) Transferred to the Replacement Fund, the Improvement Fund or
both.
(2) Transferred to the Redemption Fund and used for the purchase of
bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value
thereof or used to redeem bonds prior to maturity pursuant to
§ A100-5 of this ordinance.
(3) Transferred to the general fund of the City and used for any lawful
purpose.
§ A100-13 LAPEER CODE § A100-14
1:706
reserve account) and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the
bonds, may be kept in one or more bank account at a bank or banks
designated by resolution of the City Commission, and if kept in one bank
account, the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the City
in the manner and at the times provided in this ordinance.
§ A100-15. Priority of funds.
In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide
for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund or
of the Redemption Fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the
system, except the proceeds of sale of the bonds, shall be credited or
transferred, first, to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, and second, to
the Redemption Fund, to the extent of any deficit therein.
§ A100-16. Investments.
Moneys in the funds and account established herein and moneys derived
from the proceeds of sale of the bonds, may be invested by the City in
United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of and
interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America,
and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the bonds may also be
invested in certificates of deposit of any bank whose deposits are insured
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Investment of moneys in
the Redemption Fund being accumulated for payment of the next maturing
principal or interest payment of the bonds shall be limited to obligations
bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal or
interest payment on the bonds. Investment of moneys in the bond reserve
account shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates or subject to
redemption, at the option of the holder thereof, not later than five years
from the date of the investment. In the event investments are made, any
securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank
or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or account from
which the purchase was made. Profit realized or interest income earned
on investment of funds in the Receiving Fund, Operation and Maintenance
Fund, Redemption Fund (including the bond reserve account), and
Improvement Fund shall be deposited in or credited to the Receiving Fund
at the end of each fiscal year.
§ A100-17. Bond proceeds.
A. From the proceeds of the sale of the bonds there shall be immediately
deposited in the Redemption Fund an amount equal to the accrued
interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the bonds. The
balance of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds shall be deposited in a
bank or banks, designated by the City Treasurer, qualified to act as
depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of
Act 94,100 in an account designated CONSTRUCTION FUND (the
100. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.115.
§ A100-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-17
1:707
§ A100-18. Bond form.
The bonds shall be in substantially the following form; provided, however,
that so long as the Authority owns the bonds, the sections of the bonds
pertaining to the transfer agent shall be amended or deleted accordingly
as may be deemed necessary or appropriate by the City Clerk, and if the
Authority ceases to own the bonds, those provisions of the bonds pertaining
to the Authority shall be deleted and the provisions relating to registration
and transfer of the bonds shall be inserted.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF LAPEER
CITY OF LAPEER
SANITARY SYSTEM REVENUE BOND (SERIES 1987)
"Construction Fund"). Moneys in the Construction Fund shall be
applied solely in payment of the cost of the project, including any
engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the
financing thereof. Payments for construction, either on account or
otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge
of such work shall file with the City Commission a signed settlement
to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the
plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in
accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized
change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has
not been previously paid for.
B. Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the bonds remaining
after completion of the project in the Construction fund may, in the
discretion of the City Commission, be used for further improvements,
enlargements and extension to the system, if:
(1) At the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the
Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law;
and
(2) Redemption of the bond is not required under § A100-23 of this
ordinance. Any remaining balance after such expenditure shall be
paid to the Redemption Fund and may be used for the purpose of
purchasing Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair
market value thereof, but not more than the price at which the
bonds may next be called for redemption, or used for the purpose of
paying principal of the bonds upon maturity or calling Bonds for
redemption.
§ A100-17 LAPEER CODE § A100-18
1:708
INTEREST RATE MATURITY DATE DATE OF
ORIGINAL
ISSUE
August 6,
1987
CUSIP
REGISTERED OWNER:
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: DOLLARS
The CITY OF LAPEER, County of Lapeer, State of Michigan (the "City"),
for value received, hereby promises to pay the Principal Amount shown
above in lawful money of the United States of America to the registered
owner specified above on the Maturity Date specified above, unless prepaid
prior thereto as hereinafter provided, with interest thereon from the Date
of Original Issue or such later date to which interest has been paid, until
paid at the Interest Rate per annum specified above, payable on May
1, 1988, and semiannually thereafter. (Principal of this bond is payable
at the principal corporate trust office of Comerica Bank-Detroit, Detroit,
Michigan, or such other transfer agent as the City may hereafter designate
by notice mailed to the registered owner hereof not less than 60 days
prior to any interest payment date (the "Transfer Agent"). Interest on this
bond is payable by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the
person or entity who is as of the 15th day of the month prior to each
interest payment date, the registered owner, at the registered address as
shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the transfer
agent) (Notwithstanding any other provision of this Bond, so long as the
Michigan Municipal bond Authority (the "Authority") is the owner of this
bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest
at the principal corporate trust office of Comerica Bank-Detroit, Detroit,
Michigan, or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the
City by the Authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that
it will deposit with the Authority's Depository payments of the principal
of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available
funds at least five business days prior to the date on which any such
payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; and written
notice of any redemption of this bond shall be given by the City and
received by the Authority's Depository, at least 40 days prior to the date
on which such redemption is to be made) and for the prompt payment
thereof, the revenues of the Sanitary Sewer System of the City (collectively
the "System"), including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements
thereto, after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary
expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net
Revenues"), are irrevocably pledged and a statutory first lien thereon is
hereby recognized and created.
§ A100-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-18
1:709
This bond is one of a series of bonds of even original issue date aggregating
the principal sum of $520,000 issued pursuant to Ordinance No. _____,
duly adopted by the City Commission of the City, and under and in full
compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan,
including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended,
for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing
repairs, replacements, additions, extensions and improvements to the
system.
For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions
under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under
which additional bonds of equal standing may hereafter be issued and the
general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued,
reference is made to the above-described Ordinance.
Bonds maturing in the years 1988 to 1997, inclusive, shall not be subject
to redemption prior to their due date.
Bonds or portions of bonds maturing in the years 1998 to 2002, inclusive,
are subject to optional redemption in whole or in part in such order as the
City shall determine, in integral multiples of $5,000 on any date on or after
May 1, 1997 at the following redemption prices (expressed as percentages
of their principal amounts), plus accrued interest to the redemption date.
Period During Which Redeemed Redemption Price
May 1, 1997 to April 30, 1998,
inclusive
102%
May 1, 1998 to April 30, 1999,
inclusive
101%
May 1, 1999 to April 30, 2000,
inclusive
101%
May 1, 2000 to April 30, 2001,
inclusive
100%
May 1, 2001 and thereafter 100%
No premium shall be paid on bonds or portions thereof redeemed on or
after May 1, 2001.
(Written notice of such redemption must be given to the Authority's
Depository by the City at least 40 days prior to the date on which such
redemption is to be made.)
§ A100-18 LAPEER CODE § A100-18
1:710
(Notice of redemption of any bond or portion thereof shall be given at least
30 days prior to the date fixed for redemption by mail to the registered
owner at the registered address shown on the registration books of the City
kept as provided in the above described resolution. Bonds shall be called
for redemption in multiples of $5,000 and any bond of a denomination
of more than $5,000 and shall be treated as representing the number
of bonds obtained by dividing the denomination of the bond by $5,000
and such bond may be redeemed in part. The notice of redemption for
a bond redeemed in part shall state the upon surrender of the bond
to be redeemed a new bond or bonds in aggregate principal amount
equal to the unredeemed portion of the bond surrendered shall be issued
to the registered owner thereof. No further interest on the bonds or
portions of bonds called for redemption shall accrue after the date fixed for
redemption, whether presented for redemption or not, provided funds are
on hand to redeem the same.)
(Any bond may be transferred by the person in whose name it is registered,
in person or by his duly authorized attorney or legal representative, upon
surrender of the bond to the transfer agent for cancellation, together with
a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by
the transfer agent. Whenever any bond is surrendered for transfer, the
transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond or bonds, in like
aggregate principal amount, interest rate and maturity. The transfer agent
shall require the bondholder requesting the transfer to pay any tax or
other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer.
The transfer agent will not (i) issue, register the transfer of or exchange
any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days
before the day of the mailing of a notice of redemption of bonds selected
for redemption and ending at the close of business on the day of that
mailing, or (ii) register the transfer of or exchange any bond selected for
redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds
being redeemed in part.)
This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is not a general obligation of
the City and does not constitute and indebtedness of the City within any
constitutional or statutory limitation, but is payable, both as to principal
and interest, solely from the net Revenues of the system. The principal of
and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore
mentioned.
§ A100-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-18
1:711
The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree
to fix and maintain at all time while any bonds payable from the net
revenues of the system shall be outstanding, such rates for service
furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of
the interest upon and the principal of the bonds of this issue and any
additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become
due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including a
bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of
administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the
system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working
order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system
as are required by the ordinance.
It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things
required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series
of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and
due time and form as required by law.
(This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the transfer
agent's Certificate of Authentication on this bond has been executed by the
transfer agent.)
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Lapeer, County of Lapeer, State of
Michigan, by its City Commission, has caused this bond to be executed
with the (manual) (fascimile) signatures of its Mayor and its Clerk and its
corporate seal to be (impressed) (printed) on this bond, all as of the Date
of Original Issue.
CITY OF LAPEER
By __________
Mayor
(Seal)
Countersigned:
__________
Clerk
(FORM OF TRANSFER AGENT'S CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION
TO BE USED IF THE MICHIGAN MUNICIPAL BOND AUTHORITY IS NOT
THE OWNER OF THE BONDS)
Certificate of Authentication
This bond is one of the bonds described in the within-mentioned
Ordinance.
__________
Transfer Agent
By __________
Authorized Signatory
Date of Registration:
§ A100-18 LAPEER CODE § A100-19
1:712
§ A100-19. Covenants.
The City covenants and agrees with the holders of the bonds that so long
as any of the bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or
interest -
A. The City will maintain the system in good repair and working order and
will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually
perform all duties with reference to the system required by the
Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan and this ordinance.
B. The City will keep proper books of record and account separate from all
other records and accounts of the City, in which shall be made full and
correct entries of all transactions relating to the system. The City shall
have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the system
for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent
certified public accountant, and a copy of the audit shall be mailed to
the manager of each syndicate or account originally purchasing any
issue of the bonds. The auditor shall comment on the manner in which
the City is complying with the requirements of the ordinance with
respect to setting aside and investing moneys and meeting the
requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The audit shall
be completed and so made available not later than four months after the
close of each operating year.
C. The City will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the
bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the system and liability
insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by
municipalities engaged in the operation of sanitary sewer systems. All
moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be
applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property
damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not so used, shall be used for
the purpose of redeeming or purchasing Bonds.
D. The City will not sell, lease or dispose of the system, or any substantial
part, until all of the bonds have been paid in full, both as to principal
and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided. The City will
operate the system as economically as possible, will make all repairs
and replacements necessary to keep the system in good repair and
working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would
affect the system in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on
the security for the bonds.
E. The City will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm
or corporation to operate a System that will compete with the system
and the City will not operate a system that will compete with the
system.
F. The City will cause the project to be acquired and constructed promptly
and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor.
§ A100-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-19
1:713
§ A100-20. Additional bonds.
G. Except as required by law, the City will at no time take any action or
omit to take any action which, by commission or omission, would cause
the bonds to be "arbitrage bonds" as defined in Section 148 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as may be amended from time to time,
and the regulations from time to time promulgated or proposed
thereunder (the "Code") including failing to rebate arbitrage earnings
to the federal government if such rebate is required by the Code.
H. The City will not permit at any time or times any of the proceeds of the
bonds or any other funds of the City to be used directly or indirectly in a
manner which would result in the exclusion of any Bonds of the City
from the treatment afforded by Section 103(a) of the Code, as from time
to time amended, including, but not limited to, by reason of the
classification of such bonds or Bonds a "private activity bonds" within
the meaning of Section 141 of the Code, as "private loan bonds" within
the meaning of Section 141 of the Code, or a obligations guaranteed by
the United States of America, as provided in Section 149(b) of the Code;
or cause interest on the bonds to be taxable for federal income tax
purposes, or cause the interest on the bonds to be includable in any
alternative minimum tax other than an alternative minimum tax which
applies to all tax exempt bonds or Bonds generally; or which would
cause the proceeds to be used directly or indirectly by an organization
qualifying under Section 501(3) of the Code.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the City shall not issue additional
Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 1987 Bonds.
B. The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of act 94, to
issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the system which
shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the net revenues of the
system with the bonds but only for the following purposes and under
the following terms and conditions:
(1) To complete the project in accordance with the plans and
specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless
the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate
evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete
the project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor
and stating the amount that will be required to complete the
project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the
City Clerk, it shall be the duty of the Commission to provide for and
issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said
certificate to be necessary to complete the project in accordance
with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue
such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other
sources.
(2) For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and
improvements to the system or for the purpose of refunding part of
§ A100-19 LAPEER CODE § A100-20
1:714
§ A100-21. Direction to officers.
The Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer, members, staff, council, and Bond council
for the City, or any of the, are authorized on behalf of the City to apply
for such rulings, order and approvals and file or submit such elections or
other documents to any governmental agency in order that the bonds may
be validly issued and the interest thereon be exempt from federal income
any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such
additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be
made to the bond reserve account. Bonds for such purposes shall
not be issued pursuant to this subparagraph, (a) unless the average
actual or augmented Net Revenues of the system for the then
last two preceding twelve month operating years or the actual
or augmented Net Revenues for the last preceding twelve-month
operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall
be equal to at least 125% of the average amount of principal
and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the
then outstanding Bonds and on the additional Bonds then being
issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued in whole or in
part for refunding outstanding Bonds the average annual principal
and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from
the principal and interest requirements for each operating year
the annual principal and interest requirements for each operating
year the annual principal and interest requirements of any Bond
to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For
purposes of this Subsection B(2), the City may elect to use as the
last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more
than 16 months from the date of delivery of the additional Bonds.
If the system rates, fees or charges shall be increased at or prior
to the time of authorizing the additional Bonds, the net revenues
for each of the two preceding operating years shall be augmented
by an amount reflecting the effect of the increase had the system's
billings during such operating years been at the increased rates.
Determination by the City Commission as to existence of conditions
permitting the issuance of additional Bonds shall be conclusive. No
additional Bonds of equal standing as to the net revenues of the
system shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in
this subparagraph if the City shall then be in default in making its
required payments to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the
Redemption Fund. [Amended 7-27-1987]
(3) For refunding a part of the outstanding Bonds and paying costs of
issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may be
required to be made to the bond reserve account. No additional
Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the
maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any
operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than
the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any
operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding.
§ A100-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-21
1:715
taxation and are further hereby authorized to execute, date and deliver such
other certificates, documents, instruments, and opinions and other papers
as may be required by the Purchase Contract or as may be necessary or
convenient to effectuate the sale and delivery of the bonds in accordance
with the terms of the Purchase Contract. The officers, agents and employees
of the City are authorized to take all other actions necessary and convenient
to facilitate sale of the bonds.
§ A100-22. Sale of bonds to authority.
§ A100-23. Repeal, savings clause.
All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed.
§ A100-24. Severability; paragraph headings; and conflict.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be
held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall not affect any of the other provisions of this ordinance. The paragraph
headings in this ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only
and shall not be considered to be part of this ordinance.
§ A100-25. Publication and recordation.
This ordinance shall be published in full in The Flint Journal, a newspaper
of general circulation in the City qualified under State law to publish legal
notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the ordinance
book of the City and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the
Mayor and City Clerk.
§ A100-26. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be effective on adoption. (July 15, 1987)
A. The City hereby authorizes the bonds to be sold to the Authority, upon
receipt of approval or exception from prior approval of the Michigan
Department of Treasury, in an amount equal to the amount described
above and at a net interest rate or cost not more than the rate described
above, all as shall be approved by the Mayor and City Clerk at the time
of sale and pursuant to the terms and provisions further described in
this ordinance.
B. The form of the Purchase Contract between the City and the Authority
relating to the sale of the bonds on file with the City Clerk is hereby
approved.
C. The Mayor and Clerk are hereby authorized to execute and deliver the
Purchase Contract in the form approved, with such changes and
insertions in such document as may be necessary or desirable,
permitted by law, and not materially adverse to the City.
§ A100-21 LAPEER CODE § A100-26
1:716
ARTICLE II
Sewer Revenue Bonds 2010
[Adopted 7-19-2010 by Ord. No. 61 (Ch. 61 of the 1978 General
Ordinances)]
§ A100-27. Definitions.
Whenever used in this ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the
context, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT 94 — Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended.101
ADJUSTED NET REVENUES —
AUTHORITY — The Michigan Municipal Bond Authority.
AUTHORIZED OFFICERS — The Mayor, City Manager, Finance Director,
and Clerk.
BONDS — The Series 2010 Bonds, together with any additional Bonds of
equal or superior standing as the context indicates hereafter issued.
ISSUER — The City of Lapeer, County of Lapeer, State of Michigan.
MDEQ — The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
PROJECT — The additions, extensions and improvements to the system
together with appurtenances and attachments thereto.
REVENUES AND NET REVENUES — The revenues and net revenues of the
system and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94,102 including
For any operating year the excess of revenues over expenses for the
system determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, to which shall be added depreciation, amortization, interest
expense on Bonds and payments to the Issuer in lieu of taxes, to which
may be made the following adjustments.
Revenues may be augmented by the amount of any rate increases
adopted prior to the issuance of additional Bonds or to be placed
into effect before the time principal or interest on the additional
Bonds becomes payable from Revenues as applied to quantities of
service furnished during the operating year or portion thereof that
the increased rates were not in effect.
(1)
Revenues may be augmented by amounts which may be derived
from rates and charges to be paid by new customers of the system.
(2)
A.
The adjustment of revenues and expenses by the factors set forth in
Subsection A(1) and (2) above shall be reported upon by professional
engineers or certified public accountants or other experts not in the
regular employment of the Issuer.
B.
101. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
102. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.103.
§ A100-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-27
1:717
with respect to "Revenues," the earnings derived from the investment of
moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this ordinance.
SERIES 2010 BONDS — The Wastewater System Revenue Bonds of the
Issuer in the principal amount of not to exceed $11,000,000 authorized by
this ordinance.
SUFFICIENT GOVERNMENT OBLIGATIONS — Direct obligations of the
United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which
is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at
the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which,
without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such
amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the
bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it
comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption.
Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank
or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption
prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption
shall be given to the paying agent.
SYSTEM — The Wastewater System of the Issuer, including such facilities
thereof as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the project,
and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto
hereafter made.
§ A100-28. Necessity; approval of plans and specifications.
It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the Issuer
to acquire and construct the project in accordance with the plans and
specifications prepared by the City's engineers, which plans and
specifications are hereby approved. The project qualifies for the State of
Michigan Revolving Loan Fund financing program being administered by
the MDEQ and the Authority, whereby bonds of the Issuer are sold to the
Authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of not to exceed 4% per annum.
§ A100-29. Costs; useful life.
The total cost of the project is presently estimated not to exceed
$11,000,000 including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in
§ A100-30 of this ordinance, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and
confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the project is estimated to be not
less than 40 years.
§ A100-30. Payment of cost; bonds authorized.
To pay the cost of acquiring and constructing the project, including payment
of legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and
incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2010 Bonds, the Issuer shall
borrow the sum of not to exceed $11,000,000 (the "Principal Amount") and
issue the Series 2010 Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94.103
103. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ A100-27 LAPEER CODE § A100-31
1:718
§ A100-31. Issuance of series 2010 bonds; details.
A. The Series 2010 Bonds of the Issuer, to be designated WASTEWATER
SYSTEM REVENUE BONDS, Series 2010 authorized to be issued in the
Principal Amount or as otherwise finally determined by order of the
MDEQ for the purpose of paying the cost of the project, including the
costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2010
Bonds. The Series 2010 Bonds shall be payable out of the net revenues,
as set forth more fully herein. The bonds shall be executed in the name
of the Issuer with the manual signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk
and shall have the City's seal impressed on them. The Series 2010
Bonds shall be in the form of a single fully-registered, nonconvertible
bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as
of the date of delivery of the Series 2010 Bonds, payable in principal
installments serially as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at
the time of sale of the Series 2010 Bonds and approved by the Authority
and an Authorized Officer. Final determination of the Principal Amount
and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the
Series 2010 Bonds shall be evidenced by execution of a Purchase
Contract (the "Purchase Contract") between the Issuer and the
Authority providing for sale of the Series 2010 Bonds, and each of the
Authorized Officers are authorized and directed to execute and deliver
the Purchase Contract when it is in final form and to make the
determinations set forth above.
B. The Series 2010 Bonds or principal installments thereof will be subject
to prepayment prior to maturity in the manner and at the times as
provided in the form of Series 2010 Bond contained in this ordinance or
as may be approved by any of the Authorized Officers at the time of sale
of the Series 2010 Bonds or by the Authority at the time of prepayment.
C. The Series 2010 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate of not to exceed 4%
per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by
execution of the Purchase Contract, but in any event not to exceed the
rate permitted by law, and any of the Authorized Officers shall deliver
the Series 2010 Bond in accordance with the delivery instructions of the
Authority.
D. The Series 2010 Bond principal amount is expected to be drawn down
by the Issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue
from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the Issuer.
E. The Series 2010 Bond shall not be convertible or exchangeable into
more than one fully-registered bond. Principal of and interest on the
Series 2010 Bond shall be payable as provided, in the Series 2010 Bond
form in this ordinance.
F. The City Clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the
Issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made
and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments
shall be returned to and retained by the City Clerk.
§ A100-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-31
1:719
§ A100-32. Registration and transfer.
G. Upon payment by the Issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest
on the Series 2010 Bond, the Authority shall deliver the Series 2010
Bonds to the Issuer for cancellation.
A. Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept
pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in
person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon
surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a
duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the
transfer agent. Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for
transfer, the Issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall
authenticate and deliver a new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate
principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the
bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental
charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The transfer
agent shall not be required (i) to issue, register the transfer of or
exchange any Bond during a period beginning at the opening of
business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption
of Bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series
2010 Bonds contained in § A100-44 of this ordinance and ending at the
close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register
the transfer of or exchange any Bond so selected for redemption in
whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of Bonds being
redeemed in part. The Issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call
for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is
to be given.
B. The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office,
sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which
shall at all times be open to inspection by the Issuer; and, upon
presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such
reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be
transferred, on said books, Bonds as hereinbefore provided.
C. If any Bond shall become mutilated, the Issuer, at the expense of the
holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall
authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and
substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer
agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this ordinance
shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or
theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is
satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent
shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including
Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being
sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws
have been met, the Issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute,
and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new
Bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or
§ A100-31 LAPEER CODE § A100-32
1:720
§ A100-33. Payment of bonds.
The Series 2010 Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable from
the net revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby created a
statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues which shall be a lien
to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all
bonds payable from the net revenues, or, until sufficient cash or sufficient
government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of
all Bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such Bonds
to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption
together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit
of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous
sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series
of Bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this
ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds
of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this
ordinance. If the Series 2010 Bonds are purchased by the Authority and if
the Authority so requires, the Issuer shall pledge its limited tax full faith and
credit for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Series 2010
Bonds. Should the net revenues of the system at any time be insufficient to
pay principal and interest on the Series 2010 Bonds, as the same become
due, and if the Issuer pledges its limited tax full faith and credit pursuant
to the requirement of the Authority, then the Issuer shall advance from any
funds available therefor, or, if necessary, levy taxes upon all taxable property
in the Issuer, subject to applicable constitutional and statutory limitations,
such sums as may be necessary to pay said principal and interest. The
Issuer shall be reimbursed for any such advance from the net revenues
of the system subsequently received which are not otherwise pledged or
encumbered by this ordinance.
§ A100-34. Bondholders' rights; receiver.
any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution
for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have
matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute
Bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof.
A. The holder or holders of the bonds representing in the aggregate not
less than 20% of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding,
may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and
enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may,
by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel
performance of all duties of the officers of the Issuer, including the
fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of Revenues, the proper
segregation of the Revenues of the system and the proper application
thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be
construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof.
B. If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the
bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a
§ A100-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-34
1:721
§ A100-35. Management; fiscal year.
The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring of
the project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the City
Commission. The City Commission may employ such person or persons in
such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient
management and operation of the system. The City Commission may make
such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure
the efficient management and operation of the system.
§ A100-36. Rates and charges.
The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system
and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates
shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance.
§ A100-37. No free service or use.
No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at
less than cost, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or
corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality,
including the Issuer.
§ A100-38. Fixing and revising rates; rate covenant.
The rates now in effect and the rate increases to be placed into effect are
estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of
administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the
system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working
order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the
bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the
reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and
funds for the system required by law and this ordinance. The rates shall be
fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these
amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates
for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for the
foregoing.
receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the Issuer
and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of
the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the Issuer more
particularly set forth herein and in Act 94.104
C. The holder or holders of the bonds shall have all other rights and
remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of
the bonds and the security therefor.
104. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ A100-34 LAPEER CODE § A100-39
1:722
§ A100-39. Funds and accounts; flow of funds.
Commencing upon the adoption of this ordinance, all funds belonging to
the system shall be transferred as herein indicated and all Revenues of
the system shall be set aside as collected and credited to a fund to be
designated WASTEWATER SYSTEM RECEIVING FUND (the "Receiving
Fund"). In addition, all Revenues in any accounts of the system shall be
transferred to the Receiving Fund and credited to the funds and accounts
as provided in this section. The Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund
are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred
or debited from the Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the
times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified:
A. Operation and maintenance fund:
(1) Out of the Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund there shall be
first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated OPERATION
AND MAINTENANCE FUND (the "Operation and Maintenance
Fund"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the
next month's expenses of administration and operation of the
system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as
may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working
order.
(2) A budget, showing in detail the estimated costs of administration,
operation and maintenance of the system for the next ensuing
operating year, shall be prepared by the City Commission at least
30 days prior to the commencement of each ensuing operating
year. No payments shall be made to the Issuer from moneys
credited to the Operation and Maintenance Fund except for
services directly rendered to the system by the Issuer or its
personnel.
B. Bond and interest redemption fund:
(1) There shall be established and maintained a separate depositary
fund designated BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND (the
"Redemption Fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to
time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of,
redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the bonds. The
moneys in the Redemption Fund shall be kept on deposit with the
bank or trust company where the principal of and interest on the
bonds, or any series thereof, are payable.
(2) Out of the Revenues remaining in the Receiving Fund, after
provision for the Operation and Maintenance Fund, there shall be
set aside each month commencing with the first day of the month
following adoption of this ordinance in the Redemption Fund a sum
proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment when due of
the current principal of and interest on the bonds, less any amount
in the Redemption Fund representing accrued interest on the
bonds or investment income on amounts on deposit in the
§ A100-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-39
1:723
Redemption Fund, (including investment income on amounts held
as part of the bond reserve account). Commencing on the first day
of the month following the adoption of this ordinance, the amount
set aside each month for interest on the bonds shall be 1/6 of the
total amount of interest on the bonds next coming due. The amount
set aside each month for principal, commencing 12 months prior to
the first maturity date of the bonds, shall be 1/12 of the amount of
principal next coming due by maturity. If there is any deficiency in
the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall be added to
the next succeeding monthly requirements. The amount to be set
aside for the payment of principal and interest on any date shall
not exceed the amount which, when added to the money on deposit
in the Redemption Fund, including investment income thereon, is
necessary to pay principal and interest due on the bonds on the
next succeeding principal payment date.
(3) There is established a separate account in the Redemption Fund to
be known as the BOND RESERVE ACCOUNT (the "Bond Reserve
Account"). There shall be periodically deposited in the bond
reserve account in such amounts as the City Commission shall
annually determine sums sufficient to fund the "Reserve Amount"
which shall be the lesser of (1) the maximum annual debt service
due in the current or any future year, (2) 125% of the average
annual debt service or (3) 10% of the principal amount of the
bonds. The Reserve Account shall be funded in the Reserve Amount
within 10 years of the date of issue of the Series 2010 Bonds.
Interest on the bond reserve account must be transferred into the
Redemption Fund once the Reserve Amount has been reached.
Transfer shall be made as to the bond reserve account annually
until the Reserve Amount has been reached.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the moneys credited
to the bond reserve account shall be used solely for the payment of
the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the
bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default. If at any time
it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the bond reserve
account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be
replaced from the net revenues first received thereafter which are
not required for current principal and interest requirements until
the amount on deposit equals the Reserve Amount. If additional
Bonds are issued, each Ordinance authorizing the additional Bonds
shall provide either for additional deposits to the bond reserve
account to be made from the proceeds of the additional Bonds or
Issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use in an
amount that will result in the bond reserve account being equal to
the maximum annual principal and interest requirements on the
bonds outstanding after issuance of the additional Bonds, or such
lesser amount as may be necessary to maintain the tax-exempt
status of the bonds. If bonds of superior status are issued additional
Bond Reserve Accounts shall be established for such series of
§ A100-39 LAPEER CODE § A100-39
1:724
§ A100-40. Priority of funds.
In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide
for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund or
the Redemption Fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the
system, except the proceeds of sale of the bonds, shall be credited or
bonds prior to the issuance of same. If on any principal payment
date the amount in the bond reserve account exceeds the Reserve
Amount, the excess shall be transferred to the Redemption Fund
for payment of principal and interest on the bonds due on that date.
C. Replacement fund. There shall next be established and maintained a
fund, separate depositary account, designated REPLACEMENT FUND
(the "Replacement Fund"), the money credited thereto to be used solely
for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the system. Out
of the Revenues and moneys of the system remaining in the Receiving
Fund each month after provision has been made for the deposit of
moneys in the Operation and Maintenance Fund and the Redemption
Fund (including the bond reserve account), there may be deposited in
the Replacement Fund such additional funds as the City Commission
may deem advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys
in the Replacement Fund for the purpose for which the Replacement
Fund was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any
moneys in the Receiving Fund which are not required by this ordinance
to be used for the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption
Fund (including the bond reserve account).
D. Improvement fund. Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving
Fund, after meeting the requirements of the Operation and
Maintenance Fund, the Redemption Fund (including the bond reserve
account) and the Replacement Fund, there may be next set aside in or
credited to a fund to be designated IMPROVEMENT FUND (the
"Improvement Fund"), which Improvement Fund may have several
subaccounts therein, such sums monthly as the Issuer may deem
advisable to be used for additions, improvements, enlargements or
extensions to the system, including the planning thereof.
E. Surplus moneys. Thereafter, any Revenues in the Receiving Fund after
satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this section may, at the
discretion of the Issuer, be used for any of the following purposes:
(1) Transferred to the Replacement Fund, the Improvement Fund or
both.
(2) Transferred to the Redemption Fund and used for the purchase of
Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value
thereof or used to redeem Bonds prior to maturity pursuant to
§ A100-31 of this ordinance.
(3) Any other use permitted by law.
§ A100-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-40
1:725
transferred, first, to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, and second to
the Redemption Fund.
§ A100-41. Depositary and funds on hand.
Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this
ordinance, except moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the bond
reserve account) and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the
bonds, may be kept in one or more bank accounts at a bank or banks
designated by resolution of the Issuer, and if kept in one bank account the
moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the Issuer in the
manner and at the times provided in this ordinance.
§ A100-42. Investments.
Moneys in the funds and accounts established herein and moneys derived
from the proceeds of sale of the bonds, may be invested by the Issuer
in United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of
and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America
and any investments hereafter permitted by law, and moneys derived from
the proceeds of sale of the bonds may also be invested in certificates of
deposit of any bank whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation. Investment of moneys in the Redemption Fund
being accumulated for payment of the next maturing principal or interest
payment of the bonds shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates
prior to the date of the next maturing principal or interest payment on the
bonds. Investment of moneys in the bond reserve account shall be limited to
obligations bearing maturity dates or subject to redemption, at the option of
the holder thereof, not later than five years from the date of the investment.
In the event investments are made, any securities representing the same
shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit
the fund or funds or account from which the purchase was made. Profit
realized or interest income earned on investment of funds in the Receiving
Fund, Operation and Maintenance Fund and Improvement Fund shall be
deposited in or credited to the Receiving Fund at the end of each fiscal year.
Profit realized on interest income earned on investment of moneys in the
Redemption Fund including income derived from the bond reserve account
shall be credited as received to the Redemption Fund.
§ A100-43. Bond proceeds.
A. From the proceeds of the sale of the bonds there shall be immediately
deposited in the Redemption Fund an amount equal to the accrued
interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the bonds. The
balance of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds when received from the
Authority shall be deposited in a bank or banks, designated by the City
Commission, qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under
the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94,105 in an account designated
105. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.115.
§ A100-40 LAPEER CODE § A100-43
1:726
§ A100-44. Bond form.
The bonds shall be in substantially the following form:
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF LAPEER
CITY OF LAPEER
WASTEWATER SYSTEM REVENUE BOND, SERIES 2010
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Municipal Bond Authority
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: __________ Dollars ($_____,000)
DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: __________, 2010
CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "Construction Fund"). Moneys in the
Construction Fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the
project, including any engineering, legal and other expenses incident
thereto and to the financing thereof. Payments for construction, either
on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered
engineer in charge of such work shall file with the City Commission
a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in
accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done
pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including
properly authorized change orders), that such work is satisfactory and
that such work has not been previously paid for.
B. Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the bonds remaining
after completion of the project in the Construction Fund may, at the
discretion of the Issuer, be used for further improvements,
enlargements and extension to the system, if, at the time of such
expenditures, such use is approved by the Michigan Department of
Treasury, if such permission is then required by law. Any remaining
balance after such expenditure shall be paid to the Redemption Fund
and may be used for the purpose of purchasing Bonds on the open
market at not more than the fair market value thereof, but not more
than the price at which the bonds may next be called for redemption, or
used for the purpose of paying principal of the bonds upon maturity or
calling Bonds for redemption.
§ A100-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-44
1:727
The CITY OF LAPEER, County of Lapeer, State of Michigan (the "City"), for
value received, hereby promises to pay, out of the hereinafter described
Net Revenues of the City's Wastewater System (hereinafter defined), to
the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority (the "Authority"), or registered
assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as
shall have been advanced to the City pursuant to a Purchase Contract
between the City and the Authority, (Revenue Sharing Agreement,) and a
Supplemental Agreement by and among the City, the Authority and the
State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality,
in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid prior
thereto as hereinafter provided.
During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the City
under this bond, the Authority will periodically provide to the City a
statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and
the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part
of the Authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or
the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the City of its obligation
to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced (subject to
any principal foregiveness as provided in Schedule A), all accrued interest
thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance
with the terms of this bond.
The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual
principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached to the
Purchase Contract, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than
$_____,000 is disbursed to the City or if a portion of the Principal Amount
is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments
from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until
paid at the rate of _____ and _____ percent (_._%) per annum. Interest is
first payable on _____, 200__, and semiannually thereafter on the first day
of October and April of each year, as set forth in the Purchase Contract.
The bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity by the Issuer
only with the prior written consent of the Authority and on such terms as
may be required by the Authority.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this bond, as long as the Authority
is the owner of this bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium,
if any, and interest at the designated office of __________, or at such other
place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the Authority (the
"Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that it will deposit with
the Authority's Depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any,
and interest on this bond in immediately available funds at least five
business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether
by maturity, redemption or otherwise; and (c) written notice of any
redemption of this bond shall be given by the City and received by the
Authority's Depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such
redemption is to be made.
Additional Interest
§ A100-44 LAPEER CODE § A100-44
1:728
In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon
when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of
such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal
to the rate of interest which is 2% above the Authority's cost of providing
funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on the bonds
of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no
event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The
additional interest shall continue to accrue until the Authority has been
fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the Authority (as determined
by the Authority) as a consequence of the City's default. Such additional
interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand
of the Authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in
the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the
investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority
for the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this
bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other
funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest
on outstanding bonds of the Authority issued to fund such account, the City
shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the City's pro rata share
(as determined by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest
on this bond.
For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the City has
irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Wastewater System of the City,
including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the
"System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary
expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net
Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created.
In addition in case of insufficiency of said Net Revenues, the principal of
and interest on the bonds shall be payable from the general funds of the
City or, if necessary, from ad valorem taxes levied upon all taxable property
in the City, subject to applicable charter, statutory and constitutional tax
rate limitations.
This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal
sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinance No. _____ duly adopted
by the City Commission of the City, and under and in full compliance
with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including
specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the
purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions,
extensions and improvements to the system.
Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City
prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the Authority and
on such terms as may be required by the Authority.
For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions
under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under
which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be
issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this
bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described Ordinance.
§ A100-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-44
1:729
This bond is primarily a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal
and interest, primarily from the net revenues of the system. The principal
of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore
mentioned. [As additional security, the City has pledged its limited tax full
faith and credit for payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds of
this issue, which includes the Issuer's obligation to levy taxes, if necessary,
within applicable constitutional, statutory and charter tax limitations.]
The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree,
to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the net
revenues of the system shall be outstanding, such rates for service
furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of
the interest upon and the principal of the bonds of this issue, as and
when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond
redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide
for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such
expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the
same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other
expenditures and funds for the system as are required by said Ordinances.
This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City by the registered
owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in
writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument
of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the
registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in
writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate
principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee
in exchange therefor as provided in the ordinance authorizing the bonds,
and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed.
It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things
required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond
and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed
in regular and due time and form as required by law.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Lapeer, County of Lapeer, State of
Michigan, by its City Commission, has caused this bond to be executed with
the manual signatures of its Mayor and its Clerk and the corporate seal of
the City to be impressed hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue.
CITY OF LAPEER
By__________
Mayor
(Seal)
Countersigned:
__________
City Clerk
§ A100-44 LAPEER CODE § A100-45
1:730
§ A100-45. Covenants.
The Issuer covenants and agrees with the holders of the bonds that so long
as any of the bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or
interest.
A. The Issuer will maintain the system in good repair and working order
and will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually
perform all duties with reference to the system required by the
Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, and this ordinance.
B. The Issuer will keep proper books of record and account separate from
all other records and accounts of the Issuer, in which shall be made full
and correct entries of all transactions relating to the system. The Issuer
shall have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the
system for the preceding operating year made each year by an
independent certified public accountant, and a copy of the audit shall
be mailed to the manager of each syndicate or account originally
purchasing any issue of the bonds. The auditor shall comment on the
manner in which the Issuer is complying with the requirements of the
ordinance with respect to setting aside and investing moneys and
meeting the requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The
audit shall be completed and so made available not later than six
months after the close of each operating year.
C. The Issuer will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the
bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the system and liability
insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by
municipalities engaged in the operation of wastewater systems,
including self-insurance. All moneys received for losses under any such
insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and
restoration of the property damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not
so used, shall be used for the purpose of redeeming or purchasing
Bonds.
D. The Issuer will not sell, lease or dispose of the system, or any
substantial part, until all of the bonds have been paid in full, both as to
principal and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided.
The Issuer will operate the system as economically as possible, will
make all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the system in
good repair and working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any
act which would affect the system in such a way as to have a material
adverse effect on the security for the bonds.
E. The Issuer will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person,
firm or corporation to operate a System that will compete with the
system and the Issuer will not operate a system that will compete with
the system.
F. The Issuer will cause the project to be acquired and constructed
promptly and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor.
§ A100-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-46
1:731
§ A100-46. Additional bonds.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the Issuer shall not issue additional
Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 2010 Bonds.
B. The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94,106 to
issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the system which
may be of either equal standing or prior standing with respect to the
priority of lien on the net revenues of the system with the bonds but
only for the following purposes and under the following terms and
conditions:
(1) To complete the project in accordance with the plans and
specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless
the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate
evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete
the project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor
and stating the amount that will be required to complete the
project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the
Issuer, it shall be the duty of the Issuer to provide for and issue
additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to
be necessary to complete the project in accordance with the plans
and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or
to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources.
(2) For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and
improvements to the system or for the purpose of refunding part of
any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such
additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be
made to the bond reserve account. Bonds of equal standing with
the Series 2009 Bonds for such purposes shall not be issued
pursuant to this Subsection B(2) unless the Adjusted Net Revenues
of the system for the then last two preceding twelve-month
operating years or the Adjusted Net Revenues for the last
preceding twelve-month operating year, if the same shall be lower
than the average, shall be equal to at least 100% of the maximum
amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any
operating year on the then outstanding Bonds and on the additional
Bonds then being issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued
having priority of lien to the Series 2010 Bonds and bonds of equal
standing with the Series 2010 Bonds then said Adjusted Net
Revenues shall be equal to at least 100% of the maximum amount
of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year
on the then outstanding Bonds and on the additional Bonds then
being issued. If the additional Bonds are to be issued in whole or in
part for refunding outstanding Bonds, the annual principal and
interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the
principal and interest requirements for each operating year the
annual principal and interest requirements of any Bonds to be
106. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.101 et seq.
§ A100-46 LAPEER CODE § A100-46
1:732
§ A100-47. Application to MDEQ and authority.
The Authorized Officers are each hereby authorized to make application to
the Authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2010 Bonds
with the Authority. The Authorized Officers are each further authorized to
execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates including a
revenue sharing pledge agreement, purchase contract, and supplemental
agreement as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2010 Bonds
for the State Revolving Fund. In the event of a sale of the Series 2010 Bonds
to the Authority, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to make such
changes to the form of Series 2010 Bond contained in § A100-44 of this
ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of 1985 PA
227 ("Act 227"),107 including, but not limited to changes to the title of the
bonds, in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references
to additional security required by Act 227. In the event the Series 2010
Bonds are sold to the Authority, the taxes collected by the State of Michigan
and returned to the Issuer may be pledged for payment of the Series 2010
Bonds, and an Authorized Officer is further authorized to negotiate, execute
and deliver an agreement with the Authority for payment of such taxes to
the Authority or to a trustee as provided in Section 23 of Act 227.
§ A100-48. Covenant regarding tax exempt status of the bonds.
The Issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its
control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the bonds
from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (the "Code") including, but not limited
refunded from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For purposes
of this Subsection B(2) the Issuer may elect to use as the last
preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than
16 months prior to the date of delivery of the additional Bonds and
as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year
ending not more than 28 months prior to the date of delivery of
the additional Bonds. Determination by the Issuer as to existence
of conditions permitting the issuance of additional Bonds shall be
conclusive. No additional Bonds of equal or prior standing as to
the net revenues of the system shall be issued pursuant to the
authorization contained in this subparagraph if the Issuer shall
then be in default in making its required payments to the Operation
and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund.
(3) For refunding all or a part of the outstanding Bonds and paying
costs of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which
may be required to be made to the bond reserve account. No
additional Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless
the issuance of such Bonds shall result in a net present value or as
otherwise provided by applicable state law.
107. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 141.1051 et seq.
§ A100-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-48
1:733
to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the
expenditure and investment of Bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be
Bond proceeds, and to prevent the bonds from being or becoming "private
activity bonds" as that term is used in Section 141 of the Code.
§ A100-49. Repeal, savings clause.
All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed.
§ A100-50. Severability; paragraph headings; and conflict.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be
held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall not affect any of the other provisions of this ordinance. The paragraph
headings in this ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only
and shall not be considered to be part of this ordinance.
§ A100-51. Publication and recordation.
This ordinance shall be published in full in the LA View, a newspaper of
general circulation in the Issuer qualified under State law to publish legal
notices, promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in the ordinance
Book of the Issuer and such recording authenticated by the signatures of
the Mayor and City Clerk.
§ A100-52. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption.
§ A100-48 LAPEER CODE § A100-52
1:734
Chapter A110
WATER REVENUE BONDS
§ A100-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A100-52
1:735

ARTICLE I
Water Revenue Bonds
[Adopted as Ch. 42 of the 1978 General Ordinances]
§ A110-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this ordinance, except when otherwise indicated by the
context, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT 94 — Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan 1933, as amended.
BOND BANK — The Michigan Municipal Bond Authority created pursuant
to Act 227 of 1985.
BONDS — The Series 1986 Bonds, together with any additional bonds of
equal standing hereafter issued.
CITY — The City of Lapeer, County of Lapeer, State of Michigan.
COMMISSION — The City Commission of the City.
PROJECT — The repairs, replacements, additions, extensions and
improvements to the System including the acquisition and construction
of water main improvements and water meters, and appurtenances and
attachments thereto.
REVENUES AND NET REVENUES — The revenues and net revenues of the
City and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with
respect to "Revenues," the earnings derived from the investment of moneys
in the various funds and accounts established by this ordinance.
SERIES 1986 BONDS — The Water Supply System Revenue Bonds, Series
1986, of the City in the principal amount of $395,000 authorized by this
ordinance.
SUFFICIENT GOVERNMENT OBLIGATIONS — Direct obligations of the
United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which
is fully guaranteed by the United States of American, not redeemable at
the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which,
without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times ad in such
amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the
Bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds as it
comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption.
Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank
or trust company, and if any of the Bonds are to be called for redemption
prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the Bonds for redemption
shall be given to the paying agent.
SYSTEM — The City's water supply system, including such facilities thereof
as are now existing, are acquired and constructed as the Project, and
all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter
made.
§ A110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-2
1:737
§ A110-2. Necessity; approval of plans and specifications.
It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the City to
acquire the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications
prepared by Williams and Works of Grand Rapids, Michigan (the
"Engineers") which plans and specifications are hereby approved.
§ A110-3. Costs; useful life.
The total cost of the Project is estimated to be $395,000 including the
payment of incidental expenses as specified in § A110-4 of this article,
which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of
usefulness of the Project is estimated to be not less than 40 years.
§ A110-4. Payment of cost; bonds authorized.
§ A110-5. Bond details, issuance in series, registration and
execution. [Amended 9-15-1986]
A. To pay the cost of acquiring and constructing the Project, including
payment of legal, engineering, financial, and other expenses incident
thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 1986 Bonds,
the City shall borrow the sum of $395,000 and issue the Series 1986
Bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining cost
of the Project, if any, shall be defrayed from City funds on hand and
legally available for such use and from other funds available to the City.
B. The purpose of the ordinance is to authorize the issuance of revenue
bonds to finance the cost of acquiring additions, extensions and
improvements to the Project.
A. The Series 1986 Bonds hereby authorized shall be designated Water
Supply System Revenue bonds, series 1986, shall be payable out of the
Net Revenues, as set forth more fully in § A110-6 hereof, shall consist of
bonds of the denomination of $5,000, or multiples of $5,000 not
exceeding the amount of a single maturity, dated as of September 25,
1986, numbered in order of registration from 1 upwards, and shall
mature on May 1 in the years and amounts as follows:
Year Amount
1987 $10,000
1988 $10,000
1989 $10,000
1990 $10,000
1991 $10,000
1992 $15,000
1993 $15,000
§ A110-2 LAPEER CODE § A110-5
1:738
Year Amount
1994 $15,000
1995 $15,000
1996 $20,000
1997 $20,000
1998 $20,000
1999 $20,000
2000 $25,000
2001 $25,000
2002 $25,000
2003 $30,000
2004 $30,000
2005 $35,000
2006 $35,000
B. The Series 1986 Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates to be
determined on sale thereof, but in any event not exceeding 7% per
annum, payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year, commencing
May 1, 1987, by check drawn on the transfer agent mailed to the
registered owner at the registered address, as shown on the
registration books of the City maintained by the transfer agent.
Comerica Bank-Detroit, Detroit, Michigan is hereby designated as the
initial transfer agent. Interest shall be payable to the registered owner
of record as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest
payment date. The date of determination of registered owner for
purposes of payment of interest as provided in this paragraph may be
changed by the City to conform to market practice in the future. The
principal of the bonds shall be payable at a bank or trust company to be
designated by the City as registrar and transfer agent for this issue or, if
such Bonds are purchased by the bond Bank, at the office of the Bond
bank. The Series 1986 Bonds shall be sold at not less than 98% of their
par value.
C. The Series 1986 Bonds or portions thereof maturing on or after May 1,
1997, may be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the times and
prices and in the manner and with notice as set forth in the form of the
Series 1986 Bonds in § A110-18 of this article.
D. In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for
redemption, the transfer agent upon presentation of the bond called in
part for redemption shall register, authenticate and deliver to the
registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of
the original bond not called for redemption. Notice of redemption shall
§ A110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-5
1:739
be given in the manner specified in the form of the Series 1986 Bonds
contained in § A110-18 of this article.
E. The Bonds shall be executed in the name of the City with the facsimile
signatures of the Mayor and the Clerk and shall have the City's seal
printed on them. No Bond shall be valid until authenticated by an
authorized signer of the transfer agent. The Bonds shall be delivered to
the transfer agent for authentication and be delivered by him or her to
the purchaser in accordance with instructions from the Treasurer of the
City upon payment of the purchase price for the Bonds in accordance
with the bid therefor when accepted. Executed blank bonds for
registration and issuance to transferees shall simultaneously, and from
time to time thereafter as necessary, be delivered to the transfer agent
for safekeeping.
F. Any Bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept
pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in
person or by his duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the Bond
for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written
instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent.
Whenever any Bond or Bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the City
shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a
new Bond or Bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer
agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer
of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with
respect to the transfer. The City shall not be required:
(1) To issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Bond during a
period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day
of the giving of a notice of redemption of Bonds selected for
redemption as described in the form of Series 1986 Bonds
contained in § A110-18 of this article and ending at the close of
business on the day of that giving of notice.
(2) To register the transfer of or exchange any Bond so selected for
redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of
Bonds being redeemed in part. The City shall give the transfer
agent notice of a call for redemption at least 35 days prior to the
date such notice of redemption is to be given.
G. The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office,
sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the Bonds, which
shall at all times be open to inspection by the City; and, upon
presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such
reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be
transferred, on said books, Bonds as hereinbefore provided.
H. If any Bond shall become mutilated, the City, at the expense of the
holder of the Bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall
authenticate and deliver, a new Bond of like tenor in exchange and
substitution for the mutilated Bond, upon surrender to the transfer
§ A110-5 LAPEER CODE § A110-5
1:740
§ A110-6. Payment of bonds. [Amended 9-15-1986]
The Series 1986 Bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely from
the net Revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby created
a statutory lien upon the whole of the net Revenues which shall be a
first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest
on all bonds payable from the Net Revenues, or, until sufficient cash or
Sufficient Government Obligations have been deposited in trust for payment
in full of all Bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on
such Bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for
redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any.
Upon deposit of cash or Sufficient Government obligations, as provided in
the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to
that series of Bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights
under this ordinance except for payment from the deposited funds, and the
bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under
this ordinance. The City Treasurer is hereby directed to deposit with the
Transfer Agent payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest
on the bond in immediately in immediately available funds at least two
business days prior to the date or which any such payment is due.
§ A110-7. Bondholder's rights; receiver.
agent of the mutilated Bond. If any Bond issued under this ordinance
shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or
theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is
satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent
shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including
Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being
sections 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, of the Michigan Compiled Laws
have been met the City, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and
the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new Bond
of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any
applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the
Bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such Bond shall have matured
or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute Bond the
transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof.
A. The holder or holders of the Bonds representing in the aggregate not
less than 20% of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding,
may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and
enforce the statutory lien upon the net Revenues of the System, and
may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and
compel performance of all duties of the officers of the City, including the
fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of Revenues, the proper
segregation of the Revenues of the System and the proper application
thereof. The statutory lien upon the Net Revenues, however, shall not
be construed as to compel the sale of the System or any part thereof.
§ A110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-7
1:741
§ A110-8. Management; fiscal year.
The operation, repair and management of the System and the acquiring of
the Project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the City
Commission.
§ A110-9. Rates and charges.
The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the System
and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates
shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance.
§ A110-10. No free service or use.
No free service or use of the System, or service or use of the System at
less than cost, shall be furnished by the System to any person, firm or
corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.
§ A110-11. Fixing and revising rates; rate covenant.
The rates now in effect are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the
payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses
for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the System in
good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal
of and interest on all of the Bonds as the same become due and payable,
and the creation and maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for
all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the System required by law
and this ordinance. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time
as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted
and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the System at
all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing.
§ A110-12. Operating year.
The System shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall
coincide with the City's fiscal year.
B. If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest upon
the Bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may
appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the
City and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval
of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the City more
particularly set forth herein and in Act 94.
C. The holder or holders of the Bonds shall have all other rights and
remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of
the Bonds and the security therefor.
§ A110-7 LAPEER CODE § A110-13
1:742
§ A110-13. Funds and accounts; flow of funds.
Commencing on September 1, 1986, all Revenues of the System shall be
set aside as collected and credited to a fund to be designated WATER
SUPPLY SYSTEM RECEIVING FUND (the "Receiving Fund"). In addition,
on September 1, 1986 all Revenues in any accounts of the System shall be
transferred to the Receiving Fund and credited to the funds and accounts
as provided in this § A110-13. The Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund
are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred
or debited from the Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the
times and in the order of priority hereinafter specified:
A. Operation and maintenance fund:
(1) Out of the Revenues credited to the Receiving Fund there shall be
first set aside in, or credited to, a fund designated OPERATION
AND MAINTENANCE FUND (the "Operation and Maintenance
Fund"), monthly a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the
next month's expenses of administration and operation of the
System and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as
may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working
order.
(2) The City, prior to the commencement of each operating year
beginning with the operating year next commencing after the
effective date of this ordinance, shall adopt a budget covering the
foregoing expenses for each year. No payments shall be made to
the City from moneys credited to the operation and Maintenance
Fund except for services directly rendered to the System by the
City or its personnel.
B. Bond and interest redemption fund.
(1) There shall be established and maintained a separate depositary
fund designated BOND AND INTEREST REDEMPTION FUND (the
"Redemption Fund"), the moneys on deposit therein from time to
time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of,
redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the Bonds. The
moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve
Account) shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company
where the principal of and interest on the Bonds are payable, i.e.,
the transfer agent.
(2) Out of the Revenues remaining in the Receiving Fund, after
provision for the Operation and Maintenance Fund, there shall be
set aside monthly in the Redemption Fund a sum proportionately
sufficient to provide for the payment when due of the current
principal of and interest on the Bonds, less any amount in the
redemption Fund representing accrued interest on the Bonds.
Commencing September 1, 1986, the amount set aside each month
for interest on the Bonds shall be 1/3 of the total amount of interest
on the Bonds next coming due. The amount set aside each month
§ A110-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-13
1:743
for principal, commencing September 1, 1986, shall be 1/3 of the
amount of principal next coming due by maturity. If there is any
deficiency in the amount previously set aside, that deficiency shall
be added to the next succeeding month's requirements.
(3) There is established a separate account in the Redemption Fund to
be known as the BOND RESERVE ACCOUNT (the "Bond Reserve
Account"). The date of delivery of the bonds there shall be
deposited into the Bond Reserve Account the lesser of 10% of the
outstanding principal amount of the Bonds or the maximum annual
debt service requirements of the Bonds (the "Reserve Amount") is
on deposit in the Bond Reserve account, and the Reserve Amount
shall be approximately reduced to reflect any reduction in the
outstanding principal amount and the maximum annual debt
service requirements of the Bonds.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the moneys credited
to the Bond Reserve Account shall be used solely for the payment of
the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the
Bonds as to which there would otherwise be a default. If at any time
it shall be necessary to use moneys credited to the Bond reserve
Account for such payment, then the moneys so used shall be
replaced from the net Revenues first received thereafter which are
not required for current principal and interest requirements until
the amount on deposit equals the Revenue Amount. If additional
Bonds are issued, each Ordinance authorizing the additional Bonds
may provide for additional deposits to the Bond Reserve Account to
be made from the proceeds of the additional Bonds in an amount
that will result in the Bond Reserve Account being equal to the
maximum annual principal and interest requirements on the Bonds
outstanding after issuance of the additional Bonds. If, at the end of
any fiscal year the amount in the Bond Reserve Account exceeds
the reserve Amount, then the excess shall be transferred to the
improvement Fund or such other fund as the Commission may
designate. Excess amounts attributable to investment earnings
shall be transferred to the Receiving Fund.
C. Replacement fund. There shall next be established and maintained a
separate depositary fund account, designated REPLACEMENT FUND
(the "Replacement Fund"), the money credited thereto to be used solely
for the purpose of making repairs and replacements to the System. Out
of the Revenues and moneys of the System remaining in the Receiving
Fund after provision has been made for the deposit of moneys in the
Operation and Maintenance Fund and the Redemption Fund (including
the Bond Reserve Account) there may be deposited in the Replacement
Fund such additional funds as the City commission may deem
advisable. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the
Replacement Fund for the purpose for which the Replacement Fund
was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys
in the Receiving Fund which are not required by this ordinance to be
§ A110-13 LAPEER CODE § A110-13
1:744
§ A110-14. Depositary and funds on hand.
Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this
ordinance, except moneys in the Redemption Fund (including the Bond
Reserve Account) and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the
Bonds, may be kept in one or more bank accounts at a bank or banks
designated by resolution of the City Commission, and if kept in one bank
account the moneys shall be allocated on the books and records of the City
in the manner and at the times provided in this ordinance.
§ A110-15. Priority of funds.
In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide
for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund or
of the Redemption Fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the
System, except the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, shall be credited or
transferred, first, to the Operation and Maintenance Fund, and second, to
the Redemption Fund, to the extent of any deficit therein.
§ A110-16. Investments.
Moneys in the funds and account established herein and moneys derived
from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds, may be invested by the City in
United States of American obligations or in obligations the principal of and
interest on which is fully guaranteed by the united States of American,
used for the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the Redemption Fund
(including the Bond Reserve Account).
D. Improvement fund. Out of the remaining Revenues in the Receiving
Fund, after meeting the requirements of the Operation and
Maintenance Fund and the Redemption Fund (including the Bond
Reserve Account), there may be next set aside in or credited to a fund to
be designated IMPROVEMENT FUND (the "Improvement Fund") such
sums monthly as the City Commission may deem advisable to be used
for improvements, enlargements or extensions to the System.
E. Surplus moneys. Thereafter, any Revenues in the Receiving Fund after
satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this section may, at the
option of the City Commission, be used for any of the following
purposes:
(1) Transferred to the Replacement Fund, the Improvement Fund or
both.
(2) Transferred to the Redemption Fund and used for the purchase of
Bonds on the open market at not more than the fair market value
thereof or used to redeem Bonds prior to maturity pursuant to
§ A110-5 of this article.
(3) Transferred to the general fund of the City and used for any lawful
purpose.
§ A110-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-16
1:745
and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of the Bonds may also be
invested in certificates of deposit of any bank whose deposits are insured
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Investment of moneys in
the Redemption Fund being accumulated for payment of the next maturing
principal or interest payment of the Bonds shall be limited to obligations
bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal
or interest payment on the Bonds. Investment of moneys in the Bond
Reserve Account shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates
or subject to redemption, at the option of the holder thereof, not later
than five years from the date of the investment. In the event investments
are made, any securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit
with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or
account from which the purchase was made. Profit realized or interest
income earned on investment of funds in the Receiving Fund, Operation
and Maintenance Fund, Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve
Account), and Improvement Fund shall be deposited in or credited to the
Receiving Fund at the end of each fiscal year.
§ A110-17. Bond proceeds.
A. From the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds there shall be immediately
deposited in the Redemption Fund an amount equal to the accrued
interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the Bonds. The
balance of the proceeds of the sale of the Bonds shall be deposited in a
bank or banks, designated by the City Treasurer, qualified to act as
depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of
Act 94, in an account designated CONSTRUCTION FUND (the
"Construction Fund"). Moneys in the Construction Fund shall be
applied solely in payment of the cost of the Project, including any
engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the
financing thereof. Payments for construction, either on account or
otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge
of such work shall file with the City Commission a signed statement to
the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the
plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in
accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized
change orders), that such work is satisfactory and that such work has
not been previously paid for.
B. Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of sale of the Bonds remaining
after completion of the Project in the Construction Fund may, in the
discretion of the City Commission, be used for further improvements,
enlargements and extension to the System, if:
(1) At the time of such expenditures, such use is approved by the
Department of Treasury, if such permission is then required by law.
(2) Redemption of the Bond is not required under § A110-23 of this
article.
§ A110-16 LAPEER CODE § A110-17
1:746
§ A110-18. Bond form. [Amended 9-15-1986]
The Bonds shall be in substantially the following form.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF MICHIGAN
COUNTY OF LAPEER
CITY OF LAPEER
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM REVENUE BOND,
SERIES 1986
Interest Rate Maturity Date Date of Original Issue\
September 25, 1986
REGISTERED OWNER:
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: DOLLARS
The CITY OF LAPEER, County of Lapeer, State of Michigan (the "City"),
for value received, hereby promises to pay the Principal Amount shown
above in lawful money of the Unites States of America to the registered
owner specified above on the Maturity Date specified above, unless prepaid
prior thereto as hereinafter provided, with interest thereon from the Date
of Original Issue or such later date to which interest has been paid, until
paid at the Interest Rate per annum specified above, payable on May
1, 1987, and semiannually thereafter. Principal of this bond is payable
at the principal corporate trust office of Comerica Bank-Detroit, Detroit,
Michigan or such other transfer agent as the City may hereinafter
designate by notice mailed to the registered owner not less than 60 days
prior to any interest payment date or at such other place as shall be
designated in writing to the City by the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority
(the "Authority"). Interest on this bond is payable to the registered owner
of record as of the 15th day of the month preceding the payment date as
shown on the registration books kept by the transfer agent by check or
draft mailed to the registered owner at the registered address, and for the
prompt payment thereof, the revenues of the Water Supply System of the
City (collectively the "System"), including all appurtenances, extensions
and improvements thereto, after provision has been made for reasonable
and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the
"Net Revenues"), are irrevocably pledged and a statutory first lien thereon
is hereby recognized and created.
C. Any remaining balance after such expenditure shall be paid to the
Redemption Fund and may be used for the purpose of purchasing Bonds
on the open market at not more than the fair market value thereof, but
not more than the price at which the Bonds may next be called for
redemption, or used for the purpose of paying principal of the Bonds
upon maturity or calling Bonds for redemption.
§ A110-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-18
1:747
The City has agreed that it will deposit with the Paying Agent payments of
the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the bond in immediately
available funds at least two business days prior to the date on which any
such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise.
This bond is one of a series of bonds of even original issue date aggregating
the principal sum of $395,000 issued pursuant to Ordinance No. 42, as
amended, duly adopted by the City Commission of the City, and under
and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of
Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933,
as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and
constructing repairs, replacements, additions, extensions and
improvements to the System.
For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions
under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under
which additional bonds of equal standing may hereafter be issued and the
general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued,
reference is made to the above-described Ordinance.
Bonds or portions of bonds in multiples of $5,000, of this issue maturing
in the year 1997 and thereafter may be redeemed at the option of the City,
in inverse order of maturity and within any maturity by lot, on any interest
payment date on or after May 1, 1996 at par and accrued interest to the
date fixed for redemption plus a premium expressed as a percentage of par
value as follows:
Period During Which Redeemed Redemption Price
May 1, 1996 to April 30, 1997,
inclusive
102%
May 1, 1997 to April 30, 1998,
inclusive
101%
May 1, 1998 to April 30, 1999,
inclusive
101%
May 1, 1999 to April 30, 2000,
inclusive
100%
May 1, 2000 and thereafter 100%
Written notice of such redemption must be given to the Transfer Agent by
the City at least 35 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to
be made.
In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for
redemption, the transfer agent upon presentation of the bond called in part
for redemption shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered
owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original
bond not called for redemption.
§ A110-18 LAPEER CODE § A110-18
1:748
Notice of redemption shall be given to the registered owners of the bonds
to be redeemed by mailing of such notice not less than 30 days prior to
the date fixed for redemption to the registered owner at the address of
the registered owner as shown on the registration books of the City. Bonds
so called for redemption shall not bear interest after the date fixed for
redemption, provided funds are on hand with the transfer agent to redeem
the bond called for redemption.
In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon
when due, whether by acceleration or otherwise, the amount of such
default shall, until paid, bear inters (the "additional interest") at a rate
equal to the rate of interest which is 1% above the Authority's cost of
providing funds (as determined by the Authority) to make payment on
the bonds of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this Bond.
Such additional interest shall be payable on the demand of the Authority.
In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of
any municipal obligation purchased by the Authority) the investment of
amounts in the reserve account established by the Authority for the bonds
of the Authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond, fail to
provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may
be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding
bond of the Authority issued to fund such account, the City shall and hereby
agrees to pay on demand only the Issuer's pro rata share (as determined
by the Authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond.
This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is not a general obligation of
the City and does not constitute an indebtedness of the City within any
constitutional or statutory limitation, but is payable, both as to principal
and interest, solely from the Net Revenues of the System. The principal of
and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore
mentioned.
The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree
to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the net
Revenues of the System shall be outstanding, such rates for service
furnished by the System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of
the interest upon and the principal of the bonds of this issue and any
additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become
due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including a
bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of
administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the
System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working
order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the System
as are required by the ordinance.
§ A110-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-18
1:749
This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City kept for that
purpose at the office of the transfer agent by the registered owner hereof
in person, or by his attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender
of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to
the transfer agent duly executed by the registered owner or his attorney
duly authorized in writing and thereupon a new registered bond or bonds
in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be
issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the ordinance
authorizing the bonds, and upon the payment of the charges, if any, therein
prescribed.
It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things
required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series
of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and
due time and form as required by law.
This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the transfer
agent's Certificate of Authentication on this bond has been executed by the
transfer agent.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Lapeer, County of Lapeer, State of
Michigan, by its City Commission, has caused this bond to be executed with
the facsimile signatures of its Mayor and its Clerk and its corporate seal
to be printed on this bond, all as of the twenty-fifth-day of September, A.D.
1986.
CITY OF LAPEER
By__________
Mayor
(Seal)
Countersigned:
__________
Clerk
§ A110-19. Covenants.
The City covenants and agrees with the holders of the Bonds that so long
as any of the Bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or
interest.
A. The City will maintain the System in good repair and working order and
will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually
perform all duties with reference to the System required by the
Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan and this ordinance.
B. The City will keep proper books of record and account separate from all
other records and accounts of the City, in which shall be made full and
correct entries of all transactions relating to the System. The City shall
have an annual audit of the books of record and account of the System
for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent
§ A110-18 LAPEER CODE § A110-19
1:750
§ A110-20. Additional bonds.
certified public accountant, and a copy of the audit shall be mailed
to the manager of each syndicate or account originally purchasing
any issue of the Bonds. The auditor shall comment on the manner in
which the City is complying with the requirements of the ordinance
with respect to setting aside and investing moneys and meeting the
requirements for acquiring and maintaining insurance. The audit shall
be completed and so made available not later than four months after
the close of each operating year.
C. The City will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the
Bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the System and liability
insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by
municipalities engaged in the operation of water supply systems. All
moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be
applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property
damaged or destroyed, and to the extent not so used, shall be used for
the purpose of redeeming or purchasing Bonds.
D. The City will not sell, lease or dispose of the System, or any substantial
part, until all of the Bonds have been paid in full, both as to principal
and interest or provision made thereof as herein provided the City will
operate the System as economically as possible, will make all repairs
and replacements necessary to keep the System in good repair and
working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would
affect the System in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on
the security for the Bonds.
E. The City will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm
or corporation to operate a System that will compete with the System
and the City will not operate a system that will compete with the
System.
F. The City will cause the Project to be acquired and constructed promptly
and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the City shall not issue additional
Bonds of equal or prior standing with the Series 1986 Bonds.
B. The right is reserved in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, to
issue additional Bonds payable from the Revenues of the System which
shall be of equal standing and priority of lien on the Net Revenues of
the System with the Bonds but only for the following purposes and
under the following terms and conditions:
(1) To complete the Project in accordance with the plans and
specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless
the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate
evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete
the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor
§ A110-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-20
1:751
and stating the amount that will be required to complete the
Project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the
City Clerk, it shall be the duty of the Commission to provide for
and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said
certificate to be necessary to complete the Project in accordance
with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue
such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other
sources.
(2) For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and
improvements to the System or for the purpose of refunding part of
any Bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such
additional Bonds including deposits which may be required to be
made to the Bond Reserve Account. Bonds for such purposes shall
not be issued pursuant to the subparagraph:
(a) Unless the average actual or augmented Net revenues of the
System for the then last two preceding twelve-month operating
years or the actual or augmented Net Revenues for the last
preceding twelve-month operating year, if the same shall be
lower than the average, shall be equal to at least 125% of the
average amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing
in any operating year on the then outstanding Bonds and on
the additional Bonds then being issued. If the additional Bonds
are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding
Bonds the average annual principal and interest requirements
shall be determined by deducting from the principal and
interest requirements for each operating year the annual
principal and interest requirements of any bond to be refunded
from the proceeds of the additional Bonds. For purposes of this
subparagraph.
(b) The City may elect to use as the last preceding operating year
any operating year ending not more than 16 months from the
date of delivery of the additional Bonds and as the next to the
last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not
more than 28 months from the date of delivery of the additional
Bonds. If the System rates, fees or charges shall be increased
at or prior to the time of authorizing the additional Bonds, the
Net Revenues for each of the two preceding operating years
shall be augmented by an amount reflecting the effect of the
increase had the System's billings during such operating years
been at the increased rates. In addition., the actual Net
Revenues for each of the two preceding operating years may
be augmented by the estimated increase in Net Revenues to
accrue as a result of the acquisition of the repairs, extensions,
enlargements and improvements to the System to be paid for
in whole or in part from the proceeds of the additional Bonds to
be issued. In addition, the actual net Revenues may be
augmented by an amount equal to the investment income
§ A110-20 LAPEER CODE § A110-20
1:752
§ A110-21. Department of treasury approval; sale of bonds.
The Treasurer shall, if required by Act 94, make application to the
Municipal Finance Division or to the State Treasurer for authority to issue
and sell the Series 1986 Bonds. The City Commission shall, if the Series
1986 Bonds are sold at public sale, adopt a form of notice of sale for the
Series 1986 Bonds and, upon approval of the Department, if such approval
is required, the City Clerk shall fix a date for sale of the Series 1986 Bonds
and publish the notice of sale in the Michigan Investor or the Detroit legal
news, Detroit, Michigan. The City Commission shall receive bids for the
Series 1986 Bonds (unless the Bonds are sold in a sale to the Bond Bank),
award sale of the Series 1986 Bonds to the successful bidder determined in
accordance with Act 94 and this ordinance, and take all further necessary
steps to issue and deliver the Series 1986 Bonds.
§ A110-22. Covenant to comply with provisions of proposed Tax
Reform Act of 1985.
The City hereby covenants to use its best efforts, to the extent permitted by
law, to comply with the requirements of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
as currently amended, and the requirements of H.R. 3838, the Tax Reform
Act of 1985 (the "Bill"), to preserve the tax exemption of the interest on the
Bonds, unless, in the opinion of bond counsel, failure to comply with the
requirements of the Bill would not impair the exemption of interest on the
Bonds from federal income or State of Michigan taxation. The City hereby
designates this issue of bonds as "qualified project bonds" for the purposes
of the Bill or any similar amendments to the United States Internal Revenue
Code as finally enacted.
representing interest on investments estimated to be received
each operating year from the addition to the Bond Reserve
Account to be funded from the proceeds of the additional
Bonds being issued. Determination by the City Commission as
to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional
Bonds shall be conclusive. No additional Bonds of equal
standing as to the net Revenues of the System shall be issued
pursuant to the authorization contained in this subparagraph
if the City shall then be in default in making its required
payments to the Operation and Maintenance Fund or the
Redemption Fund.
(c) For refunding a part of the outstanding Bonds and paying costs
of issuing such additional Bonds including deposits which may
be required to be made to the Bond Reserve Account. No
additional Bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection
unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall
be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest
maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the
refunding.
§ A110-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A110-23
1:753
§ A110-23. Repeal, savings clause.
All ordinances, resolutions or order, or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed.
§ A110-24. Severability; paragraph headings; and conflict.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be
held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall not affect any of the other provisions of this ordinance. The paragraph
heading in the ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only
and shall not be considered to be part of this ordinance.
§ A110-25. Publication and recordation.
This ordinance shall be published in full in The Lapeer County Press, a
newspaper of general circulation in the City qualified under State law to
publish legal notices; promptly after its adoption, and shall be recorded in
the ordinance Book of the City and such recording authenticated by the
signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk.
§ A110-26. Application to bond bank.
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to make application to the Michigan
Municipal Bond Authority and to file any additional applications for
approval of the Bonds by the Department of Treasury. The City Commission
shall determine by resolution whether to sell the Bonds to the Bond Bank
or by public sale. If the Bonds are sold to the Bond Bank, then the taxes
collected by the State of Michigan (the "State") and returned to the City or
State revenue sharing monies shall be pledged for the payment of the Bonds
and Bond form contained in § A110-18 of this article shall be amended
to reflect this pledge. The City Manager of the City shall negotiate an
agreement with the Bond Bank for payment of such taxes to the Bond Bank
or a trustee pursuant to the provisions of Section 23 of the Bond Bank's
enabling act.
§ A110-27. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be effective on adoption.
§ A110-23 LAPEER CODE § A110-27
1:754