
Marshall, MI Code of Ordinances


CITY OF MARSHALL, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-21-2017










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CITY OFFICIALS



Marshall City Council



 



Mayor
 
Jack Reed


Council Member Ward 1
 
Kari Schurig


Council Member Ward 2
 
Niccole Metzger


Council Member Ward 3
 
Brent Williams


Council Member Ward 4
 
Michael McNeil


Council Member Ward 5
 
Robert Costa


Council Member At Large
 
Joe Caron


 
 
 


City Manager
 
Thomas Tarkiewicz


Clerk
 
Trisha Nelson


Finance Director
 
Jon Bartlett


Treasurer
 
William Dopp




 



City of Marshall



323 West Michigan Avenue



Marshall, MI 49068



Phone (269) 781-5183 • Fax (269) 781-3835



www.cityofmarshall.com



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   How code designated and cited



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section catchlines and other headings



   10.04   Certain ordinances not affected by code



   10.05   Continuation of ordinances



   10.06   Prior rights, offenses, and the like



   10.07   Ordinances repealed not reenacted



   10.08   Amendments to code



   10.09   Supplementation of code



   10.10   Appearance tickets



   10.11   Separability of provisions



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   This Code shall constitute and be designated as the “Marshall City
Code.”



(Prior Code, § 1-1)



Charter reference:



   Codification, see § 4.06



Statutory reference:



   Codification authority, see M.C.L.A. 117.5b, M.S.A. 5.2084(2)



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Terms used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically
defined, have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the
same terms.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Marshall, adopted May 23,
1978, and shall include any amendment thereto, or any revision thereof.



      CITY. The City of Marshall, Michigan.



      CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Marshall.



      CODE. The Marshall City Code as designated in § 10.01.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done,
as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall
be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or
a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



      COUNTY. County of Calhoun, Michigan.



      JUVENILE.  Means any person under 17 years of age.



      MINOR.  Means a person under 21 years of age.



      MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.  Means an act or omission that is
prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a
crime under this Code or any other ordinance of the city, and for which civil
sanctions, including without limitation, fines, damages, expenses, and costs
may be ordered, as authorized by Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts
of 1961, as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included
offense of any criminal offense in this Code.



      OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD, AND THE LIKE.  Whenever any officer,
department, board or other public agency is referred to by title only, such
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of
Marshall, Michigan.”  Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any
officer of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or
duty, reference to such officer shall mean and include such officer or his or
her deputy or authorized subordinate.



      ORDINANCES.  The ordinances of the City of Marshall and all
amendments thereto.



      PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership,
association, or corporation. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section
of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or
associations, the word includes the partners, or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations the word includes officers, agents, or employees
thereof who are responsible for any violations of the section. The singular
includes the plural. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders.



      STATE.  The term THE STATE or THIS STATE shall be construed to
mean the State of Michigan.



(Prior Code, § 1-2)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998; Am. Ord. 98-4, passed
4-6-1998)



§ 10.03  SECTION CATCHLINES AND OTHER HEADINGS.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections
and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as
any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of
deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter,
article or division.



(Prior Code, § 1-3)



§ 10.04  CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.



   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect
any ordinance not in conflict with or inconsistent with this Code.



   (A)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city,
or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the
city’s indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city;



   (B)   Containing any administrative provisions of the City Council;



   (C)   Granting any right or franchise;



   (D)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, paving, widening, vacating, and the like, any street or public way
in the city;



   (E)   Making any appropriation;



   (F)   Levying or imposing taxes;



   (G)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the city;



   (H)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;



   (I)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;



   (J)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;



   (K)   Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any
city officers or employees;



   (L)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones;
specific speed zones; parking meter zones; and specific stop or yield
intersections or other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets;



   (M)   Pertaining to rezoning;



   (N)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a
general and permanent nature;



and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such
ordinances are on file in the City Clerk's office.



(Prior Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.05  CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same in substance
as those of heretofore existing ordinances, shall be construed as a
continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments.



(Prior Code, § 1-5)



§ 10.06  PRIOR RIGHTS, OFFENSES, AND THE LIKE.



   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired,
or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of
adoption of this Code shall not be affected by such adoption, but may be
enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same
extent as if the adoption had not been effected.



(Prior Code, § 1-6)



§ 10.07  ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.



   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this Code, unless
specifically reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances
shall not impair or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.



(Prior Code, § 1-7)



§ 10.08  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   (A)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made
by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this Code in the following language: “That section _____ of the Marshall
City Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:...” The new provisions
shall then be set out in full as desired.



   (B)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be
added, the following language shall be used: “That the Marshall City Code
is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said
section reads as follows:...”  The new section shall then be set out in
full as desired.



(Prior Code, § 1-8)



§ 10.09  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.



   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City
Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and
will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.



   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the
Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this division,”
and the like, as the case may be, or to “sections _____  to _____”
(inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody
the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.



(Prior Code, § 1-9)



§ 10.10  APPEARANCE TICKETS.



   The following public servants are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets with respect to ordinances of the city, as provided by
Public Law 147 of 1968, as amended, when such public servant has reasonable
cause to believe that a person has committed an offense in violation of a
city ordinance:



   (A)   Health Officer;



   (B)   Building Inspector;



   (C)   Fire Marshal; and



   (D)   Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 1-11)  (Ord. passed 12-2-1980)



§ 10.11  SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this Code is
separable and if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for
any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this Code, or any
part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.



(Prior Code, § 1-12)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this Code for which a
penalty is not otherwise specified, either in that provision or elsewhere in
the Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in
any court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $500, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more
than 90 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court.



   (B)   Provisions of this Code prescribing any penalty shall not
apply to the failure of any city officer or employee to perform an official
duty.



   (C)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil
infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or
any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as
authorized under Chapter 87 of Act No. 736 of the Public Acts of 1961, as
amended and other applicable laws.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular
municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil
fine for a violation shall be not less than $50 nor more than $500, plus
costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Costs shall include all
expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection
with the municipal civil infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less
than $10 nor more than $500 be ordered.



      (2)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated
violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any
ordinance. As used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any
subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or
provision (i) committed by a person within any three-year period (unless some
other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance) and (ii)
for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be
responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any
ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows:



         (a)   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat
offense shall be no less than $150 and no more than $500, plus costs.



         (b)   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat
offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500, plus
costs.



         (c)   Repeat offenses are determined on the basis of the
date of the commission of the offenses.



   (D)   A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; and any
omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any
ordinance.



   (E)   Each act of violation and each day on which any violation of
this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall
be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense.



   (F)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may
bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to
restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance.
The penalty or sanction shall be in addition to the abatement of the
violating condition, any injunctive relief, revocation of any permit or
license, or other process.



   (G)   The penalties and sanctions provided by this section, unless
another penalty or sanction as expressly provided, shall apply to the
amendment of any section of this Code and/or any addition to this Code
whether or not such penalty or sanction is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance.



   (H)   All violations under the following chapters, articles and
sections of the Marshall City Code of Ordinances shall be municipal civil
infractions and shall be processed in accordance with Public Act 17 of the
Public Acts of 1994, as amended, and pursuant to the provisions of this code
related to municipal civil infractions:



   Sections 70.009, 70.011, 70.013, 70.014, 90.15, 90.16, 90.17, 91.02,
92.01 through 92.11, 97.02(A), 97.21, 112.03, 130.03, 132.02, 134.01, 134.27,
134.28, 134.30, 136.02, 137.01, 137.02, 137.03, 138.02, 138.03, 138.05,
138.06, 150.001 through 150.005, 150.067 through 150.069, 150.084 through
150.088.



(Prior Code, § 1-10)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998; Am. Ord. 98-9, passed
8-3-1998)



Charter reference:



   Limitation on penalties, see § 4.04



Statutory reference:



   Limitation on penalties, see M.C.L.A. 117.4i (10), M.S.A. 5.2082 (10)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



   30.   EMPLOYEES



   31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS



   32.   FINANCE



   33.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



   34.   CITY POLICIES



   35.   MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION BUREAU



CHAPTER 30:  EMPLOYEES



Section



   30.01   Oath of police officers



   30.02   Employee benefits



Charter reference:



   Administrative officials, see § 3.01(2)



   City administration, see Art. III



§ 30.01  OATH OF POLICE OFFICERS.



   All police officers shall, before they enter upon the discharge of
their duties, take, subscribe and file with the Clerk- Treasurer the oath of
office prescribed by the constitution of the state.



(Prior Code, § 2-21)



§ 30.02  EMPLOYEE BENEFITS.



   The city has adopted the Municipal Employee Retirement System (MERS)
group plan, pursuant to Public Act 427 of 1984, being M.C.L.A. § 38.1501;
M.S.A. § 2.169(51).  Participation in the MERS plan will be governed by
MERS rules, regulations, procedures and policies set forth in the Municipal
Employee Retirement System’s Summary Plan Description and Plan documents. 
The city’s involvement will be limited to making its required funding
contribution, pursuant to its respective agreements with city employees.



(Prior Code, § 2-82)  (Ord. passed 6-17-1991)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section



Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery Department



   31.01   Created; function



   31.02   Administration



   31.03   Recreation Fund



Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery Board



   31.15   Created



   31.16   Composition; appointment



   31.17   Terms



   31.18   Compensation



   31.19   Vacancies



   31.20   Organization



   31.21   Duties



Housing Commission



   31.35   Created



Board of Public Utilities



   31.45   Compensation; expenses



Downtown Development Authority



   31.55   Created



   31.56   Powers and duties



   31.57   Downtown District; boundaries designated



   31.58   Budget



   31.59   Taxing power



PARKS, RECREATION, AND CEMETERY DEPARTMENT



§ 31.01  CREATED; FUNCTION.



   The Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery Departments are hereby created for
the city. The function of the departments is to provide opportunities for
wholesome year-round recreation and other leisure time activities for all age
groups and to supervise and manage the use and a maintenance of municipal
parks and the city cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 2-36) (Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 31.02  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Director of Public Services and Recreation Administrator
shall be hired by the City Manager.



   (B)   The Director of Public Services and Recreation Administrator
shall:



      (1)   Be responsible for the overall administration,
management, planning, organization, maintenance and supervision of the parks,
recreation, and cemetery departments;



      (2)   Represent the parks, recreation, and cemetery
departments on all department matters coming before the City Council;



      (3)   Submit annually a proposed operating budget for the
ensuing fiscal year in accordance with legal requirements for the departments;



      (4)   Be responsible for the employment and supervision of all
personnel of the departments in conformity with personnel rules and
regulations and classification plan established by the city;



      (5)   Coordinate the activities of the parks, recreation, and
cemetery departments with other groups to achieve the highest degree of
cooperation and promotion of sound recreation goals and other applicable
appropriate public functions; and



      (6)   Be responsible for the planning of all recreation,
parks, and cemetery programs and see that such activities and programs are
carried out in a safe and healthful manner.



(Prior Code, § 2-37) (Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 31.03  RECREATION FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created a recreation fund under the
jurisdiction of the Clerk-Treasurer, into which all funds levied, collected
or derived for recreation purposes of the city shall be deposited.  The
funds shall not be commingled with park and cemetery funds or appropriations.



   (B)   Expenditures may be made from the recreation fund in
accordance with the budget and appropriations approved by the City Council in
accordance with legal requirements and rules established thereunder. Vouchers
for the payment of any claims shall be approved by the Recreation
Administrator and submitted to the Treasurer for payment. The Recreation
Administrator shall request such services as may be required from other city
departments and the cost of the services shall be charged against the
Recreation Fund.



(Prior Code, § 2-38) (Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-20-2016)



PARKS, RECREATION, AND CEMETERY BOARD



§ 31.15  CREATED.



   The Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery Board is hereby created.



(Prior Code, § 2-56)



§ 31.16  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT.



   The Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Board shall consist of seven
members.  At the first meeting of the City Council in June of each year, the
Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council, persons to
serve full three-year terms as the terms of the Board members theretofore
appointed expire.  Members of the Board need not be residents of nor
electors of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-57)



§ 31.17  TERMS.



   The terms of office for the Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery Board shall
be for three years commencing on July 1 and ending June 30.



(Prior Code, § 2-58) (Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 31.18  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Board shall serve without
compensation.



(Prior Code, § 2-59)



§ 31.19  VACANCIES.



   In each case where a vacancy occurs on the Parks, Recreation and
Cemetery Board, the Mayor shall fill the vacancy within 30 days from the
balance of the term in which the vacancy occurs, subject to the approval of
the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-60)



§ 31.20  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The members of the Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery Advisory
Board shall, at their first meeting in July of each year, organize and elect
one of their Board members as Chairperson and one as Vice-Chairperson.



   (B)   A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.



   (C)   The Recreation Administrator or designee shall act as the
Board Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 2-61) (Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 31.21  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Board to:



   (A)   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and the
Director of Public Services and Recreation Administrator in all matters
pertaining to public recreation, municipal parks, city cemetery, and to
cooperate with all governmental agencies in the advancement of sound
planning, and programming;



   (B)   Aid the Director of Public Services and Recreation
Administrator in making plans for the conduct of recreation activities, use
of municipal parks, and the city cemetery;



   (C)   Interpret the recreation programs to public officials and
interested citizens in order to promote understanding and financial support
from public and private sources;



   (D)   Recommend to the City Council the establishment of general
policies with respect to the Parks, Recreation, and Cemetery Departments;



   (E)   Assist the Director of Public Services and Recreation
Administrator in the preparation of rules and regulations for the use of
parks, recreation, and cemetery facilities and participation in recreation
programs, which shall be recommended to the City Council for consideration
and adoption; and



   (F)   Advise the Director of Public Services and Recreation
Administrator in the preparation of the annual operating budgets for the
departments.



(Prior Code, § 2-62) (Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-20-2016)



HOUSING COMMISSION



§ 31.35  CREATED.



   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being M.C.L.A. §§
125.651 et seq., M.S.A. §§ 5.3011 et seq., as amended, the Commission is
hereby created in and for the city, to be known as the “Marshall Housing
Commission.”



(Prior Code, § 2-71)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create a housing commission, see M.C.L.A. § 125.653,
M.S.A. § 5.3013



BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES



§ 31.45  COMPENSATION; EXPENSES.



   (A)   Each member of the Board of Public Utilities, except the City
Manager, shall be paid a salary of the sum as set by the Council.



   (B)   The salary shall be in full of all claims for all services
rendered by the Board or any member thereof, except that, in addition
thereto, the members shall be reimbursed for traveling expenses outside the
limits of the city as are necessary in the performance of their duties, and
subject to approval of payment therefor by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-76)  (Ord. of 4-2-1979)



Charter reference:



   Board of Public Utilities, see §§ 11.03et seq.



DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



§ 31.55  CREATED.



   Pursuant to the authority vested in the Council by Public Act 197 of
1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, as it may be amended
from time to time, the Marshall Downtown Development Authority shall be and
is hereby created.



(Prior Code, § 2-77)  (Ord. passed 8-3-1981)



§ 31.56  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Marshall Downtown Development
Authority shall exercise such powers and duties as provided by and in
accordance with the terms of Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1651 through 125.1681; M.S.A. §§ 5.3010(1) et seq.; including, but not
limited to the definition of a development area; the origination of a
development plan; and the implementation of a development program as provided
in the Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-78)  (Ord. passed 8-3-1981)



§ 31.57  DOWNTOWN DISTRICT; BOUNDARIES DESIGNATED.



   Pursuant to the requirements of Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, M.S.A. §§ 5.3010 et seq., the boundaries of
the downtown district are described as follows: Beginning at the intersection
of the centerline of North Kalamazoo Avenue and West Mansion Street; thence
Easterly along the centerline of West Mansion Street to the centerline of
Marshall Avenue; thence Southerly along the centerline of Marshall Avenue to
the centerline of East Green Street; thence Westerly along the centerline of
East Green Street to the centerline of South Sycamore Street; thence
Northerly along the centerline of South Sycamore Street to the centerline of
West Michigan Avenue; thence Easterly along the centerline of West Michigan
Avenue to the centerline of Kalamazoo Avenue; thence Northerly along the
centerline of Kalamazoo Avenue to the place of beginning, and also including
the property described below, excepting therefrom all buildings owned by the
State or Federal governments and also excepting therefrom all residential and
multi-family dwellings, unless specifically referenced hereinafter.



   (A)   Part. of Sec. 25, T2S-R6W.  Beg 12 Rods W of NW cor of
Mansion & High Sts. - W to NE cor of Madison & Mansion Sts. - N to SE cor
Madison and Prospect Sts. - E to pt due N of Beg - S to beg.



   (B)   Part of Sec. 25, T2S-R6W.  Beg at NW cor Mansion & High St. -
W 8 rods - N 8 rods - E 8 rods - S 8 rods to Beg.



   (C)   Part of Sec. 25, T2S-R6W.  Beg on N line Mansion directly N
of E li Jefferson St. extended - E 4 rods - N 12 rods - W 4 rods - S 12 rods
to beg.



   (D)   Lower Village.  E 4 Rods of S 5 Rods of lot 10, Block 12.



   (E)   Upper Village.  Lots 40, 17, 18, 19



   (F)   Upper Village.  S 41.5 ft of E 54 ft of lot 31.



   (G)   Upper Village.  Lot 226



   (H)   Upper Village. E 72.1 ft of lot 228.



   (I)   Lower Village.  Beg SE cor lot 5 - W 88 ft - N 66 ft - W 11
ft - N 16 ft - E 99.38 ft - S to beg. Block 15



   (J)   Lower Village.  Block 13 North  ½  of Lot 1, West 24 feet
of North  ½  of lot 2.



   (K)   Lower Village.  Block 25 Lot 5 except the East 6 feet of the
North 66 feet.  Also beginning 1 foot East of the Southwest corner of Lot 5;
South 1.6 feet; East 30.7 feet; North 1.6 feet; West to the point of
beginning.



   (L)   Lower Village.  Block 23 North 40 feet of Lot 8.



   (M)   Lower Village.  Block 25, Lots 3 and 4.



   (N)   Lower Village.  Block 15, North 50 feet of West 53.9 feet of
Lot 4.  North 3 feet of South 16 Feet of West 33 Feet of Lot 4.



   (O)   Part Sec 25 T2S R6W Mansion St - N side W-1 lot com on N Line
Mansion St 8 Rods W of W line of High St, W 4 Rods, N 8 Rods, E 4 Rods, S 8
Rods to beg.



(Prior Code, § 2-79)  (Ord. passed 8-3-1981; Am. Ord. passed 12-5-1983; Am.
Ord. passed 9-17-1990; Am. Ord. 02-11, passed 12-23-2002)



§ 31.58  BUDGET.



   No funds of the authority shall be disbursed, except as provided for in
the budget of the authority.  No budget shall be adopted by the Board of the
Authority until it has been approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-80)  (Ord. passed 8-3-1981)



§ 31.59  TAXING POWER.



   The Authority shall have the power to levy and collect those taxes and
approve a tax increment financing plan, as authorized by the provisions of
Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680.



(Prior Code, § 2-81)  (Ord. passed 8-3-1981)



CHAPTER 32:  FINANCE



Section



Purchasing



   32.01   Definitions



   32.02   Requisitions and estimates



   32.03   Formal competitive bid process



   32.04   Informal competitive quote process



   32.05   Expenditure of city funds



   32.06   Emergency purchases



   32.07   Exceptions to formal competitive bidding and informal
competitive quotes



   32.08   Additional purchases after competitive bidding



   32.09   Blank orders



   32.10   Disqualification



Charter reference:



   General city finance, see Art. IX



   Taxation, see Art. VIII



Statutory reference:



   Revised Municipal Finance Act, Act 34 of 2001, M.C.L.A. §§ 141.2101



   Similar provisions, see M.S.A. §§ 5.3188(1)et seq.



PURCHASING



§ 32.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENCY.  Includes city boards, commissions, committees and authorities.



   CONTRACT.  Includes, but is not limited to a purchase order for the
procurement of supplies and equipment.



   FORMAL BID LIMIT.  An amount equal to 0.67% of the total local tax
revenue of the immediately preceding fiscal year.



   PURCHASING AGENT.



      (1)   The City Manager shall act as purchasing agent of the
city, unless he or she shall designate another officer or city employee to
act as purchasing agent.



      (2)   Every purchase order shall be approved by the purchasing
agent before being issued.



      (3)   The purchasing agent may adopt rules regulating
requisitions and purchase orders.



(Prior Code, § 2-140)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.02  REQUISITIONS AND ESTIMATES.



   (A)   All agencies and departments of the city shall file with the
purchasing agent detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services in such manner, at such times
and for such future periods as the City Manager shall prescribe.



   (B)   The requirement for preparing estimates shall not prohibit any
agency or department from filing with the purchasing agent at any time a
requisition for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services
the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed.



(Prior Code, § 2-141)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.03  FORMAL COMPETITIVE BID PROCESS.



   Except as exempted in § 32.07:



   (A)   All supplies, equipment or contractual services amounting in
value to more than the formal bid limit shall be secured by competitive bids
and written contract.  Notices inviting sealed competitive bids shall be
published at least once in a newspaper or journal in the city and at least
five days before the final date for submitting of bids.  The notices shall
state the general description of the article or service to be purchased,
where specifications can be obtained and the time and place for the opening
of bids.  The purchasing agency or department may, in addition, solicit
sealed bids from prospective suppliers by sending them copies of the bid
forms and specifications to acquaint them with the proposed purchase.



   (B)   All bids shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer.  In cases
of construction contracts or purchases involving large sums of money, the
City Council may require that the successful bidder post a surety bond in the
amount that it deems proper.  The bids shall be opened publicly by the
Clerk-Treasurer or designee at the time and place stated in the public
notice.  After examination and tabulation by the Clerk-Treasurer, all bids
may be inspected by the competing bidders.  The City Council may reject any
or all bids or the bid for one or more commodities included in the proposed
contract, when the public interest will be served thereby, the City Council
may authorize the purchase of the commodities in the open market, provided
the price paid in the open market shall not exceed any bid price submitted
for the same commodity.  Otherwise, the contract shall be awarded by the
City Council on the basis of the bid most advantageous to the city. The City
Council shall take into consideration quality offered with the bid, delivery
terms and the service reputation of the vendor in making their award of the
contract.



(Prior Code, § 2-142)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.04  INFORMAL COMPETITIVE QUOTE PROCESS.



   Except as exempted in § 32.07:



   (A)   All purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services,
the estimated cost of which is less than the formal bid limit, may be made in
the open market; without newspaper advertisement and without the necessity of
observing the procedure prescribed in § 32.03 for the award of the contracts.



   (B)   All open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based
on at least three competitive quotes and shall be awarded on the basis of the
quote most advantageous to the city.  The purchasing agent shall keep a
record of all open market orders and the records shall also be open to public
inspection.



(Prior Code, § 2-143)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.05  EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS.



   Except as exempted in § 32.06, the purchasing agent shall not issue
any order for delivery on a contract or any open market order unless and
until the Clerk-Treasurer certifies that there is to the credit of each of
the agencies or departments concerned a sufficient appropriation balance in
excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the cost of the supplies,
equipment or contractual services.



(Prior Code, § 2-144)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.06  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   In an emergency or an apparent emergency endangering the public peace,
health or safety of the city, the designated purchasing agent, the City
Manager or any department head may purchase directly any supplies, materials,
equipment or services which he or she deems immediately necessary.  A full
report shall be filed by the City Manager with the City Council within a
30-day period.



(Prior Code, § 2-145)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.07  EXCEPTIONS TO FORMAL COMPETITIVE BIDDING AND INFORMAL COMPETITIVE
QUOTES.



   Formal competitive bidding and informal competitive quotes shall not be
required in the following cases:



   (A)   Where the subject of the contract is other than a public work
or improvement and the product or material contracted for is not competitive
in nature or no advantage to the city would result from requiring competitive
bidding or informal competitive quotes and the City Council by resolution
authorizes execution of the contract without competitive bidding or
competitive quotes;



   (B)   In the employment of professional services including, but not
limited to medical, accounting, auditing, data processing, legal, planning,
engineering and architectural and the City Council by resolution authorizes
execution of the contract without competitive bidding or competitive quotes;



   (C)   Where the scope of the work is not definitive and as a result
a request for proposal is difficult to prepare and/or the cost of preparing
the request for proposal is expected to exceed the cost of the contract and
the City Council, by resolution, authorizes execution of the contract without
competitive bidding or competitive quotes;



   (D)   For purchases from or joint purchases with another unit of
government;



   (E)   When the city elects to perform the work using city employees;
and



   (F)   For purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services,
the estimated cost of which is less than 10% of the formal bid limit.



(Prior Code, § 2-146)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.08  ADDITIONAL PURCHASES AFTER COMPETITIVE BIDDING.



   The purchasing agent may make additional purchases of supplies,
materials, equipment or services from a successful bidder, provided that:



   (A)   Amounts of additional purchase are at the same cost or less
per quantity as originally bid by the vendor;



   (B)   Amounts of additional purchase do not exceed the cost of the
original purchase;



   (C)   The purchase occurs not more than 12 months after the date of
the original purchase; and



   (D)   The purchasing agent is reasonably certain that the same
supply, material, equipment or service is not available at a lesser cost from
any source.



(Prior Code, § 2-147)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.09  BLANKET ORDERS.



   Periodic purchases from a single vendor as set forth in a single
purchase order for reasons of time savings, availability and competitive
pricing may be made using a blanket order.  The competitive pricing of the
goods or services shall be reviewed no less frequently than every 24 months.



(Prior Code, § 2-148)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



§ 32.10  DISQUALIFICATION.



   No bid shall be accepted from or contract awarded to a bidder who is in
arrears to the city, who is in default on any contract with or payment due to
the city or who has previously demonstrated bad faith in dealings with the
city.



(Prior Code, § 2-149)  (Ord. 98-12, passed 12-21-1998)



CHAPTER 33:  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   33.01   City Assessor as assessing agency



Procedure



   33.15   Initiating procedure



   33.16   Survey and report



   33.17   Notice of public hearing



   33.18   Hearing



   33.19   Determination of necessity



   33.20   Assessment roll



   33.21   Assessment roll method



   33.22   Particular expenses



   33.23   Levy filing and numbering



   33.24   Assessment review



   33.25   Confirmation



   33.26   Lien for special assessments



   33.27   Additional assessments



   33.28   Assessment declared illegal



   33.29   Irregularity not to impair lien



   33.30   Corner properties



Collections



   33.45   Collection from special assessment roll



   33.46   Collection of delinquent assessments



   33.47   Methods of collecting delinquent assessments



   33.48   Agreement to assessment



   33.49   Collection by legal action



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  CITY ASSESSOR AS ASSESSING AGENCY.



   The City Assessor shall be and is hereby constituted the assessing
agency for making special assessments.



(Prior Code, § 22-1)



PROCEDURE



§ 33.15  INITIATING PROCEDURE.



   The City Council shall resolve to make any public improvement either
upon its own initiative or after considering an initiatory petition.  All
initiatory petitions shall be addressed to the Council and contain a brief
description of the improvement or repair sought to be made or the nuisance or
hazard sought to be abated and shall be signed by property owners only in the
proposed district to be affected.  After each signature, there shall be a
brief description of the property owned by the subscriber.  The signatures
on the petition shall be verified by the oath of one or more of the
circulators of the petition.  All signatures of the circulators shall be
notarized.  All such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer who
shall determine that they conform to the foregoing provisions.



(Prior Code, § 22-2)



§ 33.16  SURVEY AND REPORT.



   Before the City Council shall consider making any local or public
improvement, the proposal shall be referred by motion of the City Manager,
directing him or her to prepare or cause to be prepared by the City Engineer
and others, a report setting forth the necessary plans, specifications and
detailed estimates of cost and any other such pertinent information as will
permit the Council to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the proposed
improvement, and what part or proportion thereof should be paid by special
assessment upon the property especially benefitted and what part, if any,
should be paid by the city at large.  The City Manager shall prepare this
report and shall present it to the Council, together with any of his or her
recommendations.  The costs and expenses of any improvement which may be
defrayed by special assessment should include the cost of surveys, plans,
assessments, notices, advertising and costs of construction.



(Prior Code, § 22-3)



§ 33.17  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   If the City Council shall deem that the proposed improvement
is advisable, it shall, by resolution, order the report with the plans and
specifications and estimates of cost, and any other memoranda, to be filed
with the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection, and shall provide for a
public hearing to be held before the Council on the proposed improvement,
which hearing shall be not less than one week after notice thereof by
publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.



   (B)   Notice of hearings in special assessment proceedings shall be
given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed, whose
name appears upon the last tax assessment records, by mailing by first class
mail addressed to the owner or party at the address shown on the tax records,
at least ten days before the date of the hearing.  The last tax assessment
records means the last assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes which has
been reviewed by the Board of Review, as supplemented by any subsequent
changes in the names or the addresses of the owners or parties listed thereon.



   (C)   Where any person claims an interest in real property whose
name and correct address do not appear upon the last tax assessment records,
he or she shall be obligated to file immediately his or her name and address
with the City Assessor.  This requirement shall be deemed effective only for
the purpose of establishing a record of the names and addresses of those
persons entitled to notice of hearings in special assessments proceedings. 
It shall be the duty of the City Assessor to immediately enter on the local
tax assessment records any changes in the names and addresses of owners or
parties in interest filed with him or her and at all times to keep the tax
assessment records current and complete and available for public inspection.



   (D)   The notice required by this section shall be in addition to
and not in lieu of the notices of publication required elsewhere in this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 22-4)



§ 33.18  HEARING.



   The City Council shall meet at the time and place specified in the
notice of public hearing and shall hear all persons to be affected by the
proposed improvement.  The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the
Council and the Council may make any changes in the proposed work improvement
which shall seem reasonable and proper after hearing objections or for any
other reason that the Council deems for the best interests of the city. 
However, if the scope of the proposed improvement is enlarged or any
additions are made to the district to be assessed, another hearing shall be
held pursuant to the same requirements of notice as for the original hearing.



(Prior Code, § 22-5)



§ 33.19  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.



   (A)   After public hearing, the City Council may, by resolution,
determine to make the improvement and shall set forth, in the resolution, the
following:  The approval of the plans and specifications and the estimate of
costs, the part of the cost to be borne by the property benefitted, and that
part, if any, to be borne by the city at large, the method of assessing,
whether according to frontage, area, assessed valuation or any other basis.



   (B)   By such resolution, the City Council shall determine the
number of installments in which assessments may be paid, determine the rate
of interest to be charged on the installments, not to exceed 7% per annum,
which resolution shall give the right of the property owner to pay the entire
assessment, or any part thereof, within 60 days from the date of notice to
him or her, at no interest.



   (C)   Interest shall accrue on all payments made after the 60-day
period from the date of confirmation of the assessment roll.



   (D)   By such resolution, the City Council shall also designate the
district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied,
direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with
its determination and designate the number and any other description by which
the special assessment shall be referred to.



(Prior Code, § 22-6)



§ 33.20  ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (A)   Upon receiving the order and directions under § 33.21, the
City Assessor shall make out an assessment roll, entering and describing
therein the lots, premises and parcels of land to be assessed, with the names
of the persons if known, chargeable with the assessments thereon, and shall
levy against the persons and against the lands assessed to them, the amount
to be assessed, in the manner directed by the City Council, and the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the assessment.



   (B)   He or she shall report the assessment to the City Council when
it is completed.



(Prior Code, § 22-7)



§ 33.21  ASSESSMENT ROLL METHOD.



   (A)   If the assessment is required to be according to frontage, the
City Assessor shall assess to each lot or parcel of land, the relative
portion of the whole amount to be levied, as the length of front of the
premises, abutting upon the improvement, bears to the whole frontage of all
lots to be assessed unless, on account of the shape or size of any lot, an
assessment for a different number of feet would be more equitable.



   (B)   If the assessment is directed to be according to benefits, he
or she shall assess upon each lot the relative portion of the whole sum to be
levied as shall be proportionate to the estimated benefit resulting to the
lot from the improvement.



(Prior Code, § 22-8)



§ 33.22  PARTICULAR EXPENSES.



   (A)   When any expense is incurred to the city upon or in respect to
any single or separate lot or parcel of land, or premises which, by the
provisions of this chapter, the City Council is authorized to charge and
collect as a special assessment, and not being of that class of expense
required to be made pro rata upon several lots or parcels of land, an account
of the labor or services for which the expense was incurred, verified by the
officer or person performing the labor or services, with a description of the
lot or premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the
name of the owner or person chargeable therewith, shall be reported to the
City Council in a manner as the Council shall prescribe.



   (B)   The City Council shall determine the correctness of the
account, and the person, if known, against whom and the premises upon which
the same shall be levied as a special assessment; and, as often as the City
Council shall deem it expedient, it shall require all of the several amounts
so reported and determined, and the several lots or premises, and the persons
chargeable therewith respectively, to be reported to the City Assessor for
assessment.



   (C)   Upon receiving the report, the City Assessor shall make a
special assessment roll and levy as a special assessment thereon upon each
lot or parcel so reported to him or her, and against the person chargeable
therewith, if known, the whole amount or amounts of all charges so directed
to be levied upon each of the lots or premises respectively, and when
completed, he or she shall report the assessment to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 22-9)



§ 33.23  LEVY FILING AND NUMBERING.



   When any special assessment is reported by the City Assessor to the
City Council as directed in this chapter, it shall be filed in the office of
the Clerk-Treasurer and numbered.  Before confirming the assessment, the
Council shall cause to be published in some newspaper of the city notice of
the filing of the assessment with the Clerk-Treasurer, and of the appointing
of a time when the Council and City Assessor will meet to review the
assessments.  The notice shall appear at least one week before the date set
for review of the assessment.  Any person objecting to the assessment shall
file his or her objections, in writing, with the Clerk-Treasurer on or before
the review day.



(Prior Code, § 22-10)



§ 33.24  ASSESSMENT REVIEW.



   At the time appointed, the City Council and City Assessor shall meet
and then, or at some adjourned meeting, review the assessments.  The Council
shall correct each assessment if necessary and confirm it or refer the
assessment back to the assessor for revision, or annul it and direct a new
assessment, in which case the same proceedings shall be had as in respect to
the previous assessment.  When a special assessment is confirmed, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall endorse a certificate thereof upon the roll of the City
Assessor, showing the date of confirmation.



(Prior Code, § 22-11)



§ 33.25  CONFIRMATION.



   When any special assessment is confirmed by the City Council, it shall
be final and conclusive.  Special assessments shall be due and payable on
confirmation or when the Council may otherwise determine.



(Prior Code, § 22-12)



§ 33.26  LIEN FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   All special assessments shall, from the date of confirmation thereof,
constitute a lien upon the respective lots and parcels of land assessed, and
shall be a charge against the persons to whom assessed until paid.



(Prior Code, § 22-13)



§ 33.27  ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS.



   Should any special assessment prove insufficient to pay the improvement
or work for which it was levied and the expense incident thereto, the City
Council may make an additional pro rata assessment to supply the deficiency,
and in case a larger amount has been collected than necessary, the excess
shall be refunded ratably to those by whom it was paid.



(Prior Code, § 22-14)



§ 33.28  ASSESSMENT DECLARED ILLEGAL.



   Whenever any assessment is, in the opinion of the City Council, invalid
by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court
of competent jurisdiction judges the assessment to be illegal, the Council
shall, whether the improvement has been made or not or whether any part of
the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to
be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made.  All
the proceedings on the reassessment and for the collection thereof, shall be
conducted as similarly as possible to the manner provided for the original
assessment.  Whenever any amount levied upon any premises in the assessment
set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be
applied upon the reassessment on the premises and the reassessment shall to
that extent, be deemed satisfied.



(Prior Code, § 22-15)



§ 33.29  IRREGULARITY NOT TO IMPAIR LIEN.



   No judgment or decree, nor any act of the City Council vacating a
special assessment for an irregularity occurring after the assessment has
been levied shall destroy or impair the lien of the city on the premises
assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged
against the same, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might have been
lawfully assessed thereon.



(Prior Code, § 22-16)



§ 33.30  CORNER PROPERTIES.



   Whenever a public improvement is made in any particular street and it
appears that the corner properties are already serviced by similar service on
another street and will not be further serviced or benefitted by the proposed
public improvement, the corner properties shall not be required to
participate in or be assessed for the proposed improvement.  In this event,
the entire assessment shall be borne by the property owners who will be
benefitted by the improvement.



(Prior Code, § 22-23)



COLLECTIONS



§ 33.45  COLLECTION FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (A)   When any special assessment is confirmed and payable, the City
Council shall direct the assessment so made in the special assessment roll to
be collected directly therefrom or from the general tax rolls.  The
assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Assessor to the Clerk-Treasurer
for collection immediately after confirmation and in the event it is not a
part of the annual tax roll, the Clerk-Treasurer may give notice by
publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation that the
special assessment roll has been filed in his or her office, and specifying
when and where payments may be made thereon.  The Clerk-Treasurer shall mail
to the owners of the lots or parcels of land assessed as indicated by the
records of the Assessor, statements of the amount of the assessment and the
manner in which it may be paid.



   (B)   Failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the
assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay
the assessment.  Special assessments to defray the costs of any improvement
may be levied before making the improvement.



(Prior Code, § 22-17)



§ 33.46  COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS.



   After the confirmation of any special assessment roll, the same
penalties and collection fees shall be collected on delinquent special
assessments and upon delinquent installments of the special assessments
following due dates as are provided by the Charter for the collection of
delinquent city taxes.



(Prior Code, § 22-18)



Charter reference:



   Collection charges on late payment of taxes, see § 8.16



§ 33.47  METHODS OF COLLECTING DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS.



   Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date
of confirmation of the roll are and remain alien upon the property assessed
of the same character and effect as the lien created by law for state and
county taxes or by the city for city taxes, until paid, and the
Clerk-Treasurer shall turn all delinquent assessments or installments in to
the County Treasurer in the same manner as he or she returns unpaid city
taxes.  In addition to the property tax lien created hereunder, in case any
person named in the special assessment roll fails to pay his or her
assessment upon demand, the Clerk-Treasurer may collect the assessment by
distraint proceedings in the same manner as is provided by the law for the
collection of property taxes by distraint.



(Prior Code, § 22-19)



Charter reference:



   Delinquent tax roll to County Treasurer, see § 8.18



§ 33.48  AGREEMENT TO ASSESSMENT.



   If all persons or property, owners to be affected by any proposed
improvement agree that the proposed improvement be made and that a special
assessment be levied in connection therewith, the city may, in lieu of the
foregoing procedure, enter into a written contract with all of the persons or
property owners affected thereby, which contract when properly approved and
executed, shall operate as a complete special assessment procedure and the
assessment shall be made in accordance with the contract.



(Prior Code, § 22-20)



§ 33.49  COLLECTION BY LEGAL ACTION.



   (A)   At any time after a special assessment has become due and
payable, the assessment may be recovered by suit in the name of the city
against the persons assessed in action of assumpsit, in any court having
jurisdiction of the amount.  In every action, a declaration upon the common
counts for money paid is sufficient.  The special assessment roll, and a
certified copy of the resolution confirming the same, shall be prima facie
evidence of the regularity of all proceedings in making the assessment, and
of the right of the city to recover judgment therefor.



   (B)   If in any such action it appears that, by reason of
irregularities or informality, the assessment has not been properly made
against the defendant, or upon the lots or premises sought to be charged, the
court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that the expense has been
incurred by the city, adjudge what is a proper charge against the defendant
or the lots or premises in question, and render judgment for the amount
properly chargeable against the defendant or upon the lot or premises.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall also apply to assessments
made before July 9, 1956, and remaining unpaid.



(Prior Code, § 22-22)



CHAPTER 34:  CITY POLICIES



Section



Dishonored Checks



   34.01   Purpose



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Checks drawn without sufficient funds



   34.04   Person responsible



   34.05   Presumption



   34.06   Charges against person



   34.07   Cost recovery schedule



   34.08   Billing



   34.09   Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs



   34.10   Severability



Lost and Found Property



   34.20   Generally



 



   34.99   Penalty



DISHONORED CHECKS



§ 34.01  PURPOSE.



   The city finds that a significant number of checks are written and
dishonored within its geographical boundaries causing serious financial loss
and hardship to citizens and merchants therein.  In addition, the city finds
that the financial loss and hardship incurred by its citizens and merchants
seriously impacts on the stream of commerce and the general public by causing
increases in the costs of goods and services.  As a result of these
activities, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the
city’s police and legal services by persons who are placing dishonored
checks into the stream of commerce.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-1)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADDRESS OF RECORD.  The address that appears on the check or the last
known address of record of the maker of a check that is recorded with the
Secretary of State at the time the check was presented for payment of money,
goods or services.



   CHECK.  Any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply
on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository.



   DISHONORED.



      (1)   Any check, draft or order drawn or written on any
account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, without sufficient
funds for the payment of same when presentment is made to the drawee.



      (2)   Any check, draft or order drawn or written on any
account which has been closed with or by the bank or other depository upon
which it is drawn.



      (3)   Any check, draft or order drawn or written on any
account for stop payment, any bank administrative purpose or any other reason
that caused the check to become dishonored when presentation is made to the
drawee.  Exceptions include:



         (a)   A check that was stolen and passed; and/or



         (b)   A stop payment check where a verified dispute
exists between two parties.



   DRAWEE.  A person, business, organization, partnership, company or
corporation to whom a check is presented or is requested to pay the amount of
money therein mentioned.



   EXPENSES OF DISHONORED CHECK RESPONSE.



      (1)   The direct and reasonable cost incurred by the city or a
private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the
city, when responding to a reported dishonored check, including the cost of
providing police, City Attorney and/or administrative services in response to
any reported dishonored check.



      (2)   These costs further include all of the salaries and
wages of city personnel and/or contractors engaged in investigation,
supervision and report preparation, and all costs connected with the
administration and provision of any prosecution of the person responsible for
the dishonored check, except actual cost costs which may be levied by the
court as a result of statute or court rule.



   MAKER.  A person, business, organization, partnership, company or
corporation who is the maker or drawer of a check.



   PRESENT.  Make, draw, utter or deliver.



   PRESENTING.  The making, drawing, uttering or delivering.



   PROTEST.  A check has been refused for payment or acceptance by a bank
or other repository.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-2)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.03  CHECKS DRAWN WITHOUT SUFFICIENT FUNDS.



   (A)   No person shall, with intent to defraud, make, draw, utter or
deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on
account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time
of the making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer does
not have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository, for
the payment of the check, draft or order, in full upon its presentation, of
the amount payable in the check, draft or order in any amount.



   (B)   No person shall with the intent to defraud, make, draw, utter
or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on
account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, if at the time of
making, drawing, uttering or delivering the check, draft or order he or she
does not have an account in or credit with the bank or other depository for
the payment of the check, draft or other upon presentation.



   (C)   No person shall with the intent to defraud make, draw, utter
or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on
account or otherwise, upon any bank, or other depository, unless the person
has sufficient funds for payment for same when presentment is due to the
drawee in any amount, except where the lack of funds is due to garnishment,
attachment, levy or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the
person who made, drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the time of so
doing.



   (D)   As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing,
uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is reused
by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima
facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in
or credit with the bank or other, depository, provided the maker or drawer
shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with
all cost and protest fees, with five business days after receiving notice by
first class mail that the check, draft or order has not been paid by the
drawee.



   (E)   Where the check, draft or order is protested on the grounds of
insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be
admissible as proof of presentation, non-payment and protest, and shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and knowledge of insufficient funds
or credit with the bank or other depository.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-3)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.04  PERSON RESPONSIBLE.



   Any person is liable for the expense of a dishonored check response, if
the person proximately causes, any incident resulting in a dishonored check
response.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-7)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.05  PRESUMPTION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, a person is presumed to be
the proximate cause of an incident if the person makes, draws, utters or
delivers any dishonored check or causes directly or indirectly a check to
become dishonored.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, a person is presumed to
have acted with intent to defraud if the person shall not have paid the
drawer thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest
fees, including the fees assessed, hereunder, within five business days after
receiving notice by first class mail to the last known address of record that
the check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-8)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.06  CHARGES AGAINST PERSON.



   The expenses of a dishonored check response shall be a charge against
the person liable for the expense under this chapter.  The charge
constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for
incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation
under a contract, expressed or implied.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-9)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.07  COST RECOVERY SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of
costs included within the expense of a dishonored check response.



   (B)   This schedule shall be available to the public from the
city’s Clerk-Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-10)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.08  BILLING.



   The city’s Clerk-Treasurer, or his or her designee, may submit a bill
for the dishonored check response by first class mail to the last known
address of record or personal service to the person liable for the expenses
as enumerated under this chapter.  The bill(s) shall require full payment
within 30 consecutive days from the date of service.  Service by mail shall
be effective upon depositing the bill in a United States Postal Service
receptacle.  In no event shall billing be permitted after one year from the
last expense incurred.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-11)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.09  FAILURE TO PAY; PROCEDURE TO RECOVER COSTS.



   Any failure by the person described in this chapter as liable for the
expense of a dishonored check response to pay the bill within 30 consecutive
days of service shall be considered in default.  In case of default, the
city may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and any cost allowed by
law.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-12)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



§ 34.10  SEVERABILITY.



   The phrases, sentences, sections and provisions of this chapter are
severable and the finding that any portion hereof is unconstitutional or
otherwise unenforceable shall not detract from or affect the enforceability
of the remainder of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-13)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



LOST AND FOUND PROPERTY



§ 34.20  GENERALLY.



   All lost or found money or property, other than motor vehicles, which
is recovered by the Police Department, shall be processed and handled in
accordance with Public Act 273 of 1987, being M.C.L.A. §§ 434.21 et seq.,
as amended.



(Prior Code, § 2-161)  (Ord. passed 4-16-1990)



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   The penalty for a person convicted of violating § 34.03 shall be a
fine of not more than $500 and costs of prosecution and cost recovery or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both the fine and imprisonment in
the discretion of the court.  Each act of this violation and every day upon
which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-4)  (Ord. 96-10, passed 12-17-1996)



CHAPTER 35:  MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION BUREAU



Section



   35.01   Definitions



   35.02   Municipal civil infraction action; commencement



   35.03   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service



   35.04   Municipal Ordinance Violation Bureau; creation; location;
supervision; employees; rules and regulations



   35.05   Authorized city officials



   35.06   Disposition of violations; Bureau limited to accepting
admissions of responsibility



   35.07   Municipal civil infraction violation notices



   35.08   Appearance; payment of fines and costs



   35.09   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine
not paid



   35.10   Civil fines



   35.11   Accounting and disposition of civil fines



   35.12   Availability of other enforcement remedies



§ 35.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8396
et seq.



   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL.  A police officer or other personnel of the
city authorized by this code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil
infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.



   BUREAU.  The City of Marshall Municipal Ordinance Violation Bureau as
established hereby.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION.  A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION.  A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction
violation by the person cited.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION.  A written notice prepared by an
authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed
for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as
authorized under §§ 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-165)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.02  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION; COMMENCEMENT.



   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized city official of:



   (A)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court; or



   (B)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the
alleged violator to appear at the Municipal Ordinance Violation Bureau.



(Prior Code, § 2-166)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.03  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; ISSUANCE AND SERVICE.



   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized city officials as follows:



   (A)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be
within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.



   (B)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the
district court.



   (C)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in
a form approved by the state’s Court Administrator.  The original citation
shall be filed with the district court.  Copies of the citation shall be
retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by §
8705 of the Act.



   (D)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an
authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately
above the date and signature of the official:  “I declare, under the
penalties of perjury, that the statements above are true to the best of my
information, knowledge and belief.”



   (E)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.



   (F)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person
if:



      (1)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable
cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or



      (2)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who
allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney
approves in writing the issuance of the municipal civil infraction citation.



   (G)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an
authorized city official as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided by division (G)(2) below, an
authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon
the alleged violator.



      (2)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the
use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but
may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by
posting a copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure.  In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class
mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner’s last
known address.



(Prior Code, § 2-167)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.04  MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION BUREAU; CREATION; LOCATION;
SUPERVISION; EMPLOYEES; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The city hereby creates the Municipal Ordinance Violation
Bureau (“Bureau”) pursuant to the Act (M.C.L.A. § 600.8396), as it may
be amended from time to time, to accept admissions of responsibility for
municipal civil infractions for which municipal civil infraction violation
notices have been issued and served by authorized city officials, and to
collect and retain civil fines for admissions of responsibility as prescribed
by this code or any ordinance.



   (B)   The Bureau shall be located at the Marshall City Hall and
shall be under the supervision and control of the city’s Clerk-Treasurer. 
The city’s Clerk-Treasurer, subject to the approval of the City Council,
shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the Bureau.



(Prior Code, § 2-168)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.05  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   City police officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and may issue municipal civil infraction violation notices or
municipal civil infraction citations for any municipal civil infraction.  An
official who has previously been authorized to enforce any provision of the
code or any ordinance of the city, by the code or any ordinance shall be
authorized to enforce that provision of the code or any ordinance as a
municipal civil infraction under the provisions of this chapter, and may
issue municipal civil infraction violation notices or municipal civil
infraction citations.  Additionally, the City Council may by resolution,
authorize other persons to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including
issuing municipal civil infraction violation notices or municipal infraction
citations.



(Prior Code, § 2-169)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.06  DISPOSITION OF VIOLATIONS; BUREAU LIMITED TO ACCEPTING ADMISSIONS
OF RESPONSIBILITY.



   The Bureau may only dispose of municipal civil infraction violations
for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil
infraction notice, as compared to a citation, has been issued.  The
Bureau’s authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as result of those admissions.  The Bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from anyone who denies having committed the offense
or who admits responsibility only with explanation and, in no event shall the
Bureau determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or
matter relating to the alleged violation.



(Prior Code, § 2-170)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.07  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICES.



   Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served
by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same
persons as provided for citations in § 35.03(F) and (G).  In addition to
any other information required by this code or other ordinance, the notice of
violation shall indicate the date by which the alleged violator must appear
at the Bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address
and telephone number of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is
open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation and the
consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the
required time.



(Prior Code, § 2-171)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.08  APPEARANCE; PAYMENT OF FINES AND COSTS.



   An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation
notice shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or
by the date specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction
violation notice.  An appearance may be made by mail, in person or by
representation.



(Prior Code, § 2-172)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.09  PROCEDURE WHERE ADMISSION OF RESPONSIBILITY NOT MADE OR FINE NOT
PAID.



   If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance
violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the
civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the
violation are not paid at the Bureau, the Clerk-Treasurer or other designated
city employee shall notify the issuing official that the alleged violator has
not admitted responsibility and/or has not paid the fine and costs.  A
municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and
a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the alleged
violator at the alleged violator’s last known address.  The citation filed
with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the
requirements for citations as provided by §§ 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but
shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the
municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged
violator how to respond to the citation.



(Prior Code, § 2-173)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.10  CIVIL FINES.



   Unless a different civil fine is provided for in any ordinance, the
schedule of civil fines, payable to the Marshall Municipal Ordinance
Violation Bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with
municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be as established from
time by a resolution adopted by the Marshall City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-174)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998; Am. Ord. 98-3, passed
3-10-1998)



§ 35.11  ACCOUNTING AND DISPOSITION OF CIVIL FINES.



   The Clerk-Treasurer or other designated employee shall retain all
municipal civil infraction violation notices and shall account to the City
Council as directed concerning the number of admissions and denials of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and the amount of fines and
costs collected.  The amounts collected in civil fines and costs shall be
placed in the general fund of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-175)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



§ 35.12  AVAILABILITY OF OTHER ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require the city to initiate
its ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of a municipal civil
infraction violation notice.  The city shall have the right to directly
proceed with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for any
municipal civil infraction, or to take other enforcement action as authorized
by law.



(Prior Code, § 2-176)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



   50.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



   51.   WATER



   52.   SEWERS



   53.   RATE



   54.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Use of containers on private property



   50.03   Offensive and waste matters on public property



   50.04   Pollution of streams



   50.05   Collections



   50.06   Transporting



   50.07   Method and place of disposal



   50.08   Rates and charges



   50.09   Rules and regulations for sanitary landfill or disposal
facility



Haulers



   50.20   License required



   50.21   Charges



   50.22   Days of collection



   50.23   Disposal generally



   50.24   Disposal in city disposal site if directed



   50.25   Inspections



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Rejected organic waste, including waste from the
accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for use in
the preparation, use, cooking, processing or storing of meat, fish, fowl,
fruit, or vegetable or other food; accumulations of leaves, branches, cut
grass or other vegetation.  Excluded from the definition is organic waste
which is contained within a managed compost.



   LITTER.  All rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, debris and waste
material of any kind.



(Prior Code, § 12-1) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.02  USE OF CONTAINERS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall place garbage or litter which may cause an unwholesome
odor or that which may tend to cause sickness or disease, or any other
unsanitary condition upon any private property unless it is enclosed in a
watertight container.  The container shall not be opened, except when
necessary to deposit or remove materials from the container.  Garbage
containers shall be kept in the rear or in an inconspicuous part of the
premises in connection with which it is used and both container and the area
around it shall be kept clean at all times.  Containers can be placed
adjacent to the road within a period of time 24 hours before to 12 hours
after any collection by a licensed hauler for the residential home involved.
Refuse containers, 20 cubic yards or greater, primarily used for repair or
alteration of any structure require a zoning permit pursuant to the zoning
code.



(Prior Code, § 12-2) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008; Am. Ord. 2013-15,
passed 12-3-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, see M.C.L.A.
§§ 123.361 et seq.; M.S.A. §§ 5.2661 et seq. and §§ 5.2726(1) et seq.



§ 50.03  OFFENSIVE AND WASTE MATTERS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw, place or deposit or leave in any street, lane,
alley or public place any garbage or litter.



(Prior Code, § 12-3)  (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.04  POLLUTION OF STREAMS.



   No person shall cast or throw or cause to be cast or thrown into
Kalamazoo River or Rice Creek, or into any of the streams or sewers leading
thereto or into any pond or stream of water in the city, or into any ditch or
drain in the city any garbage or litter.



(Prior Code, § 12-4) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.05  COLLECTIONS.



   Refuse containers shall be emptied and the contents disposed of in a
sanitary manner at least once each week, or the contents shall be picked up
once each week by a collector licensed by the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-5) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.06  TRANSPORTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul garbage or litter
for hire within the limits of the city or to transport, cart or convey the
same over or through the streets of the city unless such person shall have
received from the Clerk-Treasurer a license to do so as provided by this
chapter.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person hauling,
transporting or disposing of garbage or litter produced on the premises of
such person, or to any governmental agency.



(Prior Code, § 12-6) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.07  METHOD AND PLACE OF DISPOSAL.



   The disposal method and the place of disposal of garbage and litter and
all refuse and garbage trucks shall be approved by the Building Inspector. 
All garbage trucks shall have water-tight bodies to prevent leakage; and when
any truck carrying refuse is in transit, the truck body shall be so covered
as to prevent loss of any of the material and to exclude flies.  No trucks
or equipment and no disposal method or place of disposal shall be used until
approved by the Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 12-7) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.08  RATES AND CHARGES.



   If the city maintains any public disposal site, the City Manager, upon
approval of the City Council, may establish any reasonable charge to offset,
in part or total, the cost of operating the disposal facility.



(Prior Code, § 12-9)  (Ord. passed 5-20-1985; Am. Ord. 08-09, passed
6-2-2008)



§ 50.09  RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR SANITARY LANDFILL OR DISPOSAL FACILITY.



   The City Manager may make such rules and regulations as he or she deems
reasonable and necessary and not inconsistent with this chapter, for the
safe, economical and efficient management of any city sanitary landfill or
disposal facility.  All money received for the collection or disposal of
garbage or litter shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-10) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



HAULERS



§ 50.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   The City Council may license for a period not to exceed five years at a
time one or more persons to take, carry away and dispose of all garbage and
litter from houses and other buildings in the city.  The license shall be
issued by the Clerk- Treasurer, upon the direction of the Council, at payment
of a fee of $50 per year in advance by licensee.



(Prior Code, § 12-21) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.21  CHARGES.



   (A)   The person licensed to haul garbage shall receive no
compensation from the city, but shall be permitted to make arrangements with
residents of the city for the collection of garbage and litter.  The
licensee shall furnish containers at his or her own expense for storage of
garbage and litter.



   (B)   Commencing September 1, 1968, the licensee shall not be
required to furnish containers at his or her expense for new resident
accounts, nor shall he or she be required to replace at his or her expense
worn out containers for established resident accounts.  The licensee shall
charge for the removal of garbage and litter from or in containers which can
be lifted by one adult person at the rates which have been approved by the
City Council, in an agreement executed by the city and the licensee.  All
such charges shall include cost of disposal service.



(Prior Code, § 12-22) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.22  DAYS OF COLLECTION.



   Under the approved rate schedule, residential pick-up must be made once
weekly and commercial pick-up daily.  No pick-ups need be made on Christmas
Day, Thanksgiving Day or other holidays as agreed to by the City Council and
the licensed person, but an alternate day from two days prior to two days
after the holiday must be offered to customers whose pick-up would normally
be on the date of the holiday.  Customers affected must be properly notified
of the alternate date.



(Prior Code, § 12-23) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.23  DISPOSAL GENERALLY.



   Each licensee under this subchapter shall dispose of all garbage and
litter entirely in such manner as not to create a public or private nuisance;
any and all locations to be approved by the county’s Health Department. 
It shall be unlawful to dispose of, bury, burn or dump within the territorial
limits of the city any garbage or litter accumulated within or without the
city, except at the county’s Health Department approved site.



(Prior Code, § 12-24) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.24  DISPOSAL IN CITY DISPOSAL SITE IF DIRECTED.



   All licensees under this subchapter must dispose of their garbage and
litter in a city disposal site if directed to do so by the City Council
within 60 days of written notification to do so.



(Prior Code, § 12-25) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.25  INSPECTIONS.



   Authority to inspect, investigate and report on service rendered by any
licensee under this subchapter, including collection, delivery and disposal
of garbage, is given to the City Manager and the county’s Health Department
and every licensee shall comply with the recommendations.



(Prior Code, § 12-26) (Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall
disobey any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and subject to such penalties set
forth in § 10.99.



(Ord. 08-09, passed 6-2-2008)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER



Section



   51.01   Regulations for connections



   51.02   Water supply cross connections



   51.03   Pollution of wells



   51.04   Connection to city water supply system required



   51.05   Installation of backup water wells



§ 51.01  REGULATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.



   All connections with the city water supply system shall be made in
accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Board of Public
Utilities.



(Prior Code, § 27-11)



§ 51.02  WATER SUPPLY CROSS CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan
Department of Public Health, being R. 325.11401 through R. 325.11407, are
hereby adopted.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Water Department of the Board of
Public Utilities to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by
the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply
is deemed possible.  The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on
potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the Water
Department and as approved by the state’s Department of Public Health.



   (C)   The representative of the Water Department shall have the
right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection
to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting
the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections.



   (D)   On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on the property.  The refusal of the
information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of
the presence of cross connections.



   (E)   The Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any
connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply system.  Water service to the
property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated
in compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (F)   (1)   The potable water supply made available on the
properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible
contamination as specified by this section and by the state’s Plumbing Code.



      (2)   Any water outlet which could be used for potable or
domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be
labeled in a conspicuous manner as: WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING.



(Prior Code, § 27-12)



§ 51.03  POLLUTION OF WELLS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain,
or permit to be constructed or maintained, within a radius of 200 feet from
any of the municipal water wells within the city from which the city draws
its water supplies, any source of possible contamination or pollution to the
wells.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act, or to allow
to be done any act, that may contaminate or pollute or contribute to the
contamination or pollution of the water supply wells or water systems of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 27-13)



§ 51.04  CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owner of any house, building, structure or property which
is used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes and for
which the nearest point of any house, building or structure located on the
property is not more than 200 feet away from the right-of-way line of any
street, alley or right-of-way in which the public water supply system is
available, shall be required, at the owner's expense, to install a suitable
water supply system therein and to connect the water supply system to the
city's water supply system upon the earlier of the following events:



      (1)   When any repair, improvement or replacement which would
require a permit from the county's Health Department is required to be made
to an existing well servicing any house, building, structure or property; and



      (2)   Upon any sale of the house, building, structure or
property.



   (B)   Except as set forth in § 51.05 below, no new private well
shall be installed serving any house, building, structure or property which
is used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, and
for which the nearest point of the house, building or structure located at
the property is not more than 200 feet away from the right-of-way line of any
street, alley or right-of-way in which the city has installed water mains as
part of the city water supply system.



(Prior Code, § 27-14)  (Ord. 96-7, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 04-07, passed
8-2-2004; Am. Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-19-2010)



§ 51.05  INSTALLATION OF BACKUP WATER WELLS.



   The owner of any place of public accommodation may install a private
water well when it can demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Director of Public Services each of the following:



   (A)   A private well is necessary of helpful in meeting the
requirements of any county, state or federal law, regulation, accreditation
standard or ordinance requiring a supply of water in addition to the city’s
municipal water supply:



   (B)   The additional well will not pose a danger to the city’s
municipal water supply, whether by way of contamination, depletion of water
supply or other cause;



   (C)   The additional well will be used only as a secondary or backup
source of water in the event of failure or contamination of the city’s
water supply system;



   (D)   Adequate mechanical and procedural safeguards exist that will
prevent the well from being used except in the case of a water system
failure, water system contamination, or for routine maintenance of the well;



   (E)   The well shall be installed in compliance with the regulations
of the Calhoun County Health Department and the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources and Environment, as well as all other applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations; and



   (F)   The additional well will be metered for sewage return.



(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-19-2010)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   52.01   Purpose and scope



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Management of P.O.T.W.; standards and rules



   52.04   Wastewater disposal



   52.05   Building sewers and connections



   52.06   Savings provision



Regulations



   52.15   Discharges to the P.O.T.W.



   52.16   Inspections



   52.17   Pretreatment



   52.18   Reporting and information requirements



   52.19   Permits to discharge



   52.20   Spill prevention



   52.21   Surcharges



Enforcement



   52.35   Powers of the City Director



   52.36   Fees, charges and penalties



   52.37   Administrative enforcement actions



   52.38   Lien for charges and fees; collection of suit;
discontinuance of service



Rates and Charges



   52.50   Definitions



   52.51   Sewer rates



   52.52   Industrial cost recovery



   52.53   Industrial cost recovery charges



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards, rules
and regulations with respect to the use of the P.O.T.W.; to provide for
equitable distribution of the costs of the P.O.T.W. facilities; to provide
procedures for complying with the requirements contained herein and to
protect the environment from pollution.



   (B)   (1)   This chapter shall apply to the city and to persons
outside the city who, by contract or agreement with the city, discharge into
the P.O.T.W.  Any other municipality that discharges into the P.O.T.W. shall
adopt an ordinance which is substantially identical to this chapter and which
is approved by the city as being sufficiently identical.



      (2)   This chapter provides for the regulation of discharges
into the P.O.T.W. through the issuance of permits to significant industrial
users and through enforcement of the chapter’s requirements against all
dischargers into the P.O.T.W.  This chapter authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities and requires discharger reporting.



(Prior Code, § 27-17)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.



   A.S.T.M.  The American Society for Testing and Materials.



   B.O.D. or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20`C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the wastewater plumbing facilities
of a building or premises to the public sanitary sewer.



   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of a user’s treatment facility.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or F.C.P.S.  National pretreatment
standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant
properties which may be discharged into a P.O.T.W. by a specific category of
industrial user described in such standards.



   C.F.R.  As referenced in this chapter shall refer to the Code of
Federal Regulations as published by the United States Government.  All
definitions, terminology and references to 40 C.F.R. shall be in accordance
with its latest revisions.



   C.O.D. or CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The measure of the oxygen consuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater,
expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a
specified test; it does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic
matter, and thus does not necessarily correlate with B.O.D.



   COLLECTION SYSTEM.  All of the common sewers, lift stations, pumps and
other equipment of the city and of a municipality which has a contract with
the city for discharge to the P.O.T.W. treatment plant which are primarily
installed to receive wastewater and pollutants directly from users for
transmission to the P.O.T.W. treatment plant.



   COMBINED SEWER.  Any sewer designed or intended to receive both
stormwater and sewage.



   COMMERCIAL OR CLASS II USER.  Any premises occupied by, a user not
within the definition of an INDUSTRIAL or RESIDENTIAL USER, and which is
connected to the P.O.T.W.



   CONNECTION PERMIT.  A permit issued by the city for the connection of
a building sewer into the P.O.T.W.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities
or equipment (including contractual obligations to purchase such facilities
or equipment) at the premises where the equipment will be used, including
preparation work at the premises, if such equipment will in any way actually
or potentially affect the quality or quantity of discharges or the
measurement or analysis of a discharge.



   DAILY AVERAGE.  The sum of the concentrations of a constituent for the
measurement period divided by the number of days on which the discharge was
sampled and analyzed in the period.  The concentrations which are added are
single numbers for single days for all days for which analyses are obtained
(whether by the user or the city), but the concentrations may be based upon a
sample or samples taken over either all or part of that day and upon single
or multiple analyses for that day as determined by the city.



   DAILY MAXIMUM.  The concentration which shall not be exceeded on any
single calendar day.



   DISCHARGE.  The introduction of pollutants into the P.O.T.W. which is
either intentional or unintentional.



   DOMESTIC USER.  A user that discharges only domestic wastes or wastes
from sanitary conveniences.



   EXISTING SOURCE.  Any source which is not a new source as defined in
this section.



   F.C.P.S. or FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  See
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   GROUNDWATER.  Water which is pumped or otherwise captured from the
ground and which is not used in a process.  Mere treatment of groundwater is
not used in a process.



   INDUSTRIAL OR CLASS III USER.  Any user identified in Divisions A, B,
D, E or I of the Standard industrial Classification Manual.  CLASS III shall
also include any user, industrial or otherwise, which discharges wastewater
containing toxic or poisonous substances, or any substance(s) which cause
interference to the conveyance or treatment process or any user designated as
a categorical industry in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subch. N.



   INTERCEPTOR SEWER LINES.  Those lines whose basic function is to
collect wastewater from two or more separate trunk sewer lines and to
transport such wastewater to the P.O.T.W. treatment plant.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the
P.O.T.W., its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use
or disposal and is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
N.P.D.E.S. permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):  § 405 of
the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (S.W.D.A.) (including Title
II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(R.C.R.A.) and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.



   M.D.N.R. or D.N.R.  The Department of Natural Resources of the State
of Michigan or its successor.



   mg/l.  Milligrams per liter or ppm.



   mg/l.  Micrograms per liter or ppb.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of
the Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.  In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same, general type of activity as the
existing source should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (1)(b) or (c) of this
definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or
production equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a new source, as defined herein, has
commenced if the owner or operator has begun, or caused to begin, as part of
a continuous on-site construction program:



         (a)   Any placement, assembly or installation of
facilities or equipment;



         (b)   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or



         (c)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this paragraph.



   NON-DOMESTIC USER.  A user other than a domestic user.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL USER.  Any user not defined under RESIDENTIAL or CLASS
1 USER.



   N.P.D.E.S. PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System for the discharge of wastewater into the surface
waters of the state.



   ORGANIC CHEMICALS.  Compounds composed of carbon and hydrogen or their
derivatives which are manmade or by-products of manmade or natural substances
which include, but are not limited to synthetic fibers, plastics, rubber,
medicinals, solvents, surface-active agents, pesticides and other
agricultural chemicals and lubricating oil additives or other petroleum
derivatives.



   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the P.O.T.W. into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the P.O.T.W.’s N.P.D.E.S. permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).



   PERMIT TO DISCHARGE or P.T.D.  A permit issued by the city to any
Class III user.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, municipality, company, association,
society, corporation, partnerships or group, including their officers and
employees who have responsibility for or actual involvement in the matters
regulated by this chapter.



   pH.  The negative logarithm of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   POLLUTANT.  Any material which is discharged to the P.O.T.W. or is
proposed for discharge to the P.O.T.W.  The term also includes properties of
such materials such as pH and heat.



   P.O.T.W. TREATMENT PLANT.  The P.O.T.W., exclusive of the collection
system.



   PREMISES.  Each lot or parcel of land or building, having any
connection, direct or indirect, to the P.O.T.W.



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in sewage to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into the P.O.T.W.  The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(d) and (e) as amended.



   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER.  The full outside diameter of a main sanitary
sewer, including the wye or tee connection point of the building sewer to the
main sanitary sewer.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or P.O.T.W. The treatment works, as
defined by § 212 of the Act, which are owned by the city and the collection
system.  The term also means the city or its authorized representative. 
This term includes any devices, processes and systems used by or for the city
in the storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of wastewater or sludge
from the treatment works or the collection system.



   RESIDENTIAL USER or CLASS I. Any premises used only for human residency
and which is connected to the wastewater facilities.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted and which may
include pumping stations, metering stations and other appurtenances.



   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities of a user which causes them to become all
or partially inoperable; or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a
bypass.  SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays
in production.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or S.I.U.  Any user of the P.O.T.W. that:



      (1)   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards;



      (2)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day of
process wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blow
down wastewater);



      (3)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
P.O.T.W.; or



      (4)   Is designated as such by the P.O.T.W. on the basis that
the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the P.O.T.W.’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



   SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.  A violation which meets one or more of
the following criteria specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(vii):



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;



      (2)   Technical review criteria (T.R.C.) violations, defined
here as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable T.R.C.
(T.R.C. = 1.4 for B.O.D., T.S.S., fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants, except pH);



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer-term average) which the P.O.T.W. determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of P.O.T.W. personnel or the
general public);



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has, caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the P.O.T.W.’s exercise of its emergency authority under 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit to discharge or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;



      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;



      (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; and



      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations which the
P.O.T.W. determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.



   SLUG DISCHARGE.  A discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-routine batch
discharge.



   SOURCE.  Any building, structure, facility, vehicle or installation
from which there is or may be a discharge to the P.O.T.W.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION or S.I.C.  A code number used to
identify specific industrial classifications.



   STATE DIRECTOR.  The Director of the state’s Water Pollution Control
Agency.



   STORM SEWER.  A sewer intended to carry only storm waters, surface
runoff, street wash waters and drainage of waters which are not wastewater.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS or S.S.  Solids that either float on the surface of,
or in suspension in, wastewater and which can be removed by standard
laboratory procedures.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards or other
limits applicable to the user because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user.  An UPSET does not include non-compliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless
or improper operation.



   U.S.E.P.A. or E.P.A.  The United States Environmental Protection
Agency or its successor.



   USER.  A person who discharges, either directly or indirectly, into
the P.O.T.W. and a municipality whose collection system discharges into the
P.O.T.W.



   WASTEWATER.  Water discharged to the P.O.T.W. by a user which may or
may not contain other pollutants.



   W.E.F.  Water Environment Federation.



(Prior Code, § 27-18)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994; Am. Ord. 04-02, passed
2-17-2004)



§ 52.03  MANAGEMENT OF P.O.T.W.; STANDARDS AND RULES.



   (A)   The P.O.T.W. shall be and remain under the management,
supervision and control of the city.  The city may employ a city director to
administer the facility and may employ such others as the city deems
advisable to carry out the management, operation and administration of the
P.O.T.W.



   (B)   The city may make such rules, orders or regulations as deemed
advisable and necessary to assure the proper management, operation and
administration of the P.O.T.W.  The standards, rules, orders and regulations
established in or pursuant to this chapter are for the preservation of the
public health, safety, welfare and to fulfill the obligations of the city
with respect to state and federal law and all rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and to provide for proper management, operation and
administration of the P.O.T.W.



   (C)   The city may deny or condition connection to or use of the
P.O.T.W. in accordance with federal, state and local laws.



(Prior Code, § 27-19)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.04  WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge without an N.P.D.E.S. permit
to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under its jurisdiction,
either directly or through a city storm sewer.



   (B)   Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.



   (C)   All houses, buildings or properties which are required by
other authority to have sanitary or industrial wastewater facilities and are
located where the P.O.T.W. is not available or required as specified by the
provisions of division (E) below, shall be equipped, at the owner's expense,
with suitable wastewater facilities connected to a private wastewater
disposal system which complies with the provisions of this section, and all
applicable requirements of the State of Michigan Department of Public Health
and the Calhoun County Sanitation Code.  This section shall not apply to any
private system which discharges to the P.O.T.W. or which discharges directly
to a natural outlet by authority of a separate N.P.D.E.S. permit and in
compliance with applicable state and federal laws.



   (D)   The owner shall operate and maintain private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times in accordance with
applicable state requirements and at no expense to the city.  The facilities
shall be subject to inspection by the city at reasonable times.



   (E)   (1)   The owner of any house, building, structure or
property which is used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes and for which the nearest point of the house, structure or building
located on said property is not more than 200 feet away from the right-of-way
line of any street, alley or right-of-way in which the P.O.T.W. is available,
is required, at the owner’s expense, to install suitable wastewater
disposal facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly to the
P.O.T.W. in accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon the earlier
of the following events:



         (a)   The failure of any existing septic system which
serves the house, building or property;



         (b)   When any repair, improvement or replacement to be
made to an existing sanitary sewer system which would require from the
county's Health Department; or



         (c)   Upon sale of any house, building, structure or
property with an existing septic system.



      (2)   Any septic tanks, cesspools or similar wastewater
disposal facilities shall, upon connection to the P.O.T.W., be emptied of
wastes and either removed or refilled with suitable material to prevent
collapse as ordered by the city director or other applicable authorities. 
This division shall not apply to any persons served by a privately
constructed, owned, operated or maintained wastewater sewer and wastewater
treatment facility which discharges directly to a natural outlet in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state and
federal laws.



   (F)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by health
officials or other applicable authorities.



(Prior Code, § 27-20)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994; Am. Ord. 96-7, passed
9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 04-07, passed 8-2-2004)



§ 52.05  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, use, alter,
disturb or make any connections with the P.O.T.W. or a storm sewer, nor shall
any person discharge any substance into the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer without
possessing a valid connection license of a class appropriate to the use of
the premises and the discharges to the P.O.T.W. therefrom.  All persons
presently using the P.O.T.W. shall be deemed to possess a valid connection
permit.



      (2)   There shall be three classes of licenses for connections
to the P.O.T.W.:  Class I - residential users; Class II - commercial users;
and Class III - industrial users.  In all cases, the owner shall make
application on a form furnished by the city for a permit of the applicable
class to connect to the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer.  The application shall be
supplemented by such wastewater information as required by the city to
administer this chapter.  A permit and inspection fee in such amount as
shall be determined by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the
city at the time an application is filed.



      (3)   Prior to obtaining a permit to connect to the P.O.T.W.,
all non-residential users shall file an industrial user survey form with the
P.O.T.W.  Upon receipt of the industrial user survey form, a review and
determination will be made concerning the need for the non-residential user
to apply for and obtain a permit to discharge.



      (4)   The city may deny a connection permit if the application
for permit shows that anticipated discharges will be harmful to the P.O.T.W.
or storm sewer, will violate the provisions of this chapter, or in any other
way will hamper the operations of the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer.  The city may
require, as a condition to granting the permit, that the applicant enter into
an agreement as set forth in § 52.19 of this code.



      (5)   The city shall not issue a connection permit for any
applicant unless there is sufficient capacity, not legally committed to other
users, in the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer to convey and adequately treat the
quantity and quality of wastewater which the required connection will add to
the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer.  The city may allow the permit if there are
legally binding commitments to provide the needed capacity.



      (6)   A violation of any provision or requirement contained in
a connection permit is a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer
installation and connection to the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer shall be borne by
the owner.  The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.



   (C)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or
driveway, the building sewer in the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.  The city
assumes no responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any single
building sewer which serves two buildings.



   (D)   Existing building sewers may be used for connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to
meet the requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   The size, slope, alignment, construction materials, trench
excavation and back-fill methods, pipe placement, jointing and testing
methods used in the construction and installation of the building sewer shall
conform to the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable requirements of
the city.  In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.E.F. shall apply.



   (F)   Whenever practicable, the building sewer shall be brought to a
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  In buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the P.O.T.W. or storm
sewer, as the case may be, wastewater carried by the building drain shall be
lifted by an approved means and discharged to a building sewer draining to
the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer.



   (G)   (1)   The connection of a building sewer into the P.O.T.W.
or storm sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing
Code or other, applicable requirements of the city or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. or the W.E.F.  The
connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight and verified by proper
testing.  Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved in writing by the city before installation.



      (2)   The connection of a surface runoff or groundwater drain
to a store sewer or natural outlet designed to transport surface runoff or
groundwater drainage shall conform to the requirements of the applicable
building code or other applicable requirements of the city.  The connection
of any such drain to the P.O.T.W. under a permit to discharge shall conform
to the requirements specified by the city as a condition of approval of such
P.T.D.



      (3)   The city director, either at the time of the connection
of the building sewer to the P.O.T.W. or at a later time, shall have the
authority to require installation of a monitoring or sampling manhole, grease
or sand interceptors, or such other facilities which, in his or her opinion,
shall be necessary for the protection and/or proper operation of the
P.O.T.W.  The type, installation and design of these facilities shall be
subject to the approval of the city director.



   (H)   The applicant for a connection permit shall notify the city
when such sewer or drainage connection is ready for inspection.  Prior to
its connection to the P.O.T.W. or storm sewer, and upon payment of any fees
required by the city, inspection and testing as deemed necessary by the city,
and as required by city building or plumbing codes shall be conducted at the
expense of the owners.



   (I)   Excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



   (J)   The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer
maintenance and repair shall be borne by the owner.



(Prior Code, § 27-21)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994; Am. Ord. 04-02, passed
2-17-2004)



§ 52.06  SAVINGS PROVISION.



   The invalidity of any section, clause or provision in this chapter
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this  chapter which may
be given effect without reliance upon any such invalid part or parts.



(Prior Code, § 27-34)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



REGULATIONS



§ 52.15  DISCHARGES TO THE P.O.T.W.



   (A)   General discharge prohibitions.  The regulations contained in
this section are generally intended to:



      (1)   Prohibit the discharge to the P.O.T.W. of wastewater
which may cause interference or could have detrimental effects on the
physical structures or operating personnel of the P.O.T.W., or on the general
public; and



      (2)   Restrict the discharge to the P.O.T.W. of stormwater,
groundwater (contaminated and uncontaminated), and non-contact cooling water.



   (B)   Specific discharge prohibitions.  No user shall discharge,
cause to be discharged or allow to be discharged into the P.O.T.W. any of the
following:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in
the P.O.T.W., including, but not limited to pollutants with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C), as determined by a Pensky-Martens
Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified in A.T.S.M. standard
D-93-79 or D-93-80k (incorporated by reference, see § 260.11) or a Setaflash
Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified in A.T.S.M. standard
D-3278-78 (incorporated by reference, see § 260.11) and pollutants which
cause an exceedance of 10% of the lower explosive limit (L.E.L.) at any point
within the P.O.T.W.;



      (2)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the P.O.T.W. in a quantity that may cause acute or
chronic health and safety problems for workers;



      (3)   Pollutants which cause or may cause corrosive structural
damage to the P.O.T.W., but in no case wastewater with pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.5;



      (4)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which could cause
or do cause either obstruction to flow or interference in the P.O.T.W.;



      (5)   Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants,
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which
will cause or may cause interference in the P.O.T.W.;



      (6)   Pollutants which may cause:



         (a)   Impairment of the strength or durability of
structures in the P.O.T.W.;



         (b)   Restriction of hydraulic capacity of structures in
the P.O.T.W.; and/or



         (c)   Unsafe conditions to personnel in the inspection
or maintenance of structures of the P.O.T.W. or unsafe conditions to the
general public, with respect to the collection system.



      (7)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity
in the P.O.T.W. resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such
quantities that the temperature at the point of discharge exceeds 65°C
(150°F) or that the temperature at the P.O.T.W. treatment plant exceeds
40°C (104°F) unless the state director, upon request of the P.O.T.W.,
approves alternate temperature limits;



      (8)   Pollutants which cause or may cause pass through or
interference, including petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that cause or may cause
interference or pass through;



      (9)   Any pollutants which exceed the limitations set forth in
a categorical pretreatment standard;



      (10)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids
which either singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public
nuisance;



      (11)   Any pollutant introducing colors not removed in the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;



      (12)   Any unpolluted water, non-contact cooling water,
stormwater, groundwater (contaminated and uncontaminated) or surface water
unless separate P.O.T.W. facilities are available and identified for the
discharges;



      (13)   Any radioactive wastes in harmful quantities as such
quantities are defined by applicable state and federal regulations;



      (14)   Any solvent extractables (grease, fat, oils) in excess
of a daily average of 5.0 mg/l;



      (15)   Any grease, oil or other pollutants that will become
solid or viscous at a temperature of 60°C or below after being discharged
into the P.O.T.W.;



      (16)   Any insoluble substance retained by a standard No. 8
sieve or having any dimension greater than ½ inch (1.27 cm);



      (17)   Insoluble substances having a specific gravity greater
than 2.65;



      (18)   Improperly shredded garbage;



      (19)   Any water or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes employed by the P.O.T.W.
or would upset the treatment process or are amenable to treatment only to
such a degree that the P.O.T.W. effluent cannot meet the requirements of any
state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the discharge by the
P.O.T.W. to the receiving waters;



      (20)   Sludge which results from a treatment process unless
the city director has determined that it is amenable to treatment by the
P.O.T.W. without application of unusual means or expense; and/or



      (21)   Discharges greater than the concentrations of specific
pollutants as provided for in division (D) below.



   (C)   Trucked wastes.  No wastes or wastewater shall be discharged
by any user into the P.O.T.W. from a vehicle which transported the waste or
wastewater to the point of discharge unless the discharge is approved, in
writing, by the city director, prior to the discharge.  No wastes or
wastewater shall be discharged by any user if the waste or wastewater was at
any time transported by a vehicle (such as a tank truck) from its point of
generation prior to discharge to the P.O.T.W. unless the discharge is
approved, in writing, by the city director prior to the discharge.  The city
director may specify which location must be used and any other terms and
conditions for the discharges, including requiring a P.T.D.



   (D)   Local limitations on wastewater discharges.  All users of the
P.O.T.W. shall be subject to limitations as to concentration, mass and/or
volume for wastewater discharges.  These limitations shall be adopted by
resolution and kept on file at the P.O.T.W.  They shall be revised from time
to time as required by discharge limitations imposed on the P.O.T.W. by any
state, federal or other public agency having jurisdiction for such discharge
to the receiving waters, and the final disposal of residual solids from the
treatment process, or for any reason the P.O.T.W. deems necessary.  The
limitations referred to in this division shall henceforth be. referred to as
local limits and shall be deemed pretreatment standards in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.5(d).



   (E)   Right of revision.  The city may revise local discharge
limitations in accordance with applicable laws as necessary to prevent
interference with P.O.T.W. treatment processes, residual solids disposal
practices or effluent to the waters of the State of Michigan.



   (F)   Bypass.



      (1)   Bypass notice.  If a user knows in advance of the need
for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the P.O.T.W., if possible, at
least ten days before the date of the bypass.  A user shall submit oral
notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and other applicable limits to the P.O.T.W. within 24
hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass.  Written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass.  The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.  The P.O.T.W. may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.



      (2)   Prohibition of bypass.  Bypass is prohibited and the
P.O.T.W. may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass, was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime; and 
(This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent
a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventative maintenance.)



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (F)(1) above.



      (3)   P.O.T.W. approved bypass.  The P.O.T.W. may approve an
anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the P.O.T.W.
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division (F)(2)
above.



   (G)   Upset.



      (1)   Upset liability. In the event of an upset, the user
shall not be liable for the fines, imprisonment or civil penalties provided
for in this chapter, but the user is still liable to the city for surcharges
and damages.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof by clear and
convincing evidence.



      (2)   Conditions necessary for a demonstration of upset.  A
user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other
relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the P.O.T.W. within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):



            1.   A description of the discharge and cause of
non-compliance;



            2.   The period of non-compliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.



      (3)   User responsibility in case of upset.  The user shall
control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable
limits upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.



   (H)   Categorical pretreatment standards.  A user shall comply with
all categorical pretreatment standards and any other pretreatment
requirements established under §§ 307(b), 307(c) or 402(b)(8) of the Act
that are applicable to that user.  If a categorical pretreatment standard
and another limit contained in this chapter regulate the same pollutant, then
the more restrictive of the two shall apply.



   (I)   Future conditions.  Future conditions imposed on the city by
government agencies with proper jurisdiction may require subsequent amendment
of these regulations by the city.  Where federal or state promulgated
pretreatment standards require limits on parameters not covered in this
regulation or limits more stringent than those specified in the regulation,
the state or federal limits shall have precedence and take effect with
respect to the applicable user on the later of:



      (1)   Their promulgation date; or



      (2)   The date specified for compliance with the standards.



   (J)   Dilution prohibition.  No discharger shall increase the use
of potable or process water in any way, for the purpose of diluting a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment before
discharge to the P.O.T.W. to achieve compliance with the standards set forth
in this chapter.



   (K)   Special agreements.  No statement contained in this chapter
shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the city and
any industrial user, whereby an industrial waste containing compatible
pollutants, up to levels which are within treatment capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant, may be accepted, subject to payment therefore by
the industrial concern, provided the agreement shall not violate E.P.A.
guidelines or N.P.D.E.S. requirements and provided user charges and
surcharges as provided in this chapter are agreed to in the agreement.



(Prior Code, § 27-22)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.16  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Authority of inspectors.



      (1)   The city director or other duly authorized
representative bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter private or public properties at any reasonable time for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and/or sampling of the
user’s discharge.  The inspection shall be conducted for the purposes of
determining that the discharge to the P.O.T.W. is in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and to obtain remedies for non-compliance.



      (2)   Representatives of the city must be permitted to enter
any private or public properties at any hour during or following emergencies,
spills, plant upsets or to investigate real or suspected violations of this
chapter.



      (3)   Inspections need not be announced by the inspector.



   (B)   Safety rules of users.



      (1)   While on the property of the user, the authorized
representative of the city shall observe all reasonable safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the user.



      (2)   Users of the public or private property in which
sanitary sewers are located shall maintain the sanitary sewer and the
surrounding area in a safe condition free from obstacles, obstructions and
deterioration.



   (C)   Other inspections.  Inspection by state or federal
representatives pursuant to law shall not relieve a user from inspection by
city representatives and inspection by the city representatives shall not
relieve any user from compliance with lawful inspection by state and federal
representatives.



(Prior Code, § 27-23)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.17  PRETREATMENT.



   (A)   Federal categorical pretreatment standards.



      (1)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards shall be subject to the rules, regulations and requirements of 40
C.F.R. pt. 403.



      (2)   No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the
P.O.T.W. wastewaters containing substances subject to an applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standard promulgated by EPA or such other discharge
limitation set by the



city under § 52.15(D), whichever is lower, in excess of the quantity
prescribed in such applicable pretreatment standards or discharge
limitations, except as otherwise provided in this section.  Compliance with
such applicable pretreatment standards or discharge limitations shall be
within the time set by E.P.A. or by the city, whichever is less.



   (B)   Existing sources.



      (1)   Existing sources shall comply with categorical
pretreatment standards within three years of the date the standard is
effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in 40 C.F.R. Chapter
I, Subch. N.



      (2)   Existing sources which become significant industrial
users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard shall be considered existing industrial users, except where the
sources meet the definition of a new source as defined in § 52.02.



   (C)   New sources.



      (1)   Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and
local limits for new sources shall be as follows:



         (a)   New sources shall install and have in operating
condition and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet
applicable pretreatment standards and local limits before beginning to
discharge.



         (b)   Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed
90 days) new sources shall meet all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and local limits.



      (2)   New sources and sources that become significant
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of categorical standards
shall submit a baseline monitoring report (B.M.R.) to the city director at
least 90 days prior to the commencement of any discharge.  The B.M.R. shall
include information as specified in § 52.18(E)(4).



      (3)   All industrial users shall comply with the reporting
requirements including compliance schedule progress reports, 90-day
compliance reports and periodic compliance reports for existing and new
sources as outlined in § 52.18.



   (D)   Wastewaters with special characteristics.



      (1)   While the city may initially rely upon the federal
categorical pretreatment standards to protect the P.O.T.W. or receiving
waters, if any wastewater which contains substances or possesses
characteristics in excess of those established under this section, §§ 52.15
and 52.21 or which constitutes a public nuisance or hazard, is discharged or
is proposed for discharge to the wastewater sewers, the P.O.T.W. may:



         (a)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
prior to discharge to the P.O.T.W.;



         (b)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge into the P.O.T.W.;



         (c)   Require payment to cover added cost of handling
and treating the wastewaters not covered by existing fees or charges;



         (d)   Require the development of compliance schedules to
meet any applicable pretreatment requirements;



         (e)   Require the submission of reports necessary to
assure compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements;



         (f)   Carry out all inspections, surveillance and
monitoring necessary to determine compliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements;



         (g)   Obtain remedies for non-compliance by any user;
and/or (Such remedies may include those specified in §§ 52.35 et seq.)



         (h)   Reject the wastewater.



      (2)   When considering the above alternatives, the P.O.T.W.
shall assure that conditions of the P.O.T.W.’s N.P.D.E.S. permit are met. 
The P.O.T.W. shall also take into consideration cost effectiveness and the
economic impact of the alternatives on the user.  If the P.O.T.W. allows the
pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows, the installation of the
necessary facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the city. 
The P.O.T.W. shall review and recommend any appropriate changes to the
program within 60 days of submittal.



      (3)   Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are
approved or required for any wastewater, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the
user.



   (E)   Compliance with pretreatment requirements.



      (1)   Users required to pretreat wastewater in accordance with
this chapter, shall be required to submit reports on compliance with
pretreatment requirements in accordance with § 52.18.



      (2)   When so directed by the P.O.T.W., industrial users shall
provide, at their expense, such pretreatment as may be necessary to comply
with the concentration, mass and/or volume limitations established in this
chapter; and furthermore, limit the discharge of the regulated pollutants so
as not to cause interference with the P.O.T.W. treatment processes, residual
solids disposal practices or effluent quality discharged to the waters of the
State of Michigan.



   (F)   Removal credits.



      (1)   Upon application by an industrial user or upon its own
initiative the P.O.T.W. shall review any limitations on substances specified
in the applicable pretreatment standards and may modify the limitations to
reflect historic removal of the substances by the wastewater treatment
facility if the requirements contained in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 are fulfilled
and prior approval from the M.D.N.R. is obtained.



      (2)   Revised discharge limitations for specified substances
shall be derived in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 governing removal
credits.



   (G)   Fundamentally different factors.



      (1)   Upon application by an industrial user, the P.O.T.W.
shall review and may adjust any limitation on substances specified in the
applicable pretreatment standards to consider factors relating to the user
which are fundamentally different from the factors considered by E.P.A.
during the development of the pretreatment standard.



      (2)   Request for and determination of a fundamentally
different adjustment shall be in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.13
governing variance from categorical pretreatment standards for fundamentally
different factors.



   (H)   Net/gross calculation.  Any industrial user may seek an
adjustment in the categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence
of pollutants in the users intake water.  The P.O.T.W. may allow a credit in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15 governing net/gross calculations.



   (I)   Equivalent mass/concentration based limits.



      (1)   If in establishing discharge restrictions, discharge
limits or pretreatment requirements pursuant to this chapter, the P.O.T.W.
establishes concentration limits to be met by an industrial user, the
P.O.T.W., in lieu of concentration limits may establish mass limits of a
comparable or more stringent nature.



      (2)   The P.O.T.W. may impose mass limitations on industrial
users which use dilution to meet applicable discharge limits or in other
cases where the imposition .of mass limitations is appropriate.



      (3)   If the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass pollutant per unit of production, the
P.O.T.W. may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as
mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration limits for the
purposes of calculating effluent, limitations applicable to individual
categorical industries.



      (4)   Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with
this section shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of §
307(d) of the Act and this section.  Industrial users will be required to
comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical
standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.



   (J)   Combined wastestream.  Where process effluent is mixed prior
to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated
process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived by the P.O.T.W.,
as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).  These alternative limits shall be
applied to the mixed effluent.



   (K)   Notification.  The P.O.T.W. shall notify any user affected by
the provisions of this section and establish an enforceable compliance
schedule for each.



(Prior Code, § 27-24)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.18  REPORTING AND INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Required submittal of information.



      (1)   All industrial users shall file with the P.O.T.W.,
wastewater information deemed necessary by the P.O.T.W. for determination of
compliance with this chapter, the P.O.T.W.’s N.P.D.E.S. permit, and state
and federal law.  The information shall be provided by completion of a
questionnaire designed and supplied by the P.O.T.W. and by supplements
thereto as may be necessary.  Information requested in the questionnaire and
designated by the user as confidential is subject to the conditions of
confidentiality as set forth in division (K) below.



      (2)   Where an industrial user owns, operates or occupies
properties at more than one location, separate information submittals shall
be made for each location as may be required by the P.O.T.W.



   (B)   Provisions for monitoring.



      (1)   When required by the P.O.T.W., the user of any premises
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastewater discharges shall
provide suitable access and such necessary meters, monitoring facilities and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastewater.  The access shall be in a readily and
safely accessible location and shall be provided in accordance with plans
approved by the P.O.T.W.  The access, metering and monitoring facilities and
appurtenances shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense so as
to be safe and accessible at reasonable times.



      (2)   The P.O.T.W. shall consider such factors as the volume
and strength of discharge, rate of discharge, quantities of toxic materials
in the discharge and wastewater treatment facility removal capabilities in
determining whether or not access and equipment for monitoring industrial
wastewater discharges shall be required.



      (3)   Where the P.O.T.W. determines access and equipment for.
monitoring or measuring industrial wastewater discharges is not practicable,
reliable or cost effective, the P.O.T.W. may specify alternative methods of
determining the characteristics of the wastewater discharge which will, in
the P.O.T.W.’s judgement, provide an equitable measurement of such
characteristics.



      (4)   The type of equipment, methods and frequency used for
metering, sampling and analysis shall be subject to the approval of the
P.O.T.W.  All monitoring and analytical instrumentation and related
equipment shall be periodically calibrated and maintained by the user at
intervals to insure accuracy of measurements.



      (5)   When required by the P.O.T.W., any industrial user who
discharges wastewaters subject to the requirements of this chapter, shall
install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and the measurement of waste.  The manholes, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the P.O.T.W.  The manhole shall be
installed and maintained by and at the expense of the industrial user.



   (C)   Determination of wastewater characteristics.



      (1)   Measurements, tests and analyses of the wastewater
characteristics shall be made in accordance with 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 and
amendments thereto.  Where 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
administrator determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures including procedures suggested by the.
P.O.T.W. or other parties approved by the administrator.



      (2)   Such tests as are herein specified shall be determined
upon representative samples taken at the control manhole provided for in
division (B)(5) above.  In the event that no manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the sanitary sewer.



      (3)   Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and
frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval
of the P.O.T.W.  The user shall have the option to use, at his or her own
expense, more complete sampling methods, locations, times, durations and
frequencies than specified by the P.O.T.W.



      (4)   Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics
of wastewater required by this chapter shall be performed by a qualified
laboratory approved by the city director.  When such analyses are required
of a user, the user may make arrangements with the P.O.T.W., or any other
qualified laboratory, including that of the user, to perform such analyses.



      (5)   Monitoring of wastewater characteristics necessary for
determination of compliance with applicable pretreatment standards shall be
conducted on the basis of a schedule established by EPA unless more frequent
monitoring is required by the city director.  The P.O.T.W. may, in its
judgment, determine that the characteristics of the specific discharge
warrant a more stringent frequency of monitoring and require additional
monitoring and analysis in a permit to discharge.



      (6)   Upon demonstration by any user that the characteristics
of the wastewater discharged by that user are consistent, the P.O.T.W. may
reduce the established monitoring frequency, except in no case shall the
frequency of monitoring be less than semi-annual for the determination of
compliance with pretreatment standards.



      (7)   In determining discharge characteristics, factors such
as continuous or batch, seasonal operation and the information or
requirements of other provisions of this chapter shall be considered by the
P.O.T.W.  The P.O.T.W. may obtain wastewater samples as required to verify
the consistency of discharge characteristics.



      (8)   Fees for any given measurement, test or analyses of
wastewater required by this chapter and performed by the P.O.T.W. shall be
the same for all users, regardless of the quantity or quality of the
discharge and shall reflect direct and indirect costs.  Costs of analyses
performed to determine compliance with pretreatment standards shall be borne
directly by the user.



      (9)   Sampling for daily average or daily maximum shall be
24-hour flow proportioned composite samples, except that a minimum of four
grab samples shall be taken in lieu of a 24-hour flow proportioned composite
sample for a single day for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease,
sulfide and volatile organic compounds.  If it is not feasible to obtain a
flow proportioned composite sample, a time proportioned composite sample or a
minimum of four grab samples may be used in lieu of the flow proportioned
sample if the user demonstrates to the city, director that representative
samples will be obtained.



   (D)   Self monitoring.



      (1)   Any user who discharges wastewater subject to the
requirements of this chapter may be required to provide self-monitoring for
determination of continuing compliance.  The frequency of monitoring
including sampling and reporting shall be determined by the P.O.T.W. and
specified in a permit to discharge.



      (2)   The date when a sample is taken, start time, stop time,
sample location, sampler programming information and persons involved in the
sampling shall be recorded by the user if the user is self-monitoring.



      (3)   Flow measurements shall be taken to record the daily
discharge volume.



      (4)   All analytical results for each calendar month shall be
submitted to the P.O.T.W. by the fifteenth day of the following month.



      (5)   A user who is performing self-monitoring shall contract
with an independent company to maintain, repair, and calibrate the sampling
and flow measurement equipment and instruments used to monitor that user’s
discharge.  The maintenance, repair and calibration shall be performed as
necessary so that monitoring data is accurate and representative, but in no
case less frequently than twice in a calendar year at reasonable intervals. 
The city may inspect and test a user’s monitoring equipment at reasonable
times.  The user shall maintain complete records of equipment maintenance.



      (6)   Users may request not to perform self-monitoring, in
which case the city, at its discretion, may agree to obtain samples using
composite flow proportioned sampling or may contract with an independent firm
for the sampling.  The user shall pay a sampling fee to the city to fully
reimburse the city for the sampling, including administrative and overhead
costs.  If the city contracts with an independent firm for the sampling, the
user shall fully reimburse the city for amounts paid by the city to the
firm.  It is the user’s sole responsibility to provide self monitoring. 
The city will use its own discretion in determining whether or not to take on
the burden of self-monitoring if requested.



      (7)   Samples shall be analyzed at the sole cost of the
user.  If a user does its own sampling or causes its samples to be taken,
then the user shall submit the samples to a laboratory, which may be the
user’s own laboratory, approved by the city director, for analysis.  If
the user utilizes its own laboratory, that user shall send a split sample to
an independent laboratory, at a frequency determined by the P.O.T.W., as a
quality control check.  If a user does its own sampling and/or analyses, the
city may also take and have analyzed up to four daily composites or up to
four grab samples per day for four days at the sole cost of the user in any
calendar month.  If the city takes the samples, the city, at its sole
discretion, may analyze the samples at its own laboratory or contract with an
independent laboratory for the analyses.



   (E)   Reporting requirements.



      (1)   The P.O.T.W. may require any industrial user to submit
periodic reports which shall include information on the quality and quantity
of wastewater and pollutants discharged to the P.O.T.W.  The report shall
include the volume of wastewater and concentration of pollutants and be
related to pretreatment standards as shall be required by the P.O.T.W.  The
names of all persons responsible for operating and maintaining any
pretreatment, equipment, pretreatment process or responsible for wastewater
management at the user’s facilities shall be listed in the report with a
brief description of each persons duties.  The P.O.T.W. may also require
additional information from the users as to materials or substances which may
cause interference or pass through.



      (2)   Within 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after the final administrative
decision is made upon a category determination submission under §
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to the
categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging or scheduled to
discharge to the P.O.T.W. shall be required to submit a report to the
P.O.T.W. which contains the information listed in divisions (E)(4)(a) through
(g) below.



      (3)   At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new
sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to
submit to the P.O.T.W. a report



which contains the information listed in divisions (E)(4)(a) through (e)
below.  New sources shall also be required to include in this report
information on the method of pretreatment the user intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the
information requested in divisions (E)(4)(d) and (e) below.



      (4)   Informational requirements for submittal of required
reports.



         (a)   The user shall submit the name and address of the
facility including the name of the operator and owners.



         (b)   The user shall submit a list of any environmental
permits held by the facility.



         (c)   The user shall submit a brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification of
the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user.  This description shall
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to
the P.O.T.W. from the regulated process.



         (d)   The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the
P.O.T.W. from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to
allow the use of the combined wastestream formula.  The P.O.T.W. may allow
for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or
feasibility considerations.



         (e)   The user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants
from each regulated process.  Both daily maximum and average concentrations
shall be reported.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations
and sampling shall be performed in accordance with division (C) of this
section.



         (f)   A statement, reviewed by an authorized
representative of the user, as defined in division (F) of this section, and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet
applicable pretreatment standards and requirement.



         (g)   If additional operation and maintenance or
pretreatment will be required to meet pretreatment standards, the shortest
feasible schedule by which the user will provide the pretreatment shall be
developed and submitted to the P.O.T.W.  The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard.  The following conditions shall apply to
the contents of the compliance schedule.



            1.   The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment.



            2.   No increment shall exceed nine months.



            3.   Not later than 14 days following each date in
the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the P.O.T.W. including at a minimum whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, and if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment, the reason for delay, and the steps
being taken by the user to return the construction to the established
schedule.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the
progress reports to the P.O.T.W.



      (5)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance
with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of new
sources following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
P.O.T.W. any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit a report containing the information described in divisions (E)(4)(d)
through (f) above.



      (6)   Any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards,
after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard, shall submit to the
P.O.T.W. during the months of June and December unless required more
frequently, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent.  In addition, this report shall include a record of measured
or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.



      (7)   All industrial users shall notify the P.O.T.W.
immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the P.O.T.W.,
including any slug discharges.



      (8)   Significant non-categorical industrial users shall
submit to the P.O.T.W. at least once every six months (on dates specified by
the P.O.T.W.) a description of the nature, concentration and flow of the
pollutants required to be reported by the P.O.T.W.



      (9)   The reports required in this section shall be based upon
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.  All analysis shall be performed in
accordance with division (C) above.



      (10)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation,
the user shall notify the P.O.T.W. within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation.  The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the P.O.T.W. within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation.



      (11)   The city shall notify the user that it is required to
submit reports.



      (12)   Each user that has been notified of its obligation to
submit reports shall file an initial report within 60 days from the date the
notice is served upon the user.



      (13)   Each user, so notified by the city director, may be
required to file monthly reports by the fifteenth day of the month for the
preceding month.



      (14)   If any user subject to categorical limits monitors, in
accordance with approved methods, any pollutant more frequently than required
by the P.O.T.W., the results of that monitoring shall be included in the
periodic compliance reports.



      (15)   All users shall promptly notify the P.O.T.W. in advance
of any-substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in its
discharge, including the hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted
initial notification in accordance with division (J) below.



   (F)   Signatory requirements.  All reports required in this chapter
shall be signed as follows:



      (1)   By a responsible corporate officer, if the user
submitting the reports is a corporation;  (A responsible corporate officer
means a president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation
in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision making functions of the corporation; or the
manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities
employing more than 250 persons, if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.)



      (2)   By a general, partner or proprietor if the user
submitting the reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively;



      (3)   By a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in this section if:



         (a)   The authorization is made in writing by the
individual described in divisions (F)(1) and (2) above;



         (b)   The authorization specifies either an individual
or position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates, such as the position of general manager,
or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility
for environmental matters for the company; and



         (c)   The written authorization is submitted to the city
director.



      (4)   If an authorization under division (F)(3) above is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of division (F)(3) above must be submitted to the city director
prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.



      (5)   The submission of any report(s) required under a permit
to discharge or any provision of this chapter shall include the following
certification statement as set forth in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2)(ii):



“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete.  I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



   (G)   Notice of exceedance.  All users shall promptly notify the
city, as soon as possible, of a discharge which exceeds a limit in this
chapter.



   (H)   Notice of significant user status.  All users shall notify
the city of a change in discharge which may convert the user into a
significant industrial user.  Where a change in discharge may convert the
user into a significant industrial user, such user shall promptly submit an
application for a permit to discharge to the P.O.T.W.



   (I)   Emergency or accidental discharges.  All users shall report
to the P.O.T.W. as soon as possible any discharges which are known to exceed
the limits established by this chapter, in a permit to discharge, in any
other special agreement, in a F.O.P.S., or in any other applicable law or
regulation.



      (1)   The notice shall be given in advance whenever possible
and contain available information regarding the intended or accidental
discharge, volume, duration, constituents, loading and concentrations, and
such other available information as may be necessary to determine the impact
such discharge may have on the P.O.T.W.



      (2)   The following is the emergency contact point. which may
be used to convey such information:



         (a)   Normal office hours:  city director.



         (b)   After normal office hours:  city’s Police
Department.



   (J)   Notification regarding wastes which are otherwise hazardous. 
Any user that discharges to the P.O.T.W. any substance which, if disposed of
other than by discharge to the P.O.T.W., would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. § 261 or under the rules promulgated under the Michigan Hazardous
Waste Management Act (“Michigan Rules”) shall notify the city director,
the U.S.E.P.A. Region V waste management division director and the chief of
the waste management division of the M.D.N.R. of the discharge.  The notice
shall be given within 180 days after the discharge first occurs.  The notice
shall be in writing and shall include the name of the hazardous waste set
forth in 40 C.F.R. § 261 or the Michigan rules and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch or other).  If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of the waste per calendar month to the P.O.T.W., the notice shall
also contain the following information to the extent the information is known
and readily available to the user:



      (1)   An identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes;



      (2)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of the
constituents in the discharge during that calendar month; and



      (3)   An estimation of the mass of constituents expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months. Notification under this division
must be submitted once for each hazardous waste discharged.  Notification
under this division is not required for pollutants already reported under
self-monitoring by industrial users under F.C.P.S. reporting requirements. 
An industrial user is exempt from notification under this subsection during a
calendar month in which the user discharges no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).  In the case of a new regulation
which first regulates a substance as a hazardous waste after the effective
date of this chapter, notification under this division shall be made within
90 days of the effective date of the regulation.  In any notice submitted
under this division, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree
the user has determined to be economically practical.



   (K)   Confidentiality.  The following confidentiality provisions
shall apply:



      (1)   All information and data submitted to the P.O.T.W.
relating to matters regulated in this chapter are presumed not to be
confidential.  Information submitted by a user shall be clearly marked on
each page as to the portion or portions considered by the user to be
confidential and accompanied by a written explanation of why the user
considers the information confidential.  Mere marking of the page as
“confidential” does not necessarily mean that the information on that
page must be kept confidential.



      (2)   Information furnished to the P.O.T.W. on the volume or
characteristics of wastewater or pollutants discharged or proposed to be
discharged into the P.O.T.W. shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction.  When requested by the a user
furnishing information, the portions of the information submitted which may
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the N.P.D.E.S.
permit, state disposal system permit and/or pretreatment programs; provided,
however, all such information shall be available for use by the state and any
state agency or the city in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the user furnishing the information.  The city shall notify a
user, who has requested and is entitled to confidentiality for information
furnished by the user to the city, that the city has sent the confidential
information to another governmental agency that has made a written request
for it.



      (3)   Where a user has mass based limits as allowed by certain
categorical. pretreatment standards on a production basis, the production
data necessary to determine compliance must also be provided by the user to
the city, and be available to the public.  Where application of the combined
waste stream formula is necessary to apply categorical pretreatment standards
to a user, the flow measurements and other data used in the calculation must
be provided to the city, and be available to the public.



      (4)   Observations made by P.O.T.W. inspectors are subject to
the confidentiality provision of this section as if they were in writing if
the user specifies in writing to the city the observations made by the
P.O.T.W. inspector for which the user seeks confidentiality.



   (L)   Records retention.  Any non-residential user subject to the
sampling, analysis or reporting requirements of this chapter, including
reports under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, as amended, shall maintain copies of the
reports and records pertaining to those reports.  The reports and records
shall be retained by the user, and by the city if the reports and records
have been submitted to the city, for at least three years.  This period
shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding
the discharges of the user or the P.O.T.W. pretreatment program or when
requested by the city director, the state director or U.S.E.P.A.  All
non-residential users who have records regarding their generation, treatment,
storage or disposal of hazardous waste or solid waste shall maintain the
records for the period and make them available to the city for inspection and
copying, subject to the provisions contained in division (K) above regarding
confidential information.  The terms HAZARDOUS WASTE and SOLID WASTE shall
have the same definition as provided in the Michigan Hazardous Waste
Management Act, as amended, and rules promulgated thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 27-25)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.19  PERMITS TO DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Control through permit to discharge.  The P.O.T.W. shall
control through the issuance of a permit to discharge (P.T.D.), the
contribution to the P.O.T.W. by industrial users to ensure compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (B)   Permit application.  In accordance with the provisions of §
52.05(C)(3), a determination concerning the need for a permit to discharge
(P.T.D.) will be made by the P.O.T.W. for each non-residential connection to
the P.O.T.W.  The P.O.T.W. shall provide forms and receive application for a
P.T.D. from all users subject to the provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   The P.O.T.W. shall identify and locate all possible
existing users which may be subject to these rules and regulations.



      (2)   Each existing or new nonresidential user shall file a
nonresidential user survey form for each connection to the sanitary sewer. 
If determined applicable users shall, within 60 days following notification
by the P.O.T.W. file an application for a P.T.D.



      (3)   The P.O.T.W. shall attempt to notify all existing
industrial users of the requirements and provisions of this chapter,
including permitting requirements, within 60 days following adoption of this
chapter.



      (4)   The application for a P.T.D. shall contain such
information as determined necessary by the P.O.T.W. and shall include a
statement of pollutants expected in wastewater discharged to the P.O.T.W.  A
new application showing updated information shall be filed for each renewal
of a P.T.D.



      (5)   The P.O.T.W. shall act on all applications within 60
days.  If the P.O.T.W. issues a request for further information within the
stated time, the P.O.T.W. shall have 30 days in which to act after receipt of
all requested information.



   (C)   Permit conditions.



      (1)   P.T.D.s may be issued with conditions for compliance and
stipulated schedules for achieving compliance.  P.T.D.s may alternatively
require the user to submit (within 30 days of issuance of a conditional
P.T.D.) a schedule(s) for achieving compliance.



      (2)   Permittees shall furnish to the P.O.T.W. as required by
permit conditions, compliance data reports, compliance progress reports,
periodic compliance reports and reports on changes in process that affect the
strength or content of wastewater discharges.  Reports shall conform to §
52.18(E) or permit conditions, whichever is more stringent.



      (3)   The permit to discharge issued by the P.O.T.W. shall
contain, at a minimum, the following conditions:



         (a)   Statement of duration;



         (b)   Statement of non-transferability;



         (c)   Effluent limits based on applicable general
pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and
state and local law;



         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification
and record keeping requirements, including an identification of the
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location and sample type; and



         (e)   Statement of applicable civil and criminal
penalties for violations.



   (D)   Permit term.  A permit to discharge shall be issued for a
term not to exceed five years.  The city director may issue the permit for a
shorter period.  A permittee shall apply for reissuance of a permit by
submitting a complete application at least 90 days prior to the expiration of
the existing permit.  If a permittee complies with the preceding sentence,
the existing permit shall continue until final action is taken by the city
director on the application for renewal.



   (E)   Permit modification.



      (1)   The city director shall have the right to amend any
permit issued hereunder in order to:



         (a)   Assure compliance by the P.O.T.W. with applicable
laws, regulations, and the P.O.T.W. N.P.D.E.S. permit;



         (b)   Account for substantial changes in discharges by
the user;



         (c)   Account for new information concerning the
pollutants discharged by the user;



         (d)   Reflect changes in federal or state laws and
regulations or in city ordinances;



         (e)   Account for any operational changes at the
P.O.T.W. that, as determined by the city director, require the revision of
the permit; or



         (f)   Modify or terminate any special agreement
provision contained in a permit.



      (2)   The user shall be informed of any changes in the permit
at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change unless a shorter time
is necessary to meet applicable law or to protect human health or the
environment.



   (F)   Permit fees.  Significant industrial users shall pay a fee
for a permit to discharge to the city in amounts to reimburse the city for
its costs of processing the application, in administering the permit once it
has been issued, and in processing renewal application.  These fees shall be
established by the City Council by resolution.



   (G)   Permit revocation.



      (1)   The city director may revoke a permit during its term or
deny a permit renewal if:



         (a)   The permittee has fabled to comply with any
condition of the permit;



         (b)   The permittee fails, in the permit application or
during the permit issuance process, to disclose fully all relevant facts or
the permittee misrepresents any relevant fact at any time;



         (c)   The city director determines that the permitted
discharge endangers human health or the environment and the threat can only
be abated by revocation of the permit;



         (d)   A change in any condition that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the discharge;



         (e)   The permittee is in default, after having received
written notice of the default, in the payment of fees or other amounts owed
to the city related to wastewater matters; and



         (f)   Non-compliance by the permittee with any provision
of this chapter.



      (2)   Upon revocation of its permit, a user shall immediately
terminate its discharge to the P.O.T.W.



   (H)   Compliance with permit.  A user shall comply with all of the
provisions of its permit.  A violation of any provision of a permit is a
violation of this chapter, subject to the penalty, damage and other
enforcement provisions of this chapter.



   (I)   Transferability.  P.T.D.s are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation at a specific location and are not assignable to another
user or transferable to any other location.  This provision shall not apply
to minor changes in stock ownership, but shall apply to mergers, sales or
other events in which the corporate name or identity is changed.



(Prior Code, § 27-26)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.20  SPILL PREVENTION.



   (A)   The P.O.T.W. must be protected against the uncontrolled
discharge of pollutants including any slug discharge.  To achieve this goal,
the P.O.T.W. has adopted a spill prevention program in which the P.O.T.W. and
industrial or Class III users or users who are storers of hazardous or toxic
materials, as defined in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261 et seq. or listed in M.D.N.R.’s
Critical Materials Register, shall cooperate to establish adequate spill
prevention control measures.



   (B)   The P.O.T.W. may require the submittal and implementation of a
spill and slug discharge prevention plan conforming to applicable state,
federal or local requirements as a stipulation of any permit issued to any
industrial user.  A pollution incident prevention (P.I.P.) plan approved by
M.D.N.R. may be accepted by the P.O.T.W.  Industrial users with identified
spill prevention needs shall apply for a permit to discharge from the P.O.T.W.



   (C)   Employees of the P.O.T.W. may enter onto the premises of any
industrial user. during reasonable hours to inspect for potential of
uncontrolled discharges or for inspection of spill prevention facilities. 
Employees of the P.O.T.W. may enter such premises at any hour during or
following any emergency or suspected spill for purposes of inspection of
spill prevention facilities.  The inspection may be announced or unannounced.



   (D)   Spill prevention facilities shall be maintained in good repair
and in operable condition at all times at the expense of the user.



   (E)   The P.O.T.W. shall prepare a spill response program including
a spill response manual.



   (F)   The P.O.T.W. shall evaluate each significant industrial user
at least once every two years and other industrial users as necessary, to
determine whether the user needs a plan to control slug discharges.  If the
P.O.T.W. decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain,
at a minimum, the following elements:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the P.O.T.W. of
slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition
under § 52.15, with procedures to follow-up, including written notification,
within five days; and



      (4)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control
of plant site runoff, worker training, building containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.



   (G)   In the case of accidental discharge, it is the responsibility
of the user to inform the P.O.T.W. immediately, including any slug discharges
by the user.  Where the information is given orally, a written follow-up
report thereof shall be filed by the user with the P.O.T.W. within five days.



(Prior Code, § 27-27)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.21  SURCHARGES.



   (A)   Imposition of surcharges.



      (1)   Any users discharging waters or wastes conforming to the
limitations of §§ 52.15 and 52.17, and exceeding only the limitations of
this section regarding biological oxygen demand (B.O.D.), suspended solids
(S.S.) and phosphorous (P), may be allowed, at the discretion of the P.O.T.W.
to discharge the waste into a sanitary sewer.  The users shall be charged
for the treatment of extra-strength wastewater according to the following
formula:



Total Charges = (M1)V+(M2)B.O.D.+(M3)S.S.+(M4)P+Meter Charge



      (2)   Where:



         (a)   V = Volume of waste in million gallons.



         (b)   B.O.D. = Pounds of BOD in excess of the local
limit.



         (c)   S.S. = Pounds of suspended solids in excess of the
local limit.



         (d)   P = Pounds of total phosphorus in excess of the
local limit.



         (e)   Meter charge = As provided for in the rate
resolution as adopted by the city.



      (3)   The multiplying constants (M1, M2, M3, M4) shall be
calculated annually.



      (4)   Billings will be rendered on a monthly or quarterly
basis.



      (5)   The volume will be actual as metered.  Loadings of
B.O.D., S.S. and P will be actual as calculated from the analysis taken
during the preceding month(s).



   (B)   Monitoring, reporting and billing.  Users shall be required
to submit regular reports to the P.O.T.W. relative to the discharge of their
waste.  The reports shall contain such information as strength of B.O.D.,
S.S., P, pH, volume discharged and other data that might be required by the
P.O.T.W.  This data may be used for the basis for billing under the above
formula; however, the P.O.T.W. at their discretion, may conduct analysis of
representative samples taken by the P.O.T.W. as means of verifying the
results as submitted, and the P.O.T.W. may use their own results of analysis
for billing purposes.  The type of equipment, methods and frequency used for
metering, sampling and analysis shall be subject to approval of the P.O.T.W.



   (C)   Pretreatment required.  When plant loadings approach the
design capacity of the P.O.T.W. to receive and treat B.O.D., S.S. and P,
pretreatment may be required of industrial users unless additional capacity
is added to the P.O.T.W.



(Prior Code, § 27-28)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.35  POWERS OF THE CITY DIRECTOR.



   The city director is hereby empowered to either directly or through
others:



   (A)   Supervise the implementation and enforcement of this chapter;



   (B)   Institute administrative actions against all users violating
this chapter and, with the city attorney, institute necessary legal
proceedings to prosecute violations of this chapter and compel the prevention
and abatement of violations of this ordinance, any regulations promulgated
thereunder or nuisances arising therefrom;



   (C)   Review the plans for pretreatment equipment submitted by users;



   (D)   Conduct inspections and tests of existing and newly installed,
constructed, reconstructed or altered pretreatment equipment to determine
compliance with provisions of this chapter;



   (E)   Investigate complaints of violations of this chapter, conduct
inspections, make observations of discharges and record such investigations,
complaints, inspections and observations;



   (F)   Issue orders requiring compliance with this chapter;



   (G)   Impose civil penalties for violations of this chapter;



   (H)   Recommend to the City Attorney the initiation of proceedings
in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with the provisions
of this chapter or any determination or order which may be promulgated or
issued pursuant to this chapter; and



   (I)   Perform other actions, including emergency suspension of
service, necessary or advisable for the management and operation of the
P.O.T.W. and the enforcement of this chapter and other applicable laws and
regulations.



(Prior Code, § 27-29)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.36  FEES, CHARGES AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   The city director shall establish fees, charges and penalties
appropriate to provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The city may recover any costs associated with the
administration, operation and/or enforcement of provisions of this chapter
from the users of the P.O.T.W.



   (C)   Fees for P.T.D.S.s shall be collected from the applicant at
the time application is made.



   (D)   Fees and charges for services may be collected in advance from
the user requesting services.



   (E)   All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this
chapter shall be immediately due and payable upon receipt of notice of the
fees and shall be paid to the City of Marshall.  Fees and charges unpaid for
a period of 30 days from the date of the invoice or other notice of the
charges shall accrue interest as may be established from time to time by the
city.  Failure to pay may result in a revocation of a P.T.D.



(Prior Code, § 27-30)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.37  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.



   (A)   Established procedures.  The P.O.T.W. shall establish
procedures to be followed in the event of non-compliance including notice of
violation, establishing compliance schedules, show cause hearings and
proceedings.  The procedures shall be in accordance with this chapter, the
P.O.T.W.’s industrial pretreatment program administrative compliance
guidance manual and applicable state and federal regulations.



   (B)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the P.O.T.W. finds any
non-residential user has or is violating this chapter, P.T.D., or any
limitation or condition for compliance, the P.O.T.W. may serve such person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation.  Within the time
stipulated in the notice, a plan for corrective action shall be submitted to
the P.O.T.W. by the user in accordance with the P.O.T.W.’s Industrial
Pretreatment Program Administrative Compliance Guidance Manual.



   (C)   Orders to users.



      (1)   Whenever the city director has determined that any user
has violated this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations which the
city is authorized to enforce, the city director may issue an order to take
actions deemed appropriate by the city director under the circumstances.



      (2)   The following types of orders may be issued by the city
director:



         (a)   Compliance order.  An administrative order
directing a user to achieve or restore compliance by a date specified in the
order.



         (b)   Consent order.  An administrative order embodying
a legally enforceable agreement between the P.O.T.W. and a user designed to
restore the user to compliance status.



         (c)   Cease and desist order.  An administrative order
directing a user to halt illegal or unauthorized discharges.



         (d)   Show cause order.  An administrative order
directing a user to appear before the city director or a hearing officer in
order to explain its non-compliance and show cause why more severe
enforcement actions should not be taken.



      (3)   Any order issued by the city director shall contain the
facts and reasons and grounds for its issuance and the remedial action
ordered as well as the time within which the action shall be taken.  No such
order shall be deemed insufficient, however, for inconsequential errors and
omissions in the facts and reasons and ground for the order.  If any user
deems the content of the order to contain insufficient information, it may.
ask the city director for additional information.  Multiple orders may be
issued simultaneously or in combination as a single order by the city
director with respect to a single user.



   (D)   Civil violations.



      (1)   Civil citations.  The city director may issue a civil
citation with or without an order against any user deemed to be in violation
of this chapter and determine the civil administrative penalty, if any, to be
imposed consistent with the provisions of division (H)(4) below.



      (2)   Service.  The citation shall be served upon the user
either by personal delivery or by first class mail addressed to such user,
except that an immediate cease and desist order may be written or oral, and
may be served by telephone.



      (3)   Content of citation.  The citation shall specify the
following:



         (a)   Date and time of issuance;



         (b)   Date(s), time(s) and place(s) of violation, the
nature of the violation, the substances discharged, where ascertain able and
the volume of the discharge, where applicable;



         (c)   Reference to the pertinent section of this chapter
under which the violation is charged;



         (d)   Reference to the pertinent section of this chapter
establishing penalties for the violation;



         (e)   The amount of the penalty, if any; and



         (f)   The right of the alleged violator to present to
the city director written explanations, information or other materials in
answer to the citation, including any defenses.



      (4)   Notice to municipality.  Any citation issued pursuant
to this section upon any riser within the corporate limits of any contract
municipality shall be served upon the municipality in the manner provided by
division (D)(2) of this section and the municipality shall be given notice,
also in the manner provided in division (D)(2) of this section, of all
meetings, hearings and proceedings subsequently conducted pursuant to the
citation.



   (E)   Informal conference.  An informal conference with the city
director may be requested in writing by any user deeming itself aggrieved by
any notice of violation, of other administrative enforcement action by the
city director within five calendar days after the notice of the violation, or
notice of other enforcement action has been served upon the user.  The
purposes of the informal conference are to discuss the matter by which the
user deems itself aggrieved and to attempt to reach a settlement of the
matter agreeable to the user and the city.  The city director is not
required to reach any conclusion or provide a decision as a result of an
informal conference.  If such a request is received, the city director shall
hold the informal conference within ten calendar days of receipt of the
request.  A user is not required to request or participate in an informal
conference as a precondition to requesting and participating in a hearing
under division (G) below, nor is a user required to request or participate in
a hearing under division (G) below, as precondition to requesting and
participating in an informal conference.  If a hearing is held under
division (G) below, the hearing is not an appeal from an informal conference.



   (F)   Show cause hearing.



      (1)   The city director may order any user who causes or
allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the P.O.T.W. to show cause why
proposed enforcement action shall not be taken.



         (a)   This shall be accomplished by issuance of a
written order as permitted by division (C)(2)(d) above, specifying the time
and place of the hearing, the nature of the violation, reasons for taking the
proposed action, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to
appear before the city to show cause why the proposed action should not be
taken.



         (b)   Notice of hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the hearing.  Service may be made on any agent or officer of the user.



      (2)   The city director may designate a hearing officer to:



         (a)   Issue notices regarding, attendance and testimony
of witness and production of evidence;



         (b)   Take evidence; and



         (c)   Transmit a report and transcript of the hearing
together with evidence and recommendations to the city director.



      (3)   All testimony must be given under oath and recorded
verbatim.



      (4)   After reviewing the transcripts and evidence, the city
director may issue an order to the user requiring that specific corrective
action be taken and specifying a time schedule for any such action.  Further
orders and directions may be issued by the city director as the city director
shall deem appropriate.



   (G)   Violation hearing.



      (1)   Right to hearing.  A hearing before a hearing officer
may be requested in writing by any user deeming itself aggrieved by any
notice of violation, or other enforcement action, within 30 calendar days
after the notice of violation or other enforcement action has been served
upon the user.  If an informal conference has not been requested by the
user, the request for a hearing shall be made within 15 days of service of
the notice or citation.  A hearing fee of $250 must accompany any request
for a hearing filed under this section.  If a hearing is not demanded within
the time period provided herein, the action taken by the city director shall
be deemed final.  In the event the hearing is demanded, the action shall be
suspended until the hearing is completed; provided, however, that, cease and
desist orders issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be suspended.



      (2)   Time.  The hearing shall be promptly scheduled to
commence at the earliest practicable date, but not later than 30 days after
receipt of the request unless extended by mutual written agreement.



      (3)   Content for request for hearing.  Any written request
for a hearing shall be signed by the user requesting the hearing or by a duly
authorized officer, agent or attorney, shall be directed to the city director
and shall contain the following:



         (a)   The name and address of the user requesting the
hearing;



         (b)   A copy of the notice of violation, order, or the
notice of any surcharge, penalty or action on a P.T.D.; and



         (c)   A statement of the defenses and issues to be
raised at the hearing.



      (4)   Selection of hearing officer.  The City Manager shall
appoint the hearing officer who shall be a person who shall not be the city
director or any person who shall be a direct subordinate of the city director.



      (5)   Procedure for conduct of hearing.  Hearings on any
notice of violation, order, notice of surcharge, penalty or action on a
permit issued by the city director shall be conducted under the procedure set
forth in this section.



         (a)   Rules.  Hearings shall be informal and need not
be conducted according to the strict technical rules a relating to evidence
and witnesses.



         (b)   Oral evidence.  Oral evidence shall be taken only
on oath or affirmation.



         (c)   Hearsay evidence.  Hearsay evidence may be used
for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence.



         (d)   Admissibility of evidence.  Any relevant evidence
shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence upon which responsible
persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.



         (e)   Exclusion of evidence.  Irrelevant and unduly
repetitious evidence shall be excluded.



         (f)   Rights of parties. At the hearing, each party
shall have the following rights:



            1.   To call and examine witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;



            2.   To introduce documentary and physical
evidence;



            3.   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any
matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;



            4.   To impeach any witness regardless of which
party first called him or her to testify;



            5.   To rebut adverse evidence; and



            6.   To representation of his or her choice at his
or her sole expense.



         (g)   What may be noticed.  In reaching a decision,
official notice may be taken either before or after submission of the case
for decision of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of the
state.



         (h)   Inspection of the premises.  The hearing officer
may inspect any building or premises involved in the hearing.



         (i)   Record.  A record of the proceedings shall be
made by tape recording.  A transcript of the proceedings shall be made
available to all parties upon request and upon payment by the requesting
party of the costs of transcription.



      (6)   Form of decision/decision of City Manager.  The
recommendation shall contain proposed findings of fact, a proposed decision
on each of the points raised by the user, and an explanation of the reasons
for the proposed decision.  The City Manager shall review same and shall
issue a final written decision on the matter within 15 days of receipt of the
recommendation.  A copy of the decision of the City Manager shall be
delivered personally or sent by first class mail to the user.



      (7)   Judicial review.  Appeals of the decision of the City
Manager shall be made to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law.



      (8)   Costs.  If the city director’s action is upheld by
the city manager, then the user shall pay to the city all of the costs
incurred by the city in holding the hearing, including, but not limited to
the fee or salary of the hearing officer,



transcription and recording costs, and all of the city’s costs or
enforcement, including, but not limited to the city’s sampling and
analytical costs.  If the city director’s action is partially upheld or is
reversed, the City Manager may apportion those costs between the city and the
user in an equitable manner.  Under the first two sentences of this
division, the user who has paid a $250 hearing fee shall receive a credit for
that amount but no refund of any part of the $250 hearing fee shall be
given.  The user’s liability of costs under this division, plus fines and
penalties imposed on such user shall not exceed the maximum aggregate fines
that could be imposed on the user under division (H)(7) of this section.



   (H)   Violations, penalties and remedies.



      (1)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the P.O.T.W.



      (2)   Falsifying information in applications for P.T.D.’s or
reports shall be considered grounds for criminal prosecution and shall be
subject to the following:



         (a)   The provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating to
fraud and false statement;



         (b)   The provisions of § 309(c)(4) of the Act, as
amended, governing false statements, representation or certification; and



         (c)   The provisions of § 309(c)(6) of the Act
regarding responsible corporate officers.



      (3)   Each and every day, or portion thereof, of any violation
of this chapter by any user shall constitute a separate and new violation by
the user and shall be punishable by the imposition of administrative, civil
and/or criminal penalties as provided in this chapter.



      (4)   Any user violating any provision of this chapter, a
permit to discharge or any order as provided for in division (C) above is
subject to a civil administrative penalty to be determined and assessed by
the city director not to exceed $500 per day per violation.  The city
director, in calculating the amount of the penalty, shall consider the
frequency of the violations by the user, the impact on the P.O.T.W. and human
health and the environment of the violation, the magnitude of the violation
and other factors deemed appropriate by the city director.



      (5)   Violations of this chapter, a permit to discharge or of
any order as provided for in division (C) above are hereby declared, to be a
public nuisance.



      (6)   The city director, is hereby empowered, with the City
Attorney, to institute legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction
for the abatement of any nuisance, and to seek relief for violations of this
chapter, a permit to discharge, or any order as provided for in division (C)
above.  The city director may seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief,
damages, penalties, costs and such other relief as a court may order.



      (7)   In any action brought by the city against any person or
user for violation of this chapter, a permit to discharge or any order as
provided for in division (C) above, a court of competent jurisdiction may
impose, in addition to the relief permitted under division (H)(6) above, a
civil penalty of up to $500 per day per violation.



      (8)   Any person or user who violates any provision of this
chapter, a permit to discharge or any order as issued under this chapter,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.  In
addition, as part of any criminal proceeding, the city shall have, the right
to seek restitution for the cost of repair or replacement of damage to the
P.O.T.W. caused by the person or user charged with violating any of the
provisions of this chapter, a permit to discharge or any order as issued
under this chapter.



      (9)   The imposition of a single penalty, fine, order, damage
or surcharge upon a user for a violation of this chapter, a permit to
discharge or any order issued under this chapter shall not preclude the
imposition by the city or a court of competent jurisdictional of a
combination of any or all of such sanctions and remedies or additional
sanctions and remedies with respect to the same violation, consistent with
applicable statutory limitations on penalty amounts.  A criminal citation
and prosecution of a criminal action against a user shall not be dependent
upon or held in abeyance during any civil, judicial or city administrative
proceeding, conference or hearing regarding the user.



   (I)   Publication of significant violators.  The P.O.T.W. shall
publish, once per year in the largest daily newspaper in the city, a public
notice of users which, at any time during the previously 12 months were in
significant non-compliance of federal, state or city pretreatment standards
or requirements, as defined in § 52.02 and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(2)(vii).



   (J)   Affirmative defenses.  A user shall have an affirmative
defense in. any action brought against it alleging a violation of this
chapter where the user can demonstrate that:



      (1)   It did not know or have reason to know that its
discharge alone or, in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources would cause pass through or interference;



      (2)   A local limit designed to prevent pass through or
interference was developed for each pollutant in the user’s discharge that
caused pass through or interference and the user was in compliance with the
limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or



      (3)   If a local limit designed to prevent pass through or
interference has not been developed for the pollutants which caused the pass
through or interference, the user’s discharge prior to and during the pass
through or interference did not substantially change in nature or
constituents from the user’s prior discharge activity when the P.O.T.W. was
regularly in compliance with the P.O.T.W.’s N.P.D.E.S. permit requirements
and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge
use or disposal.



(Prior Code, § 27-31)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



§ 52.38  LIEN FOR CHARGES AND FEES; COLLECTION OF SUIT; DISCONTINUANCE OF
SERVICE.



   (A)   The fees charged for wastewater service as provided for by
this chapter are hereby recognized to constitute a lien on the premises
receiving the service.  This lien shall become effective immediately upon
providing wastewater service to the premises, but shall be not enforceable
for more than three years after it becomes effective.  Whenever any such
fine or charge against any property shall be delinquent for three months, the
city officials in charge of the collection thereof may certify to the tax
assessing officer of the city the fact of the delinquency, whereupon the
charge shall be entered upon the next roll as a charge against the premises
and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as
general city taxes against the premises are collected and the lien thereof
enforced.  Nothing in this section, however, shall be deemed to prevent the
city from suing in a court of law to collect the amount due it for wastewater
service charges as provided in division (C) below.  In addition to the other
remedies provided in this section, the city shall have the right to shut off
and discontinue the supply of water service to any premises for the
nonpayment of wastewater service fees or charges when due in accordance with
the procedure established in division (B) below.



   (B)   If a fee or charge for wastewater service prescribed by this
chapter is not paid within 30 days after the billing thereof, and after the
customer has been given notice and an opportunity to be heard as provided by
law, all water service may be shut off and discontinued to the customer owing
or liable for the charge.  Water service shut off pursuant to this section
shall not be restored until all sums due and owing have been paid in full,
including a collection fee of $10 and appropriate security deposits as
prescribed by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   At its option, the city may, in addition to the remedies
above, in its corporate name, bring suit in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of any wastewater service fee or charge
which, 30 days, after the billing thereof, has not been paid.  The
production of the meter record or costs record and/or invoice for fees, shall
be prima facie evidence of the liability to pay the amount therein shown to
be due.



(Prior Code, § 27-32)  (Ord. 94-1, passed 3-7-1994)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 52.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  Te Administrator of the U.S.E.P.A.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  The portion of the sewer charge required to
retire the bonds outstanding for capital improvements of the wastewater
system.



   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.  Recovery by the grantee from the industrial
users of a treatment works of the grant amount allowable to the treatment of
wastes from such users pursuant to Pub. L. No. 92-500, § 204(b), 40 C.F.R.
§ 35.905-6.



   MAINTENANCE.  To keep in a certain state of repair; to keep up
buildings, equipment and grounds.



   OPERATION.  The proper functioning of the facility.  In this case,
the manpower and equipment necessary to efficiently run the wastewater
treatment plant.



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the
works were designed and constructed.  The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
includes REPLACEMENT, 40 C.F.R. § 35.905-17.



   SEWER CHARGE.  The total monthly charge made to each user to the
wastewater system.  The total charge includes a fixed service charge, user
charge and a debt service charge based upon the volume metered.



   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of the treatment works for the
cost of operation and maintenance of the works pursuant to Pub. L. No.
92-500*, § 204(b), 40 C.F.R. § 35.905-26.



(Prior Code, § 27-46)



Editor’s Note:



   *33 U.S.C. § 1284



§ 52.51  SEWER RATES.



   The sewer rates shall be as presently established or as hereafter
adopted by resolution.



(Prior Code, § 27-47)



§ 52.52  INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.



   The Board of Public Utilities has established a method of industrial
cost recovery to be used to pay a portion of the present federal grant, used
to expand the wastewater treatment plant.  Industrial discharges classified
under Divisions A, B, D, E, and I of the Bureau of Budgets Standard
Industrial Classification Manual are subject to industrial cost recovery
charges in addition to sewer user charges unless otherwise determined by the
Board and confirmed by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.  All
charges will be made based upon wastewater flows and characteristics as per
the following allocation.  The recovered amounts are to be distributed as
per rules and regulations published in the Federal Register February 11, 1974.



(Prior Code, § 27-48)



§ 52.53  INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGES.



   (A)   Industrial cost recovery charges shall be as presently
established or as hereafter adopted by resolution.



   (B)   Charges will be assessed annually to all industries to whom
industrial cost recovery is applicable.  Any future industry requiring
sanitary sewer connection to the wastewater system will be reviewed by the
Board of Public Utilities and may be subject to industrial cost recovery
charges.  These charges will be prorated throughout the useful life of the
facility or for a 20-year period beginning January 1976.



(Prior Code, § 27-49)



CHAPTER 53:  RATES



Section



   53.01   Water rates



   53.02   Sewer rates



   53.03   Electric rates



§ 53.01  WATER RATES.



   (A)   All metered water shall be charged to a two-part rate
consisting of a readiness to serve charge plus a commodity charge.



   (B)   Water Readiness to Serve Charge shall be billed by meter size.
The effective rates shall be as established by resolution and published in
the Utility Rules and Regulations.



      (1)   The Readiness to Serve Charge outside the corporate
limits of the City of Marshall shall be 200% of the rate as established for
use within the corporate limits of the City of Marshall, Michigan.



      (2)   When a battery of more than one meter is used in the
place of a large single meter, then the Readiness to Serve Charge shall be
the charge of the single sized meter times the number of meters composing the
battery.



      (3)   The Readiness to Serve Charge covers the cost necessary
to keep the Water Works in good operating condition, and other fixed costs as
designated by Council and is the amount of the minimum bill.



   (C)   Water Commodity Charges shall be based on actual consumption.
The effective rates shall be as established by resolution and published in
the Utility Rules and Regulations.



      (1)   Commodity Charge outside the corporate limits of the
City of Marshall shall be: 200% of the rate as established for use within the
corporate limits of the City of Marshall, Michigan.



   (D)   Automatic sprinkler services or hose connections for fire
protection services only shall be charged per year the rates as established
by resolution and published in the Utility Rules and Regulations.



   (E)   The city may provide a fire hydrant connection for circuses,
tent shows, carnivals, exhibitions, and for construction purposes. Fees and
charges shall be established by resolution. The Meter Security Deposit will
be returned when the hydrant meter is returned without damage. Any loss or
damage to the reducing connection, valve, hydrant, meter or operating wrench
will be charged to the person making application for the use of the hydrant.
On large construction projects, the Water Department may require the setting
of an appropriate meter and to charge for water and service as for regular
service supply.



   (F)   All service taps to water mains shall be made by the Water
Department except when approved by the Water Superintendent. Additional
information is available in the city's Utility Rules and Regulations. The
charge for the water main tapping shall be paid by the customer and shall
include, but not be limited to, all materials, equipment, and contracted
costs incurred by the city.



   (G)   The city may provide meter testing. The meter testing fees
shall be established by resolution. If, after testing, the meter is found to
be in error above allowable percent, which is 2% plus or minus, then the
amount deposited will be refunded, but if the water meter is found to be
registering within the test limits, then the amount deposited will be
retained to cover the cost of the testing.



   (H)   A turn-on fee for the restoration of service during business
hours or after business hours will be charged to a customer in order to
reconnect his or her service if service has been interrupted. A turn-on fee
shall be established by resolution.



   (I)   Anyone seeking to make a connection to any public water main
within the City of Marshall shall first obtain a permit to make such
connection from the offices of the City of Marshall. Prior to the issuance of
said permit, the applicant must pay to the city a Water Connection Fee
representing the cost of construction of that portion of the city-wide water
system attributable to the proportionate benefit to be received by the
applicant's property.



      (1)   The Water Connection Fee shall be based on a unit factor
system wherein each single-family residence shall be classified as one unit.
Other occupational uses shall be charged on multiples of units as may be
determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Said units
and multiples thereof will be established and computed on the same basis as
for the Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee contained further in this section and
the number of units charged to a premise shall be the same for both water and
sanitary sewer. The Water Connection Fee shall be established by resolution.
The fee for premises connected from outside the corporate limits of the City
of Marshall shall be 150% times the in-city rate.



   (J)   Designated irrigation meters will only be billed between the
months of May to September.



   (K)   The charges for water services set forth in this chapter and
furnished to any premises are a lien on the premises to which this service is
provided and those charges which are delinquent for six months or more shall
be certified by the City Treasurer to the City Assessor who shall enter the
charges on the next tax roll against the premises to which the services have
been rendered. Said charges shall be a lien as of the date services are
provided and shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for by the
collection of the taxes assessed upon the tax roll and the enforcement of the
lien for taxes. The City Treasurer may certify all charges delinquent for six
months or more at any time prior to the date on which the city tax roll is
approved.



(Ord. 2012-02, passed 5-21-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-14, passed 12-3-2013, Am. Ord.
2016-10, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 53.02  SEWER RATES.



   (A)   Monthly rates for sewer service inside the corporate limits of
the City of Marshall shall be as established by resolution and published in
the Utility Rules and Regulations.



   (B)   Monthly rates for sewer service outside the corporate limits
of the City of Marshall shall be as established by resolution and published
in the Utility Rules and Regulations.



   (C)   The Sewer Commodity Charge shall be as established by
resolution and published in the Utility Rules and Regulations.



   (D)   Flat rate customers shall pay the rates as established by
resolution and published in the Utility Rules and Regulations.



   (E)   The Sewer Commodity Charge may be reduced for residential
customers because of lawn sprinkling. The procedure and policy for the sewer
discount will be part of the Rules and Regulations.



   (F)   Anyone seeking to make a connection to any sanitary sewer
system within the City of Marshall shall first obtain a permit to make such
connection from the offices of the City of Marshall. Prior to the issuance of
said permit, the applicant must pay to the city a Sanitary Sewer Connection
Fee representing the cost of construction of that portion of the city-wide
sewer system attributable to the proportionate benefit to be received by the
applicant's property.



      (1)   The Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee shall be based on a
unit factor system wherein each single-family residence shall be classified
as one unit. Other occupational uses shall be charged on multiples of units
as may be determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time. The
Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee shall be established by resolution. The fee for
premises connected from outside the corporate limits of the City of Marshall
shall be 1-1/2 times the in-city rate.



   (G)   The charges for waste water services set forth in this chapter
and furnished to any premises are a lien on the premises to which this
service is provided and those charges which are delinquent for six months or
more shall be certified by the City Treasurer to the City Assessor who shall
enter the charges on the next tax roll against the premises to which the
services have been rendered. Said charges shall be a lien as of the date
services are provided and shall be enforced in the same manner as provided
for by the collection of the taxes assessed upon the tax roll and the
enforcement of the lien for taxes. The City Treasurer may certify all charges
delinquent for six months or more at any time prior to the date on which the
city tax roll is approved.



(Ord. 2012-02, passed 5-21-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-14, passed 12-3-2013, Am. Ord.
2016-10, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 53.03  ELECTRIC RATES.



   (A)   Residential Service Rate "A."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $7.25 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Energy Charge: $0.1141 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment.



   (B)   Residential Rate "A-l."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $7.25 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Energy Charge:



         Winter:   $0.1141 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment for the first



               600 kWh (October through May)



               $0.0741 per KWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment for all over



               600 kWh per month (October through May)



         Summer:   $0.1141 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment for all kWh



               (June through September)



   (C)   Residential Rate-Life Support "LS."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $4.25 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Energy Charge: $0.1041 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment.



   (D)   Commercial/Industrial Secondary Service "B."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $15.50 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Energy Charge: $0.1124 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment for all kWh used per month.



   (E)   Commercial/Industrial Secondary Service "B1."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $15.50 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Energy Charge:



         Winter:   $0.0724 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment.



         Summer:   $0.1124 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment.



   (F)   Commercial/Industrial Secondary Service "C."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $15.50 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Capacity Charge: $10.87 per kW for all billing demand
per month; plus



      (3)   Energy Charge: $0.0706 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment.



   (G)   Industrial Primary Service "D."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $100.00 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Capacity Charge: $9.15 per kW for all billing demand per
month (Minimum 25 kW); plus



      (3)   Energy Charge: $0.076 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment.



   (H)   Industrial Primary Service Rate "D-2."



      (1)   Electric System Access: $100.00 per customer per month;
plus



      (2)   Capacity Charge: $9.15 per kW for all billing demand per
month (Minimum 1000 kW); plus



      (3)   Energy Charge: $0.076 per kWh plus Power Supply Cost
Adjustment.



   (I)   Economic Development Rate "E."



      (1)   Capacity Charge:  To be determined under special
contract.



      (2)   Energy Charge:  To be determined under special contract.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 5-1-2014)



CHAPTER 54:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section



   54.01   General



   54.02   Findings



   54.03   Objectives



   54.04   Definitions



   54.05   Applicability



   54.06   Exemptions



   54.07   Nonconforming areas



   54.08   Requirements



   54.09   Stormwater storage facilities and/or BMP’s



   54.10   Right of entry; furnishing information



   54.11   Compliance with other permits



   54.12   Monitoring and access of discharges



   54.13   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   54.14   Notification of spills



   54.15   Enforcement



   54.16   Appeal of notice of violation



   54.17   Suspension of access to the stormwater system



   54.18   Abatement activities by the city



   54.19   Injunctive relief



   54.20   Violations deemed a public nuisance



   54.21   Existing ordinances



   54.22   Severability



 



   54.99   Penalty



§ 54.01  GENERAL.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare of city residents and to protect property values, quality of
life, and natural systems relating to stormwater runoff control and
management. In addition to the requirements herein, all projects shall comply
with the City of Marshall requirements, including but not limited to, all
rules and regulations pertaining to Site Plan approval and Building Permit
approval.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.02  FINDINGS.



   The city finds that uncontrolled stormwater runoff from developed land
adversely affects the public health, safety, and welfare because:



   (A)   The addition of impervious surfaces alters the natural
hydrologic cycle, increasing peak flows and total stormwater runoff volume.
This scenario results in environmental degradation through increased
flooding, channel erosion, pollution, and ultimately increases the cost of
maintaining drainage infrastructure downstream of a development.



   (B)   Improper collection and conveyance of stormwater adversely
affects off-site property and increases the incidence and severity of
flooding, which can endanger property and human life.



   (C)   Increased erosion leads to sedimentation in stormwater
management systems that decrease their hydraulic capacity and increases the
likelihood of pollution in our rivers.



   (D)   Stormwater runoff contains numerous pollutants, such as heavy
metals, dangerous bacteria from animal excrement, nitrogen, and phosphorus,
all of which adversely impact downstream water bodies and endanger the health
of humans and other living organisms.



   (E)   The city has adopted a master plan that establishes proposed
land use and infrastructure service needs for undeveloped areas of the city.



   (F)   Inadequate soil erosion and sedimentation control practices
can cause increased turbidity, the cloudiness caused by having soil particles
suspended in the water column.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.03  OBJECTIVES.



   It is the intent of this chapter to protect, maintain, and enhance the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by:



   (A)   Protecting and maintaining the physical, chemical, and
biological integrity of groundwater and surface waters.



   (B)   Preventing activities that adversely affect groundwater and
surface water resources.



   (C)   Encouraging the use of stormwater management systems that
approximate natural systems and mimic the pre-development hydrologic response
as closely as is practical.



   (D)   Ensuring that post-development stormwater runoff peak flow
rates, total runoff volumes, and pollutant loadings are no greater than would
occur under pre-development conditions.



   (E)   Maintaining and restoring groundwater levels.



   (F)   Preventing damage to wetlands and other natural resources.



   (G)   Minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation.



   (H)   Requiring surface and stormwater management practices that
comply with the requirements of this chapter and with the post-development
runoff Minimum Control Measures, as recommended by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).



   (I)   Promoting the development of stormwater retention and
detention facilities that are aesthetically desirable, maintainable, and
functional.



   (J)   Follow the direction established by the City's Master Plan.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.04  DEFINITIONS.



   Definitions of terminology used in this chapter shall be as follows:



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation delineating the level of
flooding resulting from the 100-year frequency flood discharge.



   BIORETENTION. A water quality feature that uses landscaping and
engineered soil media to treat stormwater runoff by collecting it in shallow
depressions before filtration and/or infiltration. Where underlying soils
have inadequate infiltration capacity, a bioretention area may contain an
underdrain to promote dewatering.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). A practice or combination of practices
that prevent, minimize, or reduce pollution and other effects of stormwater
runoff.



   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes but is not limited to a gas or liquid
storage tank, a manufactured home, carport, mobile home, or a prefabricated
building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and recreational
vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   CITY. The City of Marshall, including staff and elected officials.



   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of
storage used to offset the loss of natural flood storage capacity when
artificial fill or structures are placed within a floodplain.



   CONSTRUCTION. Any on-site activity that will result in the creation of
a new stormwater management system, including the building, assembling,
expansion, modification, or alteration of the existing contours of the
property; the erection of buildings or other structures, or any part thereof,
or land clearing.



   CONTROL DEVICE. The element of a discharge structure that allows the
gradual release of water under controlled conditions, sometimes referred to
as bleed-down.



   CONTROL ELEVATION. The lowest elevation at which water can be released
through the control device.



   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow
that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Service and/or City Engineer and/or
his or her designees.



   DETENTION. The collection and temporary storage of stormwater in such a
manner as to provide treatment through physical, chemical, or biological
processes with subsequent gradual release of the stormwater.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following:



      (1)   Construction, installation, alteration, demolition, or
removal of a structure impervious to surface stormwater management system; or



      (2)   Clearing, scraping, grubbing or otherwise removing or
killing the vegetation of a site; or



      (3)   Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling,
grading, digging, dumping, or otherwise disturbing the soil or rock of a site
in a manner that is contrary to the requirements of this chapter.



   DISCHARGE STRUCTURE. A structural device usually constructed of a
material such as concrete, metal, or timber through which water from a
stormwater management system is discharged and a controlled rate from a site
to a receiving drainage component.



   DRAIN. A channel, natural depression, slough, stream, creek or pipe in
which storm runoff and floodwater can flow. This includes systems installed
to carry urban storm runoff.



   DRAINAGE AREA. The land area above a given point that contributes
stormwater to that point.



   DRY DETENTION. Water storage with the bottom elevation at least one
foot above the control elevation. Sumps, swales, and other minor features may
be at a lower elevation.



   ELEVATION. The height in feet above mean sea level. All references to
elevation shall be at the NAVD88 Vertical Datum.



   FACILITY. Any development required per the provisions of this chapter
to construct and maintain a Stormwater Management System.



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN (REGULATORY). Floodplains that may be either riverine or
non-riverine depressional areas.



      (1)   RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS. Those areas contiguous to a lake,
pond, or stream whose elevation is greater than the normal water pool
elevation but equal to or lower than the projected 100-year flood elevation.



      (2)   NON-RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS. Depressional storage areas not
associated with a stream system which surrounding lands drain causing
periodic inundation by stormwaters. In certain cases, the floodplain may also
be known as the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood plus a minimum one foot of freeboard at any given
location in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).



   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY). The channel, including onstream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by the FEMA floodplain maps, which is needed to store and convey the existing
and anticipated future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a
one foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage.



   HISTORIC DISCHARGE OR VOLUME. The peak rate or volume at which
stormwater runoff leaves a parcel of land in an undisturbed, natural site
condition by gravity, or the legally allowable discharge at the time of
permit approval.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that has been compacted or covered so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.



   NOAA ATLAS 14. The preferred source of statistical data for rainfall
depths for design storm selection. NOAA Atlas 14 supersedes all previous
references for rainfall depths, including TP 40, Bulletin 71, or any other
document from state agencies referencing rainfall depths.



   NPDES PERMIT. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit.
The Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of "pollutants" through a point
source into a water of the United States without an NPDES permit. The permit
will contain limits on what you can discharge, monitoring and reporting
requirements, and other provisions to ensure that the discharge does not hurt
water quality or people's health. In essence, the permit translates general
requirements of the Clean Water Act into specific provisions tailored to the
operations of each person discharging pollutants.



   OVERFLOW ELEVATION. The design elevation of a discharge structure at
which or below which, water is contained behind the structure except for that
which discharges through a control device down to the control elevation.



   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A Professional Engineer registered in Michigan
who is competent in the fields of hydrology, hydraulics, and stormwater
management.



   RETENTION. The prevention of or to prevent the discharge of a given
volume of stormwater runoff into surface waters by complete on-site storage
and infiltration. Retention design requires demonstration of adequate onsite
soils to provide infiltration.



   SOIL CONSERVATION PLAN. A document prepared or approved by the local
Soil and Water Conservation District Board that outlines a system of
management practices to control stormwater and soil erosion, reduce sediment
loss, or protect receiving water quality on a specific parcel of property.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to
flooding from a river, creek, stream, or any other identified channel or
ponding and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map
as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, or E.



   STORMWATER. The flow of water that results from runoff that occurs
during and immediately following a rainfall event.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWMP). A plan for receiving, handling, and
transporting stormwater and surface waters within the city stormwater
management system. This manual shall be used in conjunction with this chapter.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. Includes all natural and man-made
elements used to convey stormwater from the first point of impact with the
surface of the earth to a suitable outlet location, internal or external, to
the boundaries of the city. The stormwater management system includes all
pipes, channels, streams, ditches, wetlands, sinkholes, detention/retention
basins, ponds, and other stormwater conveyance and treatment facilities,
whether public or private.



   STRUCTURE. A man-made change to the land constructed on or below the
ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building
or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site;
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days; and includes retaining walls, tanks, and
manholes.



   SURFACE WATER. Water that finds its way to an open channel without
infiltrating into the soil.



   SWALE. A man-made trench that:



      (1)   Has a top depth-to-width ratio of the cross-section
equal to or greater than 1:6, or side slopes equal to or greater than three
feet vertical to one foot horizontal; and



      (2)   Contains contiguous areas of standing or flowing water
only following a rainfall event; and



      (3)   Is planted with or has stabilized vegetation suitable
for soil stabilization, surface water treatment, and nutrient uptake; and



      (4)   Is designed to take into account the soil erodibility,
soil percolation, slope, slope length, and drainage area so as to prevent
erosion and reduce pollutant concentration of any discharge.



   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The particles or other solid material
suspended in stormwater or stormwater runoff. Commonly expressed in
concentration of milligrams per liter (mg/l) or parts per million (PPM).



   WATERSHED AREA. Any drainage area contributing surface and stormwater
runoff to the city stormwater management system.



   WET DETENTION. Permanent water storage below the control elevation of
the detention pond that will effectively remove total suspended solids (TSS).



   WATER COURSE. A natural or artificial channel, whether lined or
unlined, in which a flow of stormwater, ground water, or clean water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.05  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all land within the City of Marshall. No
person may subdivide, develop, change to a more intense land use, construct
or reconstruct a structure, or change the size of a structure, except as
hereinafter exempted, without complying with the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.06  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:



   (A)   Construction of single-family or duplex homes on individual
lots that are part of a larger subdivision with a city approved stormwater
management plan.



   (B)   Maintenance activity that does not change or affect the
quality, rate, volume, or location of stormwater flows on the site or runoff
from the site.



   (C)   Bona fide agricultural pursuits for which a soil conservation
plan has been approved by the local Soil and Water Conservation District.



   (D)   Action taken under emergency conditions to prevent imminent
harm or danger to persons or to protect property from imminent fire, violent
storms, tornadoes, flooding, or other hazards, whether man-made or naturally
occurring.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.07  NONCONFORMING AREAS.



   When any of the following improvements are made to an existing
development that currently does not conform to this chapter, such
improvements shall comply whether or not the existing development has
received an approval prior to adoption of this chapter.



   (A)   Floor area expansion. The gross floor area of a structure is
expanded by more than 10% or more than 4,000 square feet, whichever is less.
Repeated expansions of a development constructed over a period of time
commencing with the effective date of this chapter shall be combined in
determining whether the threshold has been reached.



   (B)   Use change. The use of a development changes to a more intense
classification.



   (C)   Site alteration. A site alteration activity requires the
submission of a development plan or amended development plan and involves 10%
or more of the site area.



   (D)   Reconstruction. A structure is reconstructed following
substantial destruction by fire or other calamity. A structure is considered
substantially destroyed if the cost of reconstruction is 50% or more of the
fair market value of the structure before the calamity.



   (E)   In any case, notwithstanding divisions (A) through (D) above,
if the improvements propose a 1/2 acre of new impervious area or more than
one acre of total disturbed area, the whole site shall comply with this
chapter.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.08  REQUIREMENTS.



   This section sets forth specific design and construction standards that
will be used in review of proposed stormwater management systems in
accordance with the objectives of managing both the quantity (volume and
rate) and quality of stormwater runoff.



   (A)   These requirements shall apply to all public and private sites
within the city, regardless of whether the stormwater outlet(s) from the site
discharge to a designated county drain, city storm sewer system, waters of
the state, or any other types of conveyance.



   (B)   These requirements shall also apply to sites under the control
of public agencies such as schools, Federal and State governmental
facilities, and other entities that might not otherwise be subject to site
plan review procedures and requirements as set forth in other sections of the
city's codified ordinances.



   (C)   A stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the city,
with exception to those activities listed in § 54.06 of this chapter. All
new developments shall comply with this chapter and requirements as set forth
in the city's SWMP, as required. Any proposed redevelopment proposing greater
than 1/2 acre of new impervious area or more than one acre of total disturbed
area shall comply with this chapter and the SWMP, as required.



   (D)   Refer to the City of Marshall Stormwater Management Plan for
specific submittal and design requirements.



   (E)   The City of Marshall reserves the right to direct site plan
stormwater designs and submittals to adhere to all or part of the Calhoun
County Technical Reference Manual, latest edition.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.09  STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES AND/OR BMP’S.



   Stormwater storage facilities and/or BMP's shall be implemented to
protect water quality and prevent adverse flooding on-site and off-site. This
is to improve the quality of stormwater runoff and reduce the discharge of
sediment into wetlands, watercourses, roadways, structures and other property
within, and downstream of the City of Marshall.



   (A)   Natural watercourses shall not be dredged, cleared of
vegetation, deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized or otherwise altered
without approval from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and/or
Calhoun County Water Resources Commissioner.



   (B)   Discharge of runoff from commercial and industrial sites which
may contain oil, grease, toxic chemicals, or other polluting materials shall
be prohibited unless approval has been obtained from the Michigan Department
of Natural Resources and Calhoun County Water Resources Commissioner.



   (C)   The use of stormwater management areas and vegetated buffer
areas as open space, recreation, and conservation areas shall be encouraged.



   (D)   Pipes, conduits, ditches, drains, or other conveyance
facilities shall not discharge directly to the following without providing
the minimum treatment volume and channel protection criteria (refer to the
City of Marshall Stormwater Management Plan):



      (1)   Any natural watercourses, including lakes, ponds,
rivers, and streams.



      (2)   Wetlands with unique or natural wildlife or habitat
characteristics as defined by a professional wetlands delineation specialist,
biologist or ecologist.



      (3)   Wetlands which are within a 500 foot distance of any
natural lake or pond.



      (4)   Wetlands which are within a 100 foot distance of any
river or stream.



      (5)   City of Marshall stormwater conveyance system.



   (E)   Discharges from stormwater conveyance facilities shall be
routed through swales, vegetated buffer strips, stormwater basins,
hydrologically isolated wetlands, and other facilities designed to decrease
runoff velocity and volume, allow for natural infiltration, allow suspended
solids to settle, and remove pollutants.



   (F)   If wetlands are proposed for stormwater detention, runoff must
be diffused to non-erosive velocities before it reaches the wetlands.



   (G)   No stormwater management plan shall be approved if the City of
Marshall finds that the action will or is likely to pollute, impair or
destroy air, water, or other natural resources or the public trust therein,
provided that there is a feasible and prudent alternative consistent with the
reasonable requirements of the public health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.10  RIGHT OF ENTRY; FURNISHING INFORMATION.



   Representatives of the City of Marshall, State of Michigan, or Calhoun
County Water Resources Commissioner's office shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time any property served by a stormwater drainage facility.
Entry shall be limited to review and inspection of stormwater drainage
facilities as required to ensure compliance. On request, the owner, lessees,
or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency
any pertinent information regarding the drainage system or systems on such
property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when
requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of unlawful discharge.



   (A)   Operation and Maintenance. All structural and vegetative best
management practices installed as a performance standard for stormwater
management shall include a plan for maintaining maximum performance through
long-term operation and maintenance (O&M). The plan shall include a schedule
for O&M procedures and recordkeeping provisions such as periodic inspections.



   (B)   Records retention. Inspections and other records pertaining to
the O&M of best management practices for stormwater quality protection shall
be maintained by the property owner and retained for a minimum of five years.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.11  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PERMITS.



   Any person subject to a NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit, Calhoun
County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Permit, or City of Marshall
Site Plan Review shall comply with all provisions of such permit or
approvals. Proof of compliance with said permits or approvals may be required
in a form acceptable to the City of Marshall prior to the allowing of
discharges to the stormwater system.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.12  MONITORING AND ACCESS OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   As a condition to having a direct connection to waters of the
state or to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) an industrial or
commercial facility shall permit the city to enter and inspect the stormwater
facilities, at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner, to determine
compliance with this chapter and the city's SWMP. Such entry and inspection
may include, but not be limited to, sampling, analysis, dye testing, smoke
testing, remote video inspection (TV-ing), and examination and/or copying of
records that are required by this chapter to be maintained.



   (B)   The city may require a commercial or industrial facility that
discharges into the stormwater system to install devices as are reasonably
necessary to monitor and/or sample the facility's stormwater discharge to
ensure compliance with this chapter and the SWMP. In the alternative, and at
the city's option, the city may install such devices. All such devices shall
be calibrated to ensure accuracy.



   (C)   The city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court
of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry to a facility if the city's
designated personnel has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater originates and/or is discharged, and if the city is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community. In addition, or in the
alternative, the city's designated personnel, if denied entry, may terminate
the facility's connection to the stormwater system. Such termination must be
preceded by written notice to the facility of such intent.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.13  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   (A)   If the owner or operator of a facility does not provide
reasonable protection from illicit discharge, the city may require best
management practices (BMP's) and/or stormwater pollution prevention plans
(SWPPP's) for a facility that discharges, or is reasonably suspected of
discharging, pollution into the stormwater system, at the facility's expense.
A BMP shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the most current
MDEQ Guidebook of BMP's for Michigan Watersheds, or equivalent practices and
design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this chapter, as approved by
the city. A BMP and/or a SWPPP, which may be imposed even if the facility is
subject to a NPDES permit, shall be communicated in writing by city's
designated personnel to the facility.



   (B)   If the owner or operator believes all or a portion of the BMP
or SWPPP is unreasonable, it may appeal for a variance in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.14  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
person/facility responsible for a facility, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility, has information of a release or suspected release of
pollutants into the stormwater system, said person shall take all reasonable
and necessary steps to discover, contain, and clean up such release,
including, if necessary, contacting emergency response agencies. Said person
shall also notify the city's designated personnel of the discharge either in
person, by telephone, or by facsimile as soon as possible, but in no event
more than six hours after learning of the release.



   (B)   All spill notifications provided to the city's designated
personnel in person or by telephone shall be documented by said person in
writing and mailed to the City of Marshall within five business days of said
incident. Such written notice shall specify the following:



      (1)   The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;



      (2)   The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the
discharge;



      (3)   All measures taken to clean up the discharge,



      (4)   All measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent
any recurrence;



      (5)   The name and telephone number of the person making the
report;



      (6)   The name of the person who may be contacted for
additional information on the matter. The person shall also provide the City
of Marshall with copies of all documents the person submits to state or
federal agencies relating to the same release.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.15  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever the city's designated personnel finds that a
person/facility has violated a provision of this chapter, the city may order
compliance by issuing a written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require one or more of the following:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of an illicit connection or discharge;



      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations
cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



      (5)   The abatement and correction of any degradation of
riparian habitat and aquatic life caused by the failure to design, install,
operate, or maintain sediment control, stormwater management, or agricultural
BMP's in accordance with an approved Sediment Control Plan, Stormwater Plan,
Sediment Control Permit, Soil Conservation and Quality Plan, or plan for
compliance;



      (6)   The reimbursement to the city in an amount sufficient to
reimburse the city for all reasonable administrative and remediation costs;



      (7)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMP's.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work may be done by the city, with the expense
thereof charged to the violator.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.16  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   If an owner of property believes the requirements of this
chapter impose an unreasonable burden on the use of the owner's property, the
owner may seek a variance from the Director. Such a request must be in
writing with enough detail to understand the situation and proposed variance.
If the Director determines that additional information is needed, the request
for additional information shall be made within 30 days of the owner's
request. Within 30 days of the receipt of such additional information, or, if
no such request is made, within 30 days of the owner's request, the Director
shall issue a written response to the owner. The response shall grant, deny,
or grant partial or different relief than was requested. A grant, partial or
complete, may relieve the property owner from strict compliance of this
chapter. Reasonable conditions may be imposed as part of such a grant. The
Director shall be guided by the primary goal of protecting the waters of the
state without creating undue hardship upon the property owners affected.



   (B)   In determining whether to grant a variance, and conditions to
impose, the Director shall be guided by the Performance Standards adopted by
City Council Resolution from time to time,



   (C)   Meeting the Performance Standards may constitute exceptional
challenges when contemplating redevelopment of existing sites. Any additional
stormwater imperviousness shall generally be off-set to the extent defined by
the SWMP. However, to be consistent with the goals of this chapter,
redevelopment is also generally expected to result in increased environmental
protection whenever the overall site is not currently performing to these
SWMP. Therefore, in determining whether to grant a variance and the
conditions to impose, for a reconstruction project the Director shall be
guided by seeking a minimum 20% improvement over existing conditions for
water quality or water volume or both.



   (D)   Any person receiving a Notice of Violation or whose variance
request has been denied in whole or in part may appeal the determination set
forth within the Notice or the variance decision to the Zoning Board of
Appeals by submitting a written notice of appeal to the city. The notice of
appeal must be received by the Director within 30 days from the date of the
Notice of Violation, with enough detail to allow the Zoning Board of Appeals
to understand the situation. Within 30 days of the receipt of an appeal, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall set the matter for hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be given in writing to the applicant and to the owner of the
stormwater system. The applicant shall be given the opportunity to present
evidence at the hearing in person or in writing or by representative. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue a written decision on the appeal. The
Zoning Board of Appeals response shall affirm, reverse, or modify the Notice
of Violation being appealed.



   (E)   If the person who has made an appeal does not agree with the
Zoning Board of Appeals decision, said person may appeal the matter by filing
an appeal in a court of competent jurisdiction in the County of Calhoun,
which may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision being appealed. Such an
appeal must be filed within 30 days of the Zoning Board of Appeals decision.



   (F)   In considering all such appeals, the Director may grant a
variance from the terms of this chapter so as to provide relief, in whole or
in part from the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the
following requirements are satisfied:



      (1)   The application of the chapter provisions being appealed
will present or cause unreasonable difficulties for a facility; and



      (2)   The granting of the relief requested will not
substantially prevent the goals and purposes sought to be accomplished by
this chapter from being accomplished, nor result in less effective management
of stormwater runoff.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.17  SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE STORMWATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city may, after providing written notice, suspend
stormwater discharge access to a person in violation of this chapter. Written
notice shall describe the nature of the violation and the action necessary to
correct the violation. If the violation continues for ten calendar days after
the notice was sent, the city may suspend discharge access into the
stormwater system.



   (B)   The city may suspend stormwater discharge access to a person
in violation of this chapter, without prior notice, when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents an imminent
and substantial danger to the stormwater system or to the environment.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.18  ABATEMENT ACTIVITIES BY THE CITY.



   (A)   The city may perform reasonable and necessary abatement
activities whenever the city determines a violation of this chapter has
occurred and it appears that the responsible party cannot or will not timely
perform said activities, or when no known responsible party exists. The
responsible party shall reimburse the city for all reasonable expenses thus
incurred.



   (B)   If the city desires the responsible party to reimburse it for
reasonable abatement activity expenses, the city shall, within 90 days of the
completion of said activities, mail to that person a notice of claim
outlining the expenses incurred, including reasonable administrative costs,
and the amounts thereof. The person billed shall pay said sum in full within
30 days of receipt of the claim. If the person billed desires to object to
all or some of the amount sought by the Director, said person may file,
within the same 30 day period, a written objection so stating. The Director
shall, within 30 days of its receipt of the objection, provide an opportunity
for the objecting party to present facts or arguments supporting said
objection. If the Director determines that some or the entire amount
originally billed is appropriate, the person shall pay said sum within 30
days of receipt of that determination. If the amount due is not timely paid,
the city may cause the charges to become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.19  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter, the city may petition the appropriate court for injunctive relief
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations,
or compelling the person to perform necessary abatement or remediation.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.20  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated, or restored at
the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or
otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.21  EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   All Ordinances or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed and shall be of no further force and effect.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.22  SEVERABILITY.



   Any and all sections, terms, provisions, and/or clauses herein shall be
deemed independent and severable. Should any court of competent jurisdiction
hold any section, term, provision or clause void and/or invalid, all
remaining sections, terms, provisions, and/or clauses not held void and/or
invalid shall continue in force and effect.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   The penalty for violation of this chapter, in addition to the general
code penalty, shall include revocation of Site Plan approval and revocation
of any existing building permits for the site. The city may refuse any
further permit applications until such time as the site has been brought into
compliance with this chapter. A citation charging such a violation may be
issued by the city’s Ordinance Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC CODE



CHAPTER 70:  VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC CODE



Section



   70.001   Adoption of Motor Vehicle Code and Uniform Traffic Code



   70.002   Adoption of Motor Carrier Safety Act



   70.003   Adoption of Part 821 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act



   70.004   Additions to Codes



   70.005   Vehicle size, weight and load



   70.006   Exhibition driving



   70.007   Clinging to vehicles



   70.008   Parking regulations



   70.009   Stopping, standing, loading, breakdowns, dismantled and
inoperable vehicles



   70.010   Parking violations



   70.011   Parking or storage of motor vehicles in required front yard
in Residential District



   70.012   Snowmobiles



   70.013   Bicycles



   70.014   License required



§ 70.001  ADOPTION OF MOTOR VEHICLE CODE AND UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of Code. The Michigan Vehicle Code being PA 300 of
1949; M.C.L.A. 257.1 to 257.923 and the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships, and Villages as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan
Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of
1969, 1969 PA 306, M.C.L.A. 24.201 to 24.326 and made effective November 30,
2003 (Uniform Traffic Code), and as the Michigan Vehicle Code and Uniform
Traffic Code may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference as the Vehicle and Traffic Code for the City of Marshall. This
adoption includes, but is not limited to, section 625(1)(c) of the Motor
Vehicle Code as allowed and provided by Public Act Number 7 of 2012, as
amended. Complete copies of the Motor Vehicle Code and Uniform Traffic Code
are at the office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public.



   (B)   References in Code. References in the Motor Vehicle Code and
Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages to a "governmental
unit" shall mean the City of Marshall.



   (C)   Penalty. The penalties provided by the Motor Vehicle Code and
Uniform Traffic Code are adopted by reference; provided, however, the City
may not enforce any provision of the Motor Vehicle Code and Uniform Traffic
Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days, or
the maximum fine is greater than $500, or both, except as provided by the
Home Rule City Act.



   (D)   Conflict of Laws. In the event of any conflict between the
Motor Vehicle Code or the Uniform Traffic Code and any supplementary
ordinances, the Supplemental Ordinances shall prevail.



(Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.002  ADOPTION OF MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT.



   (A)   Adoption of Code. The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (Public
Act 181 of 1963, as amended; being M.C.L.A. § 480.11 et seq.), as amended
from time to time, and the rules promulgated thereunder, is adopted by
reference as herein modified for the purposes of protecting the public. The
Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1863, together with the provisions of this
section, shall be known and may be cited as the Motor Carrier Safety Act of
the City of Marshall, Complete copies of the Act are available at the office
of the City Clerk for inspection by the public.



   (B)   References in Code. References in the Motor Carrier Safety Act
of 1963 to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Marshall.



   (C)   Penalty. The penalties provided by the Motor Carrier Safety
Act of 1963 are adopted by reference; provided, however, the city may not
enforce any provision of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 for which the
maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days, or the maximum fine
is greater than $500, or both, except as provided by the Home Rule City Act.



   (D)   Conflict of Laws. In the event of any conflict between the
Motor Carrier Safety Act and any supplementary ordinances, the Supplementary
Ordinances shall prevail.



(Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.003  ADOPTION OF PART 821 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION ACT.



   (A)   Adoption of Code. For the purpose of regulating the operation
of snowmobiles in the City, Part 821 of PA of 1994, M.C.L.A. 324.82101 et
seq., as amended ("Part 821"), copies of which are available for inspection
by the public in the City Clerk's Office, is adopted by reference, as though
set forth herein in full.



   (B)   References in Code. References in the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act to "local authorities" shall mean the City of
Marshall.



   (C)   Penalty. The penalties provided by the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act are adopted by reference; provided, however, the
City may not enforce any provision of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than
93 days, or the maximum fine is greater than $500, or both, except as
provided by the Home Rule City Act.



   (D)   Conflict of Laws. In the event of any conflict between the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act and any supplementary
ordinances, the Supplementary Ordinances shall prevail.



(Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.004  ADDITIONS TO CODES.



   Additional ordinance sections adopted herein shall be considered
supplementary to the acts or parts of acts adopted by reference.



(Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.005  VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD.



   (A)   Maximum Loads. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, or any combination thereof, or to
permit the operation of any such vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, or
combination thereof, when the wheel and axle load of any such vehicle or unit
of a combination of vehicles, with or without a load, exceeds the schedule of
weights allowed by the laws of the state, as set forth in the Michigan
Vehicle Code (M.C.L.A. § 257.722, M.S.A. § 9.2422). (Prior Code, §
71.080(A))



   (B)   Width, Height and Length. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, or any combination thereof,
or to permit the operation of any such vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, or
combination thereof, when the maximum width, height or length of such vehicle
or combination thereof, or unit of a combination of vehicles, and of the load
thereon or therein shall exceed the limits fixed by provisions of the
Michigan Vehicle Code (M.C.L.A. §§ 257.717, 257.719, M.$.A. §§ 9.2417,
9.2419), unless a special permit is issued as provided in M.C.L.A. §
257.725, M.S.A. § 9.2425. (Prior Code, § 71.080(B))



   (C)   Applicability. This section shall be operative upon all public
streets and highways within the City. (Prior Code, § 71.080(C))



   (D)   Stopping Vehicles. The Chief of Police or his or her agents,
when engaged in the enforcement of this section, or any police officer of the
City, may at any time require a vehicle to stop and submit to a weighing of
the same by means of either portable or stationary scales either at the
location of such stopping or at regularly designated weigh stations of the
City for purposes of permitting the officer to ascertain whether the vehicle
or part thereof is loaded in conformity with the provisions of the laws of
the state and the provisions of this section. (Prior Code, § 71.080(D))



   (E)   Weigh Stations. The Chief of Police shall be authorized to
establish weigh stations, which stations may be located at such places as
may, from time to time, be designated by the Chief of Police and which, when
and there so designated, are declared to be public weigh stations for the
City. (Prior Code, § 71.080(E))



   (F)   Unloading Access. If it shall be determined upon such weighing
that any vehicle or unit of a combination of vehicles is loaded in violation
of the terms of this section, it shall be the duty of the driver thereof to
forthwith remove so much of such load as will be necessary to reduce the
gross weight of such vehicle to limits permitted under this section. Any
material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of such
vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator. If it shall be necessary to
store such materials within any portion of a public street or highway, the
same shall be stored for not to exceed eight hours, and shall within such
period be completely removed from such location by such owner or operator. If
such materials are not so removed, the same shall be removed at the expense
of the City. Any charges of such removal shall be paid by the owner or
operator of such vehicle or the owner of such materials; and the City shall
have a lien upon such materials in its possession until such charges are
fully paid. (Prior Code, § 71.080(F))



   (G)   Temporary Permits. The City is authorized to temporarily
permit the maximum limits set forth in this section to be exceeded. Such
exceeding limits of weight shall be authorized only in cases of emergency or
upon showing of good cause, and only when the condition of the streets or
highways over which such loads are to be carried is such that the same will
not be damaged thereby. (Prior Code, § 71.080(G))



   (H)   Exempt Vehicles. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to fire apparatus or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special
permit issued as provided in this section. (Prior Code, § 71.080(H))



   (I)   Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be subject
to the penalties as provided in the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, as
amended.



(Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord.
2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.006  EXHIBITION DRIVING.



   (A)   Exhibit driving is the driving of a motor vehicle in such an
unusual manner or out of the usual flow of traffic, whether or not other
traffic is present, so that it is likely to attract the attention of the
public, whether or not there is anyone present, or it shall consist of, any
two or more of the following:



      (1)   Rapid acceleration;



      (2)   Squealing, peeling or burning of the tires;



      (3)   The swaying of the motor vehicle from side, to side
commonly referred to as fish-tailing;



      (4)   Racing or running of the engine of a motor vehicle at
such high revolutions per minute, combined with the engaging of the gears,
causing excessive or unusual noise;



      (5)   Unnecessary and excessive changing of lanes; and/or



      (6)   The emission of any unreasonably loud or raucous or
disturbing and unnecessary noise from the engine or exhaust system of any
motor vehicle.



   (B)   Any person who engages in exhibition driving on any public
street is responsible for a civil infraction. (Prior Code, § 72.096)



(Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.007  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall cling to, sit, lay or stand on, hang on to or
out of a motor vehicle or otherwise attach themselves or another person to
the outside of a motor vehicle while it is in operation on any highway,
street, alley, parking lot or other place open to the public.



   (B)   A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil
infraction.



(Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.008  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Prohibitions. No persons shall stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in
any of the following places:



      (1)   Within 200 feet of an accident at which police officers
are in attendance;



      (2)   On any unimproved surface within a side yard of a
residential lot in a residential zoning district. An unimproved surface is
one which is not surfaced with concrete, asphalt, gravel or similar material.
(Prior Code, § 73.01(A))



   (B)   Prohibitions on Specific Streets.



      (1)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, with the
consent of the City Council by motion, to prohibit or restrict the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles on any street of the city and to erect signs
giving notice thereof, where, in his or her opinion, the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles interferes with the movement of traffic thereon.



      (2)   With the consent of the City Council, the Traffic
Engineer may prohibit or restrict the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles and may direct the erection of signs giving notice thereof in the
following places:



         (a)   On city streets and city parking lots; and/or



         (b)   On public or private property when, after
consultation with the Fire Chief, he or she has designated the same as a fire
lane. Fire lane signs erected on private property shall be at the expense of
the owners or persons in charge of the property. (Prior Code, § 73.02)



   (C)   Parking Limited Between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (1)   Except as provided in this section, It shall be unlawful
for any person to park, allow to be parked or allow to remain parked, any
motor vehicle on any paved surface of any public street of the city between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   The Traffic Engineer shall erect signs giving notice of
the on-street parking prohibition contained in division (1).



      (3)   Specific blocks of specific streets may be permitted as
exceptions to the foregoing general provisions in division (1), when so
designated by the Traffic Engineer with the consent of the City Council.



      (4)   Parking on any public street in the City between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. may be permitted for a period of up to three
(3) days upon notification to, and approval of, the Marshall Police
Department.



      (5)   Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. may be permitted
under the following circumstances:



         (a)   Two permits for parking on the street shall be
issued if the Traffic Engineer finds that no vehicles may be legally parked
on a lot of record, as defined by the zoning code, and that the specific
characteristics of the lot of record, including size, shape and placement of
structures prevent any area from being reasonably adapted for the legal
parking of vehicles.



         (b)   One permit for parking on the street shall be
issued if the Traffic Engineer finds that no more than one vehicle may be
legally parked on a lot of record, as defined by the zoning code, and that
the specific characteristics of the lot of record, including size, shape and
placement of structures prevent any area from being reasonably adapted for
the legal parking of additional vehicles.



         (c)   When issued, a permit for parking on the street
shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed one year. Parking permits
issued under this subsection shall be issued to the registered owner of a
vehicle. Permits shall not be transferrable. Each permit shall be affixed to
the front windshield of the vehicle in a location readily visible. There will
be an annual fee in the amount established by resolution for each permit
issued. All permits will expire each December 31, and must be renewed prior
to such date.



         (d)   Permit holders parking on any public street
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall park the permitted vehicle
on that area of a public street within the lot lines of the lot of record for
which the permit has been issued and on the same side of the street as the
lot of record unless on-street parking is permitted only on the opposite side
of the street.



         (e)   Applications for temporary permits for periods of
up to 90 days may be granted for construction, medical services, or other
needs, based upon a finding of the Traffic Engineer that a hardship has been
sufficiently demonstrated.



      (6)   Vehicles parked in violation of division (1) shall be
subject to immediate impoundment, in addition to being ticketed, if, in the
opinion of the Traffic Engineer or his or her designee, the vehicle or
vehicles are interfering or will interfere with the performance of necessary
street maintenance service, including, but not limited to, street cleaning or
snow plowing operations.



      (7)   Vehicle owners holding a permit issued pursuant to
division (5) must, upon notice, immediately remove the vehicle from a public
street if, in the opinion of the Traffic Engineer or his or her designee, the
vehicle is interfering or will interfere with the performance of necessary
street maintenance service, including, but not limited to, street cleaning or
snow plowing operations. Vehicles not removed as required in this section
shall be subject to immediate impoundment.



      (8)   The Traffic Engineer is authorized, with the consent of
City Council by motion, to establish procedures for the issuance of permits
for parking overnight on municipal streets.



      (9)   The Traffic Engineer shall erect signs giving notice of
the provisions of this section.



      (10)   Specific blocks of specific streets may be permitted as
exceptions to the foregoing general provisions in division (1), when so
designated by the Traffic Engineer with the consent of the City Council.



      (11)   Vehicles parked in violation of division (1) shall be
subject to immediate impoundment, in addition to being ticketed, if, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works or his or her designee, the vehicle
or vehicles are interfering or will interfere with the performance of
necessary street maintenance service, including, but not limited to street
cleaning or snow plowing operations. (Prior Code, § 73.19)



   (D)   Municipal Lot Parking.



      (1)   Parking in municipal parking lots is hereby prohibited
between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   The Traffic Engineer is authorized, with the consent of
the City Council by motion, to establish procedures for the issuance of
permits for parking overnight on municipal parking lots.



      (3)   A person who violates subsection (1) without first
obtaining a permit or permission pursuant to subsection (2) is responsible
for a civil infraction. (Prior Code, § 73.19.1)



   (E)   Parking or Standing Between Curb or Drainage Line and Sidewalk
or Grassy Parkway. No motor vehicle shall be parked or be allowed to stand
between the curb or drainage line and the property line, unless expressly
permitted by order of the Traffic Engineer, with the consent by motion of the
City Council. (Prior Code, § 73.22)



   (F)   Parking of Trailers. House Cars and the Like.



      (1)   No unattached trailer or semitrailer shall be parked at
any time in or upon the public streets of the city, except when it is
necessary for loading or unloading.



      (2)   No vehicle with a trailer, house car or mobile home
attached thereto shall be parked on any public street where angle parking is
allowed, nor shall it be parked for a period of more than three hours on any
public street in the city.



      (3)   No person shall drive upon, park or leave standing any
vehicle in the front yard of a residence as defined in the zoning code or
between the curb or curb line and the lot line nearest the street, whether or
not any sidewalk or curb is actually installed along the street, except that
this provision shall not apply to that portion of land within the front yard
and/or between the curb or curb line and the lot line nearest the street upon
which there is constructed an improved parking apron or driveway as permitted
and provided for in the City Code of Ordinances.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or let stand
any semi-truck or semitrailer or other commercial vehicle on any private or
publicly owned property zoned by these ordinances as residential, except
under temporary circumstances as permitted under this chapter.



      (5)   For purposes of division (2) above, a commercial vehicle
is defined by reference to the Motor Vehicle Code § 257.7 and § 257.7a.
(Prior Code, § 73.23)



   (G)   Parking Meters.



      (1)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, with the
consent of the City Council by motion, to determine and designate metered
parking zones, to establish maximum lawful time limits of parking within
those zones, and to install and maintain as many parking meters as necessary
in such zones, where it is determined that the installation of parking meters
shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control and inspection of the
parking of vehicles. The parking meters may be of whatever type is determined
by the City Council.



      (2)   When parking meters are erected adjacent to a space
marked for parking, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in the space, or
permit the same to remain thereon, unless the proper coin has been deposited
in the meter and the meter shows that the allotted time has not expired,
except on Sundays and legal holidays.



      (3)   Where maximum lawful time limits of parking are
established within metered parking zones, no person shall park a vehicle or
permit the same to remain within the zone for a time period in excess of the
established lawful limit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily,
except on Sundays and legal holidays. Each additional expiration of the
established lawful maximum time limit for a metered parking zone shall
constitute a separate violation.



      (4)   Every vehicle shall be parked wholly within the metered
parking space for which the meter shows parking privilege has been granted.



      (5)   The parking system is hereby authorized to develop and
install a program of special meter hoods for tradespersons performing work
near metered parking spaces, which work requires that a motor vehicle be
immediately available for the performance thereof, such as the delivery and
removal of tools, materials and supplies, and for special events or temporary
emergency needs, provided no off-street parking is conveniently available.
The system is further authorized to require the deposit of $3 per hood and to
charge such fees far the use thereof as the City Council shall from time to
time establish by resolution.



      (6)   No person shall place or maintain upon any street any
parking meter bearing thereon any commercial advertising. (Prior Code, §
73.24)



   (H)   Snow and Ice Emergencies



      (1)   The City Manager or an authorized representative is
hereby appointed as the Street Emergency Coordinator. If, in the judgment of
the Street Emergency Coordinator, a snow or ice emergency exists, the parking
or standing of a motor vehicle on a public street or highway in the city
shall be prohibited during the term of such emergency.



      (2)   A snow or ice emergency shall be deemed to exist when
snow or ice, or a combination thereof, hinders the proper removal of
accumulated snow and ice from city streets or highways due to the amount of
snow or ice, the number and type of storms, multiple storms in close
proximity to each other, or as deemed necessary by the Street Emergency
Coordinator.



      (3)   The provisions of this section shall be immediately
effective upon the posting of a notice in City Hall by the Street Emergency
Coordinator that such emergency is in effect, and upon the announcement of
such snow or ice emergency in public media, in a newspaper, or radio station
that disseminates news within the city.



      (4)   Any person who owns or is in the control of a vehicle
that is in violation of this section shall be subject to fines and costs set
forth in § 70.010, in accordance with this chapter, and such motor vehicle
may be removed from the city street or highway by the City Police Department
or its authorized designee, with the costs of such removal paid by the owner
or person in control of the vehicle.



      (5)   Appropriate signs shall be posted at all entrances to
the city in conformance with applicable state statutes pertaining thereto.



(Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord.
2016-01, passed 1-4-2016)



§ 70.009  STOPPING, STANDING, LOADING, BREAKDOWNS, DISMANTLED AND
INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   (A)   Breakdowns. In case of the breakdown of a vehicle, the driver
shall immediately take all reasonable precautions to prevent accidents by
warning other drivers thereof by means of flares, lights or other signals.
(Prior Code, § 73.25)



   (B)   Establishment and Use of Curb Loading Zones. No person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, except for
the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any place marked as a
passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to
the passenger curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not
to exceed five minutes. (Prior Code, § 73.27 (B))



   (C)   Loading and Unloading at an Angle to Curb. No person shall
stop, stand or park any vehicle at right angles to the curb, for the purpose
of loading or unloading merchandise unless signs permitting the same are
posted at the place. (Prior Code, § 73.28)



   (D)   Dismantled or Inoperable Motor Vehicles.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:



         DISMANTLED AND PARTIALLY DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLES. Motor
vehicles from which some part or parts which are ordinarily a component of
the motor vehicle have been removed or are missing.



         INOPERABLE AND PARTIALLY DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLES. Motor
vehicles which by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other cause are
incapable of being propelled under their own power.



         MOTOR VEHICLES. Any wheeled vehicles which are
self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled.



      (2)   No person shall park or store any dismantled, partially
dismantled, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof on any
premises in the city for a period of more than seven days continuously, and
no person shall permit, any dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable
motor vehicle or parts thereof to remain on any premises in the city for a
period of more than seven days continuously.



      (3)   This section shall not apply to dismantled, partially
dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof stored in a closed
building or to dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles
or parts thereof stored on the premises of a person engaged in the used car,
junk car or automobile storage business and possessing a current state
license for the business.



      (4)   Any person owning a dismantled, partially dismantled or
inoperable motor vehicle, who is repairing or who is about to have the motor
vehicle repaired, may obtain a permit from the Building Inspector to permit
the motor vehicle to remain on the premises for a period of an additional ten
days. A fee of $5 for each permit issued shall be collected by the building
inspector and paid into the general fund.



      (5)   The presence of any dismantled, partially dismantled or
inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof outdoors on any premises in the
city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is hereby further
declared to be offensive to the public health, welfare and safety.



      (6)   Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be
subject to immediate impoundment, in addition to being ticketed, if, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works or his or her designee, the vehicle
or vehicles are interfering or will interfere with the performance of
necessary street maintenance service, including, but not limited to, street
cleaning or snow plowing operations. (Prior Code, § 73.31)



(Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-1993; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed
6-17-2013)



§ 70.010  PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Parking Ticket or Notice of Violation.



      (1)   Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found
parked or stopped in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or
any order promulgated under this chapter, or in violation of state law, the
police officer finding the vehicle shall take its registration number and may
take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its
user, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking ticket or notice
of violation. The City Manager may delegate to other persons the power to
issue and affix the tickets or notices for parking violations, but no other
power normally exercised by a police officer in the exercise of his or her
normal duties.



      (2)   The issuance of a parking ticket or notice of violation
by a police officer or other authorized person shall be deemed an allegation
of a parking violation. The traffic ticket or notice of violation shall
indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued
must respond before the Parking Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the
address of the Bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount
of the penalty scheduled for the offense of the person to whom the ticket was
issued and advise that a civil infraction citation will be sought if the
person fails to respond within the prescribed time. (Prior Code, § 73.45)



   (B)   Parking Violations Bureau Generally.



      (1)   Pursuant to § 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, State
of Michigan, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 600.8395, the Parking Violations
Bureau is hereby established for the purpose of handling alleged parking
violations within the city and to collect and retain civil fines and costs
prescribed in this chapter.



      (2)   The Parking Violations Bureau shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Manager.



      (3)   The City Manager shall, subject to the approval of the
City Council, establish a convenient location for the Parking Violations
Bureau, and the City Manager shall appoint qualified city employees to
administer the Bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation
thereof.



      (4)   No violation not scheduled in subsection (C) below shall
be disposed of by the Parking Violations Bureau. The fact that a particular
violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition
of the violation at the Bureau, and in any case, the person in charge of the
Bureau may refuse to dispose of the violation, in which case, any person
having knowledge of the facts may, make a sworn complaint before any court
having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law.



      (5)   No violation may be settled at the Parking Violations
Bureau, except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty
for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having
committed the offense, and in no case shall the person who is in charge of
the Bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any
fact or matter relating to the alleged violation. No person shall be required
to dispose of a parking violation at the Parking Violations Bureau, and all
persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court
having jurisdiction thereof, if he or she so desires. The unwillingness of
any person to dispose of any violation at the Parking Violations Bureau shall
not prejudice him or her or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and
protection accorded to him or her by law.



      (6)   The City Council may, by resolution, authorize other
persons to enforce the provisions of this section, including the issuance of
civil infraction citations. (Prior Code, § 73.47)



   (C)   Schedule of Fines Payable to Parking Violations Bureau. The
schedule of fines payable to the City of Marshall Parking Violations Bureau
shall be as follows:



 


Violation

 

Fine





 

Paid in Seven Days or Less

 

Paid After Seven Days

 

Paid after 30 Days





Loading Zone
 
$5
 
$7
 
$20


15 feet of fire hydrant
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Parked in alley
 
$5
 
$7
 
$20


Over one foot from curb
 
$5
 
$7
 
$20


General sign violations


Parking against traffic
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


No parking here to corner
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


No parking anytime
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


No parking between drives
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


No parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


No stopping or standing
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


No parking between signs
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Bus stop
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Taxi zone
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Double park
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Parked on sidewalk
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Parked on crosswalk
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Blocking drive
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Obstructing traffic
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Not parked within space
 
$5
 
$7
 
$20


Angle parking violation
 
$5
 
$7
 
$20


Parking within intersections
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Blocking emergency exit
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Blocking fire escape
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Taking two spaces
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Beside street excavation when traffic obstructed
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Within 25 feet of corner lot lines
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Within 50 feet of railroad crossing
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Within 20 feet of fire station entrance
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Within 75 feet of fire station entrance on opposite side of the street
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Within 20 of a crosswalk
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Within 15 feet of an intersection
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Alternate side of street parking
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


City vehicle only
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


No parking, except Sunday
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Front yard parking
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Other, as described
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Handicapped vehicle only
 
$50
 
$52
 
$100


Hotel and center vehicles only
 
$10
 
$12
 
$20


Overnight parking without a valid permit
 
$25
 
$30
 
$50


Expired meter (paid in 48 hours or less)
 
 
 
 
 
$1


Expired meter (paid after 48 hours to 17 days)
 
 
 
 
 
$5


Expired meter (paid after 17 days up to and until 30 days)
 
 
 
 
 
$10


Expired meter (paid after 30 days)
 
 
 
 
 
$20


Vehicle standing or parking on city street during declared snow or ice
emergency
 
$25
 
$30
 
$50




 



(Prior Code, §73.48)  (Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-1993;
Am. Ord. 01-11, passed 7- 16-2000; Am. Ord. 03-01, passed 3-17-2003; Am. Ord.
2013-07, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed 1-4-2016)



§ 70.011  PARKING OR STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN REQUIRED FRONT YARD IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   For the purposes of protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare, for the enhancement of the visual environment of the city
and for the purpose of preserving residential neighborhoods, the parking,
storage or leaving unattended of any motor vehicle in any required front yard
in any residential district in the city is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FRONT YARD. The area measured by the full width of the front lot
line to a depth measured from such front lot line to the first supporting
member of a structure. In the case of corner lots, the front yard shall be
the area measured by the lot lines on each street to a depth measured from
the lot lines to the first supporting member of the structure.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parking of motor
vehicle upon driveways. A driveway, for this purpose, shall be surfaced with
concrete, asphalt, gravel or similar material and shall lead, from an
authorized curb cut to a garage, carport or required parking space.



   (D)   A surfaced turnabout area, a circular driveway from an
authorized curb cut to another authorized curb cut and auxiliary parking
spaces above those required by ordinance shall be permitted under the
following conditions.



      (1)   The areas and driveway shall not occupy in excess of 50%
of the area of the front yard.



      (2)   The areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt,
brick or four-inch solid concrete blocks. Where the brick or solid concrete
block surface is to be used, the sod and topsoil shall be removed and a sand
subbase shall be provided. (Prior Code, § 73.49)



(Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.012  SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   Registration. No snowmobile shall be operated within the City
unless it is currently registered as required by State law. (Prior Code, §
74.01)



   (B)   Operation on City-Owned Property. No person shall operate a
snowmobile in any City park or golf course or on any other City-owned
property, except that the City in its discretion, may allow the operation for
special events, when the permission is requested by a reputable organization
or individual. Prior Code, § 74.04)



   (C)   Operation on Streets or Highways. No person shall operate a
snowmobile upon the traveled portion of any public roadway, except as follows:



      (1)   Owners of properly registered snowmobiles may cross
public streets or highways, with the exception of limited access highways and
freeways; and



      (2)   Snowmobiles may be operated on a street or highway
during a period of emergency, when the emergency has been declared by the
City. (Prior Code, § 74.05)



(Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.013  BICYCLES.



   (A)   The hands of the operator of a bicycle shall be on the handle
bars at all times, except when he or she is in the act of signaling. (Prior
Code, § 75.30)



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (Prior Code, §
75.31)



   (C)   Riding on Sidewalks or Certain Streets Generally.



      (1)   No person shall ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk, part
of sidewalk or street where signs have been erected prohibiting bicycle
riding. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing any pedestrian.



      (2)   No person shall ride a bicycle, unicycle, tricycle,
skateboard, roller blades, roller skates or similar device upon any sidewalk
adjacent to Michigan Avenue between Grand Street and Exchange Street at any
time, nor on any sidewalk in any city park adjacent to Michigan Avenue
including, but not limited to Carver and Brooks Memorial Parks, at any time,
nor shall any person under the age of 12 years of age ride a bicycle in the
street on Michigan Avenue between Grand Street and Exchange Street; provided,
however, that, the person may ride across Michigan Avenue where it intersects
with Grand, Eagle, Jefferson, Madison, Hamilton, High or Exchange Streets;
nor shall any person ride a skateboard or other similar device on city-owned
parking Lot No. 2 (also called Myers' Lot) or city-owned parking Lot No. 10
(also called Schuler's Lot) or city owned alleyways, at any time; nor shall
any person, except on Sundays and legal holidays, ride a skateboard or
similar device on any other city-owned parking lot between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. daily, except Fridays, which activity is prohibited between 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. (Prior Code, § 75.35)



   (D)   When signs are erected on any sidewalk or street which
prohibit the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall
disobey the signs. (Prior Code, § 75.36)



   (E)   No person shall stand or park a bicycle upon a street other
than upon the roadway against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to
support the bicycle, or against a building, or at the curb, in such a manner
as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Prior Code, §
75.37)



(Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 70.014  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle on any street in the city
unless the bicycle has been licensed and a license plate attached to the
bicycle as provided in this section. (Prior Code, § 75.50)



   (B)   Application for a bicycle license shall be made to the Chief
of Police. (Prior Code, § 75.51)



   (C)   A license fee under this chapter shall be as presently
established or as hereafter adopted by resolution. (Prior Code, § 75.52)



   (D)   The Chief of Police shall issue the license and the license
plate, both bearing the same number. The plate shall be kept attached to the
bicycle at all times. (Prior Code, § 75.53)



   (E)   The license under this chapter is valid for the life of the
bicycle. (Prior Code, § 75.54)



   (F)   Any sale or transfer of a licensed bicycle shall be reported
to the Chief of Police and the license transferred to the new owner. There is
no fee for the transfer. (Prior Code, § 75.55)



   (G)   The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all licenses and
transfers of licenses under this chapter. (Prior Code, § 75.56)



(Ord. passed 11-16-1992; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-17-2013)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES



   91.   PARKS AND RECREATION



   92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



   93.   LIBRARY



   94.   FAIR HOUSING



   95.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



   96.   CEMETERIES



   97.   ANIMALS



   98.   AIRPORT AND AIRCRAFT



   99.   TREES



CHAPTER 90:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Repaving streets requirements; utility connections



   90.02   Unconstructed sidewalks



   90.03   Excavations



   90.04   Insurance prerequisite to granting, fee



   90.05   Insurance requirements, generally



   90.06   Trees in streets or alleys



Obstructions and Hazards



   90.15   Obstruction in streets



   90.16   Obstruction on sidewalks



   90.17   Snow and rubbish on sidewalks



   90.18   Removal of obstructions by city



   90.19   Faulty structure



   90.20   Awnings and overhangs



   90.21   Gratings and trap doors in sidewalks



   90.22   Fines plus costs



   90.23   Publishing notice in newspaper



Extension of Water, Sewers and Streets



   90.35   Purpose



   90.36   Jurisdiction



   90.37   Applications



   90.38   Review of applications



   90.39   Approval or rejection



   90.40   Criteria



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  REPAVING STREETS REQUIREMENTS; UTILITY CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Whenever the City Council determines that a street or alley is
to be paved, it shall serve a written notice upon each owner, occupant or
agent of the property along the line of the street or alley requiring him or
her, within 30 days from the date of the notice, to make connections with the
main water and gas pipes and sewers in the streets or alleys, if the
connections have not already been made.



   (B)   If the owner or agent of any premises cannot be conveniently
found, the Council shall cause the notice to be posted upon the premises.



   (C)   (1)   If any owner, occupant or agent fails to connect with
the service pipes and sewers as directed, the city shall cause the
connections to be made, and the expense assessed upon the property for the
benefit of which the connection is made.



      (2)   The assessment shall be a lien upon the property until
paid and shall have the same force and effect as provided for other special
assessments.



(Prior Code, § 24-1)



§ 90.02  UNCONSTRUCTED SIDEWALKS.



   Whenever a sidewalk has not been constructed on any street, a strip of
land on either side of the street two feet distant from the outer line
thereof and four feet in width shall be considered a sidewalk for the
purposes of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 24-2)



Charter reference:



   Streets and alleys, see § 2.23



§ 90.03  EXCAVATIONS.



   No person shall make any excavation in or under any street, alley or
public place without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer
or designee.



(Prior Code, § 24-3) (Am. Ord. 08-11, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 90.04  INSURANCE PREREQUISITE TO GRANTING, FEE.



   No permit as required by § 90.03 shall be granted until a bond or
policy of insurance has been filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer as provided
in § 90.05, and until the fee as established by resolution adopted by City
Council has been paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 08-11, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 90.05  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY.



   The policy of insurance required under § 90.04 shall be in the sum
specified by the City Engineer or designee as commensurate with risk to the
permit application and the city arising out of any work proposed to be
performed under such permit, conditioned that the applicant or his insurer
will indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to persons or
property caused by any negligence in protecting his or her work or by any
imperfect, inadequate, careless or unkillful work done by him or her, and
that he or she will also promptly and at the proper time, replace and restore
sidewalk, pavement or street surfaces over any opening he or she may have
made to as good state and condition as existed previous to opening same and
will keep and maintain the same in good order, to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer or designee, for a period of one year thereafter, and that he
or she will pay all fines and penalties imposed upon him or her for violation
of any of the rules or regulations prescribed by this code.



(Ord. 08-11, passed 8-4-2008)



§ 90.06  TREES IN STREETS OR ALLEYS.



   Any person owning any real property in the city may plant trees for
shade or ornament in any street or alley adjoining the real property in
accordance with the provision in Chapter 99.



(Prior Code, § 24-4) (Am. Ord. 08-11, passed 8-4-2008)



OBSTRUCTIONS AND HAZARDS



§ 90.15  OBSTRUCTION IN STREETS.



   No person shall obstruct or place or permit anything to obstruct the
free passage or proper use of any public street, alley, sidewalk or public
place, except as may be temporarily permitted by the City Manager, or while
loading or unloading goods, merchandise, material or persons.



(Prior Code, § 24-16)



§ 90.16  OBSTRUCTION ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)  Except as herein provided, no person shall place any article,
merchandise or obstruction upon any sidewalk or crosswalk which impedes the
full, free and clear passage of the entire width of the sidewalk or
crosswalk; and no owner or occupant of any premises shall suffer any article,
merchandise or obstruction to remain on any sidewalk or crosswalk adjacent to
his or her premises after being notified by the city to remove it, except as
provided for in divisions (B) and (C) of this section. 



   (B)    The owner or occupant of premises in a business district may
place goods, wares, merchandise or a sandwich board sign complying with the
zoning code on a public sidewalk, on the condition that an unobstructed
walkway of four feet shall be maintained for public safety, or as modified by
the City Council under division (C) below. 



   (C)   The City Council may license public utility companies to erect
facilities such as telephone booths, switching gear or boxes, or similar
items on public sidewalks or within the public right-of-way and may license
outdoor restaurants, cafes and other public/private sidewalk uses under such
terms and conditions as the Council may determine upon submittal of a
sidewalk use application.  In no instance shall a crosswalk be blocked.



(Prior Code, § 24-17)  (Ord. passed 10-21-1991; Am. Ord. 93-7, passed
8-16-1993; Am. Ord. 05-03, passed 3-21-2005)



§ 90.17  SNOW AND RUBBISH ON SIDEWALKS.



   The owner(s) or occupant of any lot or building shall not permit or
suffer any snow, ice, or rubbish to remain upon the sidewalk in front or
adjacent to the lot or building.  The owner or occupant shall remove the
snow or ice within 24 hours after any such storm.  Rubbish shall be removed
within four hours after receiving a written or verbal notice from the city to
remove the same.



(Prior Code, § 24-18) (Am. Ord. 05-03, passed 3-21-2005)



§ 90.18  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS BY CITY.



   In case any person fails to remove any obstruction, encroachment,
merchandise or other thing, or any snow, ice or rubbish from the streets or
sidewalks, as required in this chapter, the city shall remove the thing or
obstruction.  Any expense incurred in the enforcement of this chapter,
including city administrative fees, shall be paid by the landowner, occupant
or person in control of those lands within 30 days of receipt of an invoice
for all costs incurred.  Should the invoice not be paid within this
timeframe, then it shall accrue interest at the rate of 6% annum and the city
may, at its option, assess the same against the land which shall constitute a
lien against such lands from the date of abatement and may be billed as part
of the tax applicable to the land.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
a cause for delay or termination of prosecution of an owner, owners,
occupants or responsible local agent for failure to correct violations of
this chapter as authorized under Chapter 10.



(Prior Code, § 24-19)  (Am. Ord. 05-03, passed 3-21-2005)



§ 90.19  FAULTY STRUCTURE.



   No person shall permit any building, fence or chimney or other
structure adjacent to or adjoining any street, alley or public place to be
unsafe, or dangerous to the right of public travel in any street, alley or
public place.



(Prior Code, § 24-20)



§ 90.20  AWNINGS AND OVERHANGS.



   No person shall place or permit any awning, goods, wares, merchandise
or other thing to overhang any sidewalk to a height of less than eight feet
measured from the furthest point of the projection into the sidewalk, except
an awning that is retractable.  A retractable awning may overhang a sidewalk
and shall maintain a height of not less than 6-1/2 feet as measured from
furthest point of the projection into the sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 24-21)  (Am. Ord. 05-03, passed 3-21-2005)



§ 90.21  GRATINGS AND TRAP DOORS IN SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall place in or upon any sidewalk any grating, door, trap
or step which shall extend into the sidewalk more than four feet from the
outer boundary of the street.  Any person placing any grating, door, trap or
step in or upon any sidewalk shall maintain the same in good repair and shall
repair or wholly remove the same when so ordered by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 24-22)



§ 90.22  FINES PLUS COSTS.



   An individual, corporation, property owner or entity having control of
the property in violation of this subchapter may be issued a citation, in
addition to those remedies allowed for in § 90.18:



 


Offense

 

Designation

 

Remedy




First offense

 

Municipal Civil Infraction

 

fine plus abatement costs




Second offense

 

Municipal Civil Infraction

 

fine plus abatement costs




Third offense

 

Municipal Civil Infraction

 

fine plus abatement costs




Fourth offense

 

Misdemeanor

 





 



(Ord. 05-03, passed 3-21-2005)



§ 90.23  PUBLISHING NOTICE IN NEWSPAPER.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the city shall publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county, once a month from December 1
to March 1 of the following year, giving notice that snow or ice shall be
removed within 24 hours of a snow or ice storm, or the city may remove the
snow or ice and charge the expense of the abatement in accordance with the
provisions of § 90.18.  The city may remove the snow or ice as many times
as is necessary and charge the cost to the property owner.
(Ord. 05-03, passed 3-21-2005)



EXTENSION OF WATER, SEWERS AND STREETS



§ 90.35  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedures to be
followed in determining whether city water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and
streets shall be extended to service properties outside the corporate limits
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 24-31)



§ 90.36  JURISDICTION.



   Pursuant to the Charter, the Board of Public Utilities shall make the
final decision regarding applications for the extension of city water and
sanitary sewer and the City Council shall make the final decision regarding
applications for the extension or use of city storm sewer and streets for
properties outside the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 24-32)  (Ord. passed 5-12-1980)



§ 90.37  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Applications for the extension or use of city water, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer or streets shall be made by the property owners, in
duplicate, one to be filed with the City Manager and one with the
superintendent of public utilities.



   (B)   A fee of $40 for single-family residences and $200 for all
other uses, payable to the city shall accompany the application.



   (C)   The application shall describe the property to be served, the
type of service requested, the use to which the property is or will be
devoted, the extent to which it is estimated that the requested service shall
be utilized, how payment for the service extension will be made and shall
contain a tentative site plan of the property.



(Prior Code, § 24-33)  (Ord. passed 5-12-1980)



§ 90.38  REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   The City Council shall refer all applications to the Planning
Commission for review and for its advice and recommendations.



   (B)   The City Council, with respect to applications for extension
or use of city water and sanitary sewer, shall review the applications and
submit its advice and recommendations, together with those of the Planning
Commission, to the Board of Public Utilities.



   (C)   The Board of Public Utilities, with respect to applications
for extension or use of city storm sewers and streets, shall review the
applications and submit its advice and recommendations to the City Council.



   (D)   The City Council, Board of Public Utilities and Planning
Commission shall afford the applicant the opportunity to appear and may
require the applicant to provide any supplemental information deemed
pertinent to the application.



(Prior Code, § 24-34)  (Ord. passed 5-12-1980)



§ 90.39  APPROVAL OR REJECTION.



   (A)   The City Council, after consideration of the advice and
recommendations of the Board of Public Utilities and Planning Commission,
shall approve or reject all applications for extension or use of city storm
sewer and streets.



   (B)   The Board of Public Utilities, after consideration of the
advice and recommendations of the City Council and Planning Commission, shall
approve or reject all applications for extension or use of city water and
sanitary sewer.



   (C)   Approval may be subject, to certain terms and conditions as
the Council or Board, as the case may be, deems reasonable and appropriate,
including but not limited to submission and approval of final site plans,
payment or security therefor of the cost of improvements, appropriate zoning
and approval of subsequent development on the property.



(Prior Code, § 24-35)  (Ord. passed 5-12-1980)



§ 90.40  CRITERIA.



   The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to
approve or reject an application under this subchapter:



   (A)   The capacity of the city to provide the requested service or
services;



   (B)   The expense, if any, to the city in providing the service;



   (C)   The compatibility of the use by the property owner and the
existing development or zoning within the city in the vicinity of the
applicant’s property;



   (D)   The aesthetics of the applicant’s proposed development; and



   (E)   Such other matters as may be reasonable and appropriate under
the circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 24-36)  (Ord. passed 5-12-1980)



CHAPTER 91:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   91.01   Establishment of city parks



   91.02   Park hours



   91.03   Regulation of parks



   91.04   Usage of parks



   91.05   Weapons and firearms



   91.06   Alcoholic beverages



   91.07   Animals - pets, dogs, cats



   91.08   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Parks and recreational facilities, see § 2.24



§ 91.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY PARKS.



   The following properties owned by the city are hereby designated as
city parks:



   (A)   Carver Park, located near the intersection of East Michigan
Avenue and Exchange Street;



   (B)   Brooks Memorial Fountain Park, located in the center of the
traffic circle at West Michigan Avenue and Kalamazoo Avenue;



   (C)   Marshall Athletic Fields, located on West Michigan Avenue near
the east end of the city;



   (D)   Ketchum Park, located on the north and south sides of Rice
Creek, from South Marshall to eastern city limits;



   (E)   Stuart Landing and Millpond Park, located on the south side of
the Kalamazoo River, near Homer Road; and



   (F)   The Brooks Nature Area, located along the shore of both Upper
and Lower Brace (Stuart) Lake.



   (G)   Shearman Park, located along N. Linden Street between W.
Mansion Street and W. Prospect Street.



(Prior Code, § 19-1)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1993; Am. Ord. 06-05, passed
4-17-2006; Am. Ord. 07-02, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 08-08, passed 6-2-2008;
Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - -2013)



§ 91.02  PARK HOURS.



   Ketchum, Carver, Stuart Landing and Millpond Parks, the Brooks Nature
Area, and Shearman Park shall be open to the public daily between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any one day. Marshall Athletic Fields shall be
open to the public daily between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., or ½
hour after the conclusion of any city-sanctioned event, whichever is later.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than city personnel conducting city
business therein to occupy or be present in the park during any hours in
which the park is not open to the public.



(Prior Code, § 19-2)  (Ord. passed 7-16-1979; Am. Ord. passed 9-17-1984;
Am. Ord. passed 9-16-1991; Am. Ord. passed 6-7-1993; Am. Ord. 07-02, passed
5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 08-08, passed 6-2-2008; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - - 2013)



§ 91.03  REGULATION OF PARKS.



   In addition to those provided for in this chapter, the Parks,
Recreation, and Cemetery Board shall propose rules, regulations, hours of
operation, and fees necessary for the enjoyment of the city parks and
recreational programs for adoption by the City Council.



(Ord. 07-02, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - -2013)



§ 91.04  USAGE OF PARKS.



   (A)   All persons using park property shall dispose of litter in
receptacles provided.



   (B)   No persons shall pollute any lake, stream, creek, ditch,
drain, or waterway as specified in § 50.04 of Chapter 50 Garbage and Rubbish.



   (C)   No person shall build a fire except in an approved appliance
and every person shall extinguish all fires prior to leaving the area.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any amplified music
device while on any park property which may be disruptive to the use of the
park.



   (E)   All persons shall pay appropriate fees for use of the park as
approved by the City Council.



   (F)   No person may hunt, trap, feed, or endanger animals or birds
in any way except fishing unless authorized by the City Council.



   (G)   No camping shall be allowed in any park, unless otherwise
authorized by the City Council.



   (H)   No person shall operate any recreational vehicles in any park
as defined in the zoning code or prohibited under § 70.012.



(Ord. 07-02, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - -2013)



§ 91.05  WEAPONS AND FIREARMS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized peace
officers, to discharge on any land operated under the jurisdiction of City of
Marshall, any gun including shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, air or BB gun
unless specifically authorized by the City Council or unless discharged in
the lawful defense of oneself or another.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized peace
officers, to possess, display, or use on any land operated under the
jurisdiction of City of Marshall, any sling shot, bow and arrow, switchblade
knife with spring loaded blade, throwing knife, tomahawk, or throwing axe,
unless specifically authorized by the City Council.



(Ord. 07-02, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - -2013; Am. Ord.
2013-13, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 91.06  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   Per § 137.03 Possession of an/or Consumption of Alcoholic Liquor while
in city parks, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume
alcoholic beverages on any park property unless prior approval is granted by
the City Council and insurance acceptable to the city insurance carrier is
provided.



(Ord. 07-02, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - -2013)



§ 91.07  ANIMALS - PETS, DOGS, CATS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or otherwise
permit any pet, dog, or cat, or other domesticated animal to be upon any park
property unless leashed or restrained at all times and under the specific
physical control of the person who owns or has legal custody of said animal.
Leashes must be no longer than ten feet in length. All persons who bring
animals, as described above, onto property must have proof that the animal
has a current valid rabies inoculation and valid license.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or keep a noisy,
vicious, or dangerous animal, onto park property and remain thereon after
having been asked to leave by a city official, law enforcement officer, or
employee.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person bringing said animal, as
heretofore described, not to remove and dispose of its animal waste in proper
containers from park premises.



(Ord. 07-02, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - -2013)



§ 91.08  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates those rules and regulations as adopted by the
City Council and in conformance with this Code shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine in such amounts as may
from time to time be established pursuant to § 35.10 of the Code. In
addition, nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking other
remedies pursuant to § 35.12.



(Ord. 07-02, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed - -2013)



CHAPTER 92:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section



Health Nuisances



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Jurisdiction



   92.03   Enforcement



   92.04   Nuisances prohibited



   92.04.1   Conciliation conference



   92.05   Abatement of nuisances



   92.06   Abatement of nuisances by the city; costs



   92.07   Appeals; hearing



   92.08   Other laws and regulations, remedies severable



   92.09   Vacated property



   92.10   Building materials



   92.11   Penalties



HEALTH NUISANCES



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING MATERIAL.  Building materials means, but is not limited to,
lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical
wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete
or cement, nails, screws or any other materials used in constructing any
structure.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The Director of Public Safety or any employee
assigned or designated by the Director of Public Safety, or by the City
Manager, charged with the responsibility for administering and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.



   FREE STANDING SOLID FUEL BURNING APPLIANCE. Any device which operates
by the burning of wood or other solid fuel and is designed, intended, or used
to provide heat and/or hot water to a structure in which the device is not
located.



      (1)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to install or operate
a free-standing solid fuel-burning appliance, and to cause or permit the
installation or operation of a free-standing solid fuel-burning appliance,
within the City, except within I-1 (Research & Technical and I-2 Heavy
Industrial) zoning districts.



      (2)   Permit; Inspection. No Free Standing Solid Fuel Burning
Appliance erected in compliance with this ordinance shall be allowed unless a
valid permit is issued through the City of Marshall. Any permitted Free
Standing Solid Fuel Burning Appliance shall be subject to safety inspection
by the City of Marshall Fire Department.



      (3)   Conflicts. This section shall not be construed as an
exemption or exception to any other provision of these Codified Ordinances or
any other code adopted by reference as an ordinance for which the City is an
enforcing agency. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this
section and any other ordinance or other provision of law, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.



      (4)   Existing Uses. This section shall not apply to any
free-standing solid fuel-burning appliance that was installed, connected, and
operating as of the effective date of this ordinance. However, this section
shall not be deemed as an authorization for the use of any preexisting
free-standing solid fuel-burning appliance and shall not be deemed to bar,
limit, or otherwise affect the rights of any person to take private legal
action regarding damage or nuisance caused by the use of a free-standing
solid fuel-burning appliance.



      (5)   Violations; Declaration of Nuisance. Any free-standing
solid fuel-burning appliance installed or operated in violation of this
section is declared to be nuisance per se.



   GARBAGE.  Rejected organic waste including waste from the accumulation
of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for use in the
preparation, use, cooking, processing or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit,
vegetable or other food; accumulations of leaves, branches, cut grass or
other vegetation.  Excluded from the definition is organic waste which is
contained within managed compost.



   HARBORAGE.  Any premises within which, or upon which is located rats,
mice, grain moths, grain berries, flour beetles, cockroaches, or any other
vermin, or traces, droppings, trails, runs or other evidence of the presence
of rodents or vermin.



   LITTER.  All rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, debris and waste
material of any kind.



   OWNER. 



      (1)   Every person or entity holding legal or equitable title
to a property or to real improvements on a property solely, jointly, by the
entireties, in common, or as land contract vendee.



      (2)   Every person or entity who in fact has been empowered to
act on behalf of, or receive process for, or as agent of the owner; or



      (3)   Every person or entity who has or exercises care,
custody, dominion or control over any property;



      (4)   Every person or entity who is a record owner as
demonstrated by a deed or other document of title recorded at the office of
the Register of Deeds or otherwise substantiated; or



      (5)   Every person or entity listed as the taxpayer by
assessor’s records.



   PROHIBITED VEGETATION.



      (1)   Poisonous or injurious vegetation, including but not
limited to poison ivy -Toxicodendron radicans, poison oak - Toxicodendron
toxicarium and poison sumac -Toxicodendron vernix,



      (2)   Any grass, weeds or undergrowth higher than eight inches
except within the following areas:



         (a)   Managed landscaping;



         (b)   Undeveloped parcels which are naturally wooded or
consist of perennial grasses or a combination thereof;



         (c)   Developed parcels which are naturally wooded or
consist of perennial grasses or a combination thereof, and are consistent
with the general character of the plant growth and landscaping in the
surrounding neighborhood.



   PROPERTY.  Any parcel or tract of land, including any building,
containers or items located thereon.



   WHOLLY ENCLOSED.  Having four adjoining walls and a roof. Any window
or door opening in a wall shall be capable of being completely closed.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2012-03, passed 6-18-2012)



§ 92.02  JURISDICTION.



   The Enforcement Officer shall have jurisdiction throughout the city in
the administration and enforcement of this chapter and relevant state laws
including all regulations or amendments hereafter adopted unless otherwise
specifically stated. The burden of proof is on the Enforcement Officer to
establish a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any premises shall be subject to inspection by the Enforcement Officer,
and the Enforcement Officer may collect such samples for laboratory analysis
or other further inspection as he or she deems necessary for the enforcement
of this chapter, as permitted by law.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.04  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   No owner shall commit, create, permit or maintain a nuisance. Nuisance
shall include but not be limited to the creation or maintenance of litter,
harborage, garbage, refuse, rubbish, noxious weeds, any activity prohibited
by this chapter and any other act, omission, defect or condition which
annoys, injures, or threatens injury, endangers or threatens to endanger, the
health, safety, comfort or repose of the public.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.04.1  CONCILIATION CONFERENCE.



   When, in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer, an apparent violation
of this chapter could be resolved informally, the Enforcement Officer may
offer a property owner an opportunity for a conciliation conference.



   (A)   The purpose of a conciliation conference is to avoid
unnecessary enforcement proceedings and to encourage a greater understanding
of the issues involved in the apparent violation by all parties by providing
a process for the Enforcement Officer and the owner to present information to
each other.



   (B)   If given, notice of the conciliation conference shall be
delivered to the owner identifying the time and place of a conciliation
conference and the name, mailing address and telephone number of an
individual designated by the city to conduct the conference. The notice shall
provide that if the owner does not attempt or promptly reschedule the
conciliation conference, other enforcement action will ensue, as permitted by
this chapter.



   (C)   The conciliation conference may result in an agreement between
the city and the property owner concerning application of this chapter to the
property. Such an agreement shall be binding upon both parties.



   (D)   The failure of the Enforcement Officer to provide notice of a
conciliation conference, or the failure of the owner to attend or promptly
reschedule a conference shall have no effect on either party’s procedural
or substantive rights under this chapter.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.05  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.



   Any structure, condition or activity prohibited by this chapter may be
abated by the Enforcement Officer in accordance with the following procedure:



   (A)   Written notice. The Enforcement Officer shall give written
notice to one or more owners, specifying the nature of the violation and the
corrective action to be taken. The owner shall cure the violation within 15
days of the date notice is served.



   (B)   Right to appeal. The notice shall inform the recipient of his
or her right to appeal the determination of the Enforcement Officer and the
procedure to initiate the appeal.



   (C)   Notice.



      (1)   Notice shall be served by either of the following:



         (a)   Delivering the notice to an owner personally; or



         (b)   Mailing the notice by first class mail to an owner
and posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises.



      (2)   If, after the expiration of the time limit in said
notice, the person responsible for the creation, commission, or maintenance
of any nuisance shall not have complied with the requirements thereof, the
Enforcement Officer may abate the nuisance and the costs shall be assessed as
provided herein. The foregoing notice requirements shall not apply in the
event the nuisance, in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer, is likely to
cause immediate death, injury or property damage.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.06  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES BY THE CITY; COSTS.



   The costs of abatement incurred by the city shall constitute a personal
debt to the owner or owners of the property. If there is more than one owner,
liability for the costs shall be joint and several. If the owner does not pay
the debt within five days after receiving an invoice for costs incurred,
interest shall accrue at a rate of 6% per annum and the city may, at its
option, assess the debt as a lien against the property, which may be billed
as a part of the tax applicable to the land, provided notice has been given
under § 92.05.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.07  APPEALS; HEARING.



   Appeals from a notice of abatement shall be made to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Appeal shall be made in accordance with the procedure set forth
herein and failure of the person to comply with the provisions shall
constitute grounds for denial of the appeal. The following procedures shall
apply:



   (A)   Time period for filing appeal. Any person served with a notice
to abate may make an appeal by completing and submitting to the City Clerk a
claim of appeal form within ten days of the service of the notice or order
being appealed. Appeal forms shall be available at the City Clerk’s office.
Submission of any appeal shall constitute acknowledgment of service of the
notice to abate. An appeal filed under this section shall stay abatement
pending the Appeal Board decision.



   (B)   Appeal fee. An appeal fee in an amount determined by
resolution of the City Council shall be submitted with any claim of appeal.



   (C)   Procedure prior to hearing. Upon receipt of a completed claim
of appeal and appeal fee, the City Clerk shall forward copies of the claim of
appeal and a copy of the notice appealed from to members of the Appeal Board.
The Clerk shall schedule a hearing to be held within two weeks of the filing
of the Appeal. The Clerk shall serve notice of the hearing to Appeal Board
members, the Enforcement Officer and to the person filing the appeal. Notice
to the person filing the appeal shall be by first class mail to the address
provided on the claim of appeal form.



   (D)   Hearing procedures. The Appeal Board shall provide the
appellant and the Enforcement Officer not less than 20 minutes each to
present testimony or other evidence in support of their respective positions.
The Appeal Board shall, upon a de novo review, affirm, modify or reverse the
notice being appealed any may, upon good cause, order a refund of the appeal
fee to the appellant. The Board's specific findings and determinations shall
be preserved by the City Clerk or its designated representative. If the Board
affirms the Enforcement Officer's determination, in whole or in part, the
appellant shall comply with the decision of the Board within ten days of the
hearing or by an alternate date if the Board directs. Failure to comply with
the Board's decision shall be a violation of this code and the Enforcement
Officer shall abate the nuisance in accordance with the decision of the
Appeal Board and costs shall be assessed in accordance with § 92.06.



   (E)   Appeals to Circuit Court. The decision of the Appeal Board is
appealable by right to the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.08  OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS, REMEDIES SEVERABLE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards. Where
any of the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other local
or state law or regulations apply, the more restrictive shall prevail.



   (B)   Any action taken by the city to abate any nuisance under the
provisions herein shall not affect the right of the city to institute
proceedings against the person, persons or entity in violation and shall not
affect the imposition of penalty described for such violation, nor prevent
application by the city to any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or
enjoin violations or threatened violations.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.09  VACATED PROPERTY.



   All persons, including representatives of firms or corporations
vacating any dwelling, storeroom, apartment or other property shall within 48
hours after vacating the property, remove or cause to be removed all litter
from the property.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.10  BUILDING MATERIALS.



   No person shall store, place, or permit to be stored or placed, or
allowed to remain, any building materials unless:



   (A)   There is in force a valid building permit issued for the
premises and such materials are intended for use in connection with such
construction; or



   (B)   Are part of stock or trade of business located upon such
property; or



   (C)   Are stored within a wholly enclosed structure.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 92.11  PENALTIES.



   A violation of any section of this chapter is a municipal civil
infraction.



(Ord. 09-01, passed 5-4-2009)



CHAPTER 93:  LIBRARY



Section



   93.01   Library Fund



§ 93.01  LIBRARY FUND.



   (A)   There shall be levied a tax of not to exceed one mill on the
dollar annually on all taxable property in the city, to be levied and
collected as other general taxes of the city.



   (B)   All taxes and moneys received for the library shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city, to the credit of the library fund, and
shall be kept separate and apart from other moneys of the city, and drawn
upon by the proper officers of the city upon authenticated vouchers of the
Library Board.



   (C)   Any person desiring to make donation of money, personal
property or real estate for the benefit of the library shall have the right
to vest the title to the money or real estate so donated in the Library
Board, to be held and controlled by the Board for library purposes according
to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest.



(Prior Code, § 14-1)



Charter reference:



   Library, see Art. VII



Statutory reference:



   Establishment and maintenance of library authorized, see M.C.L.A. §§
397.201 et seq.; M.S.A. §§ 15.1661et seq.



CHAPTER 94:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   94.01   Title



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Prohibited conduct in real estate transactions



   94.04   Exclusions



   94.05   Prohibited conduct in financing



   94.06   Limitations on use or occupancy; religious or charitable
institution, organization or property



   94.07   Inducing of transactions



   94.08   Plan to eliminate present effects of past discrimination or
assure equal protection; filing with Commission; approval



   94.09   Enforcement



   94.10   Other remedies



§ 94.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Fair Housing
Chapter.”



(Prior Code, § 13-11)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMISSION.  The Civil Rights Commission established by the
Constitution of 1963.



   COMMISSIONER.  A member of the Commission.



   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION.  Improved or unimproved real property, or a
part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed
to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more persons.



   NATIONAL ORIGIN.  The national origin of an ancestor.



   PERSON.  An individual, association, corporation, joint apprenticeship
committee, joint stock company, labor union, legal representative, mutual
company, partnership, receiver, trust, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy,
unincorporated organization; any other legal or commercial entity, the state
or any governmental entity or agency.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESPERSON.  A person, whether licensed or not,
who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property; or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate any of those activities; or who holds himself or
herself out as engaged in those activities; or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance
upon real property; or who is engaged in the business of listing real
property in a publication; or a person employed by or acting on behalf of a
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESPERSON.



   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION.  The sale, exchange, rental or lease of real
property or an interest therein.



   REAL PROPERTY.  A building, structure, mobile home, real estate, land,
mobile home park, trailer park, tenement, leasehold or an interest in a real
estate cooperative or condominium.



(Prior Code, § 13-12)



Statutory reference:



   Similar definitions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 37.2103, 37.2501; M.S.A. §§
3.548(103), 3.548(501)



§ 94.03  PROHIBITED CONDUCT IN REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   A person engaging in a real estate transaction or a real
estate broker or salesperson, shall not on the basis of religion, race,
color, national origin, age, sex or marital status of a person or a person
residing with that person:



      (1)   Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a
person;



      (2)   Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions
or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities
or services in connection therewith;



      (3)   Refuse to receive from a person or transmit to a person
a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction;



      (4)   Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a
person;



      (5)   Represent to a person that, real property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available, or knowingly fail to bring a property listing to a person’s
attention or refuse to permit a person to inspect real property;



      (6)   Print, circulate, post, mail or otherwise cause to be
published a statement, advertisement, notice or sign or use a form of
application for a real estate transaction, or make a record of inquiry in
connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which indicates,
directly or indirectly, an intent to make a preference, limitation,
specification or discrimination with respect thereto; and



      (7)   Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real
property with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in
a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in
connection therewith.



   (B)   This section is subject to § 94.04.



(Prior Code, § 13-13)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 37.2502; M.S.A. § 3.548(502)



§ 94.04  EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   Section 94.03 shall not apply:



      (1)   To the rental of a housing accommodation in a building
which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living
independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner’s
immediate family resides in one of the housing accommodations, or to the
rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling by a person if the
lessor or a member of the lessor’s immediate family resides therein;



      (2)   To the rental of a housing accommodation for not more
than 12 months by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him or her and
maintained as his or her home for at least three months immediately preceding
occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal
residence; and/or



      (3)   With respect to the age provision only, to the sale,
rental or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of
federal, state or local housing programs for senior citizens, or
accommodations otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona
fide, for the purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons 50
years of age or older.



   (B)   For the purpose of division (A) above, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      IMMEDIATE FAMILY.  A spouse, parent, child or sibling.



   (C)   Information relative to the marital status of an individual
may be obtained when necessary for the preparation of a deed or other
instrument of conveyance.



(Prior Code, § 13-14)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 37.2503; M.S.A. § 3.548(503)



§ 94.05  PROHIBITED CONDUCT IN FINANCING.



   (A)   A person to whom application is made for financial assistance
or, financing in connection with a real estate transaction or in connection
with the construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance or improvement of
real property, or a representative of that person, shall not:



      (1)   Discriminate against the applicant because of the
religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex or marital status of the
applicant or a person residing with the applicant;



      (2)   Use a form of application for financial assistance or
financing or make or keep a record or inquiry in connection with an
application for financial assistance or financing which indicates, directly
or indirectly, a preference, limitation, specification or discrimination as
to the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex or marital status of
the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.



   (B)   Division (A)(2) above shall not apply to a form of application
for financial assistance prescribed for the use of a lender regulated as a
mortgagee under the National Housing Act, as amended, being 12 U.S.C. §§
1701 to 1750g or by a regulatory board or officer acting under the statutory
authority of the state or the United States.



(Prior Code, § 13-15)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 37.2504; M.S.A. § 3.548(504)



§ 94.06  LIMITATIONS ON USE OR OCCUPANCY; RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE
INSTITUTION, ORGANIZATION OR PROPERTY.



   (A)   A condition, restriction or prohibition, including a right of
entry or possibility of reverter, which directly or indirectly limits the use
or occupancy of real property on the basis of religion, race, color, national
origin, age, sex or marital status is void, except a limitation of use on the
basis of religion relating to real property held by a religious institution
or organization, or by a religious or charitable organization operated,
supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization, and used
for religious or charitable purposes.



   (B)   A person shall not insert in a written instrument relating to
real property a provision that is void under this section or honor such a
provision in the chain of title.



(Prior Code, § 13-16)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 37.2505; M.S.A. § 3.548(505)



§ 94.07  INDUCING OF TRANSACTIONS.



   A person shall not represent, for the purpose of inducing a real estate
transaction from which the person may benefit financially, that a change has
occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to religion,
race, color, national origin, age, sex or marital status of the owners or
occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is
located, or represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of
property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline
in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood or area in which the
real property is located.



(Prior Code, § 13-17)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 37.2506; M.S.A. § 3.548(506)



§ 94.08  PLAN TO ELIMINATE PRESENT EFFECTS OF PAST DISCRIMINATION OR ASSURE
EQUAL PROTECTION; FILING WITH COMMISSION; APPROVAL.



   A person subject to this chapter may adopt and carry out a plan to
eliminate present effects of past discriminatory practices or assure equal
opportunity with respect to religion, race, color, national origin, or sex if
the plan is filed with the Commission under rules of the Commission and the
Commission approves the plan.



(Prior Code, § 13-18)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 37.2507; M.S.A. § 3.548(507)



§ 94.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be by the
state’s Civil Rights Commission pursuant to Public Act 453 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 37.2101 et seq.; M.S.A. §§ 3.548(101) et seq.



   (B)   Violation of this chapter shall be deemed civil and not
criminal in nature.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed in such a
manner, and no investigation or determination herein prescribed or permitted
shall be made in a manner so as to deny any person suspected or accused of
violating the provisions of this chapter, or otherwise affected by such
provisions, any statutory or constitutional right guarantee, safeguard,
privilege or other prerogative that would exist in a corresponding criminal
investigation and proceeding.



   (D)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to
diminish the right of any party to direct and immediate legal or equitable
remedies in the courts of the state.



(Prior Code, § 13-19)



§ 94.10  OTHER REMEDIES.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the
Commission from securing other civil rights guaranteed by law or by the State
Constitution.



(Prior Code, § 13-20)



CHAPTER 95:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



Fire Prevention Code



   95.01   Adoption of N.F.P.A. Basic Fire Prevention Code



   95.02   Loading, unloading or operation of a terminal for flammable
liquids



   95.03   Prohibited burning



   95.04   Control of burning



   95.05   Burning on paved, gutter area of street prohibited



   95.06   Permits for burning



Emergency Fire Department Services; Charges



   95.15   Purpose



   95.16   Charges



   95.17   Billing, payment and collection of service charge



   95.18   Exemptions



   95.19   Services to multiple recipients



 



   95.99   Penalty



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 95.01  ADOPTION OF N.F.P.A. BASIC FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as “The N.F.P.A. Fire
Prevention Code and Life Safety Code,” as currently amended, and as
published by the National Fire Protection Association; are hereby adopted as
the Fire Prevention Code and the Life Safety Code of the city.  All of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the Fire Prevention Code and
Life Safety Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 10-11)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1978; Am. Ord. passed 10-18-1982;
Am. Ord. passed 2-21-1984; Am. Ord. 01-14, passed 11-5-2001)



Charter reference:



   Technical codes, see § 4.07



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. §
117.3(k); M.S.A. § 5.2073(k)



§ 95.02  LOADING, UNLOADING OR OPERATION OF A TERMINAL FOR FLAMMABLE
LIQUIDS.



   (A)   No carrier shall load, unload or operate a terminal for any
flammable liquids within 1,000 feet of any residential use.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CARRIER.  Any person who engages in the transportation of
articles or materials by rail, highway, water or air.



      FLAMMABLE LIQUID.  Any liquid having a flash point below 100°F
(38°C) and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 Asia (276 kPa) at 100°F
(38°C).



      TERMINAL.



         (a)   Those facilities used by carriers for the receipt,
transfer and temporary storage or delivery of flammable liquids.



         (b)   TERMINAL shall not include retail gasoline
stations or any airport or underground or aboveground tank(s) for storage of
flammable liquids to be used by the owner of the tank(s) and not being held
for resale or for the storage of flammable liquids which, by virtue of the
use by the owner, do not constitute flammable liquids at the time of any
resale.



      UNLOADING.  Shall not include the discharge by any carrier of
flammable liquids into the storage tank of any retail gasoline station or at
any airport or into any underground or aboveground tanks for the storage of
flammable liquids which flammable liquids are to be used by the owner of the
tank(s) and are not being held for resale or which flammable liquids, by
virtue of their use by the owner, do not constitute flammable liquids at the
time of any resale.



(Prior Code, § 10-12)  (Ord. 93-10, passed 11-1-1993)



§ 95.03  PROHIBITED BURNING.



   Construction debris, paper, garbage and items of this type are not
allowed to be burned at any time.



(Prior Code, § 10-13)  (Ord. passed 10-15-1984)



§ 95.04  CONTROL OF BURNING.



   (A)   No burning will take place closer than 25 feet to any building
or combustible material.



   (B)   An adult person must be in attendance to keep the fire under
control, and there must be some type of water supply, such as a garden hose
or other source of water, readily available to prevent the fire from getting
out of control.



(Prior Code, § 10-14)  (Ord. passed 10-15-1984)



§ 95.05  BURNING ON PAVED, GUTTER AREA OF STREET PROHIBITED.



   No burning shall be conducted in the paved or gutter area of any street
within the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-15)  (Ord. passed 10-15-1984)



§ 95.06  PERMITS FOR BURNING.



   (A)   The City Manager may issue special burning permits at any time
during the year.



   (B)   The requests for the permits will be in writing and a written
recommendation from the Fire Chief or the Deputy Fire Marshal will be
necessary before any permission or denial is granted.



(Prior Code, § 10-16)  (Ord. passed 10-15-1984)



EMERGENCY FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICES; CHARGES



§ 95.15  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to provide reimbursement to the
city and its citizens through establishment of fees for the costs incurred in
providing emergency fire department services to citizens and property located
outside of the city limits of the city.  It is anticipated that these
services will encompass the provision of first responder emergency medical
services, as well as providing other types of routine emergency Fire
Department services.



(Prior Code, § 10-21)  (Ord. 97-4, passed 9-15-1997)



§ 95.16  CHARGES.



   All charges which shall be due and payable to the city from the
recipient of any emergency Fire Department services rendered to persons or
property outside of the city limits of the city shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council based upon recommendations
from the Director of Public Safety.  The charges shall be based upon a
reimbursement to the city for the actual costs (including overhead and
administrative costs) incurred by the city in providing the service.



(Prior Code, § 10-22)  (Ord. 97-4, passed 9-15-1997)



§ 95.17  BILLING, PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF SERVICE CHARGE.



   All charges established pursuant to this subchapter shall be billed
directly to the recipient of the services and shall be due and payable within
30 days from the date of the bill.  In the event that payment is not
received within the time period herein established, the payment of the
charges shall be enforceable through proceedings in the courts of the State
of Michigan or other courts of competent jurisdiction as with any other
unpaid debt.



(Prior Code, § 10-23)  (Ord. 97-4, passed 9-15-1997)



§ 95.18  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following services shall be exempt from the charges established by
this subchapter:



   (A)   False alarms;



   (B)   Emergency Fire Department services provided for railroad train
fires; and



   (C)   Emergency fire department services provided to property owned
by any governmental unit (including the State of Michigan and any county,
city, village or township property) for which the recipient of the service is
deemed to be the governmental unit.



(Prior Code, § 10-24)  (Ord. 97-4, passed 9-15-1997)



§ 95.19  SERVICES TO MULTIPLE RECIPIENTS.



   When a particular emergency Fire Department service is rendered by the
city, and directly benefits more than one person or more than one property,
each person so benefitted and the owner of each property so benefitted shall
be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the full charge for the
service, as established pursuant to § 95.16; provided however, the city may
not collect more than the total amount of the charge established for the
service.



(Prior Code, § 10-25)  (Ord. 97-4, passed 9-15-1997)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Violation of any of the terms of §§ 95.01 et seq. will, upon
conviction, be subject to confinement in the Calhoun County Jail up to 90
days or a fine of up to $500 or both.



(Prior Code, § 10-17)  (Ord. passed 10-15-1984)



CHAPTER 96:  CEMETERIES



Section



   96.01   Oakridge Cemetery



   96.02   Cemetery records



   96.03   Sale of cemetery lots



   96.04   Easement of city on lots



   96.05   Cemetery lot use



   96.06   Speculative purchase of lot



   96.07   Burials



   96.08   Burial application



   96.09   Exhumation



   96.10   Grade of lots



   96.11   Monument foundation



   96.12   Damaging cemetery



   96.13   Vehicles in cemeteries



   96.14   Hours of use of Oakridge Cemetery



§ 96.01  OAKRIDGE CEMETERY.



   The cemetery owned by the city, and all additions thereto, shall be
known as “Oakridge Cemetery,” hereinafter in this chapter referred to as
“the cemetery.”



(Prior Code, § 8-1)



§ 96.02  CEMETERY RECORDS.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a list of all the lots in the cemetery
with the owners’ names attached and numerically and alphabetically
arranged.  He or she shall keep a record book containing an abstract of all
resolutions adopted by the City Council in relation to cemetery affairs and
all rules adopted by the Council and in receipts and disbursements.  He or
she shall keep a list of all orders for interments during his or her term
which list shall specify the date of the order, the name, age, place of
residence and cause of death of the person interred, and the number of the
lot and locality where interment took place.



(Prior Code, § 8-2)



§ 96.03  SALE OF CEMETERY LOTS.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall dispose of lots in the cemetery at
such prices as the City Council may determine.  On receiving payment in
full, he or she shall execute a conveyance to the purchaser, but the deed of
conveyance shall not be operative until also signed by the Mayor.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall collect all indebtedness for lots
contracted for and pay such sums collected into the treasury.



(Prior Code, § 8-3)



§ 96.04  EASEMENT OF CITY ON LOTS.



   Every deed of any lot in the cemetery shall be conveyed subject to the
right of the city through the City Council to enter any lot for any purpose
and to remove any tree, plant or shrub which may interfere with the good
management of the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 8-4)



§ 96.05  CEMETERY LOT USE.



   No person shall use any lot in the cemetery for any purpose other than
as a place of burial for the dead.



(Prior Code, § 8-5)



Charter reference:



   City cemeteries, see § 2.25



Statutory reference:



   Authority to acquire and maintain, see M.C.L.A. § 128.1; M.S.A. §
5.3165



§ 96.06  SPECULATIVE PURCHASE OF LOT.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall not permit the purchase of any lot for the
purpose of speculation and if he or she is of the opinion that a purchase is
intended for the purpose of speculation he or she shall not execute the deed
to the lot.



(Prior Code, § 8-6)



§ 96.07  BURIALS.



   No person shall bury any body within the city, except in an authorized
cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 8-7)



Statutory reference:



   Permit for disposition of body, see M.C.L.A. § 333.2850; M.S.A. §
14.15(2850)



§ 96.08  BURIAL APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon application for interment, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue to the applicant an order for interment in the lot specified.



   (B)   No order for interment shall be issued on any lot not reserved
for free use until the lot has been paid for in full.



(Prior Code, § 8-8)



§ 96.09  EXHUMATION.



   No exhumation of any body in the cemetery shall be done, except by the
order of the Cemetery Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 8-9)



§ 96.10  GRADE OF LOTS.



   No owner of a cemetery lot shall grade or terrace the lot, except by
the permission of and under the direction of the Cemetery Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 8-10)



§ 96.11  MONUMENT FOUNDATION.



   No monument or headstone shall be erected without sufficient
foundation.  The foundation for a monument shall be not less than the same
size as the base of the monument and not less than five feet deep if the
monument has a base of less than three feet square and not less than six feet
deep if the base is more than three feet square.



(Prior Code, § 8-11)



§ 96.12  DAMAGING CEMETERY.



   No person shall pluck or remove any flowers or disturb, damage or
deface any tree, shrub, plant, grass, monument, fence, gate or other property
in any cemetery in the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-12)



§ 96.13  VEHICLES IN CEMETERIES.



   Vehicles in any cemetery in the city shall be driven only on the roads
and drives.  No person shall drive any vehicle in any cemetery at a rate of
speed of more than ten mph.



(Prior Code, § 8-13)



§ 96.14  HOURS OF USE OF OAKRIDGE CEMETERY.



   Oakridge Cemetery shall be open to the public for lawful use during the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily.  No person shall occupy or be present
in the cemetery, other than city personnel conducting city business or by
special permission during the hours in which the cemetery is not open to the
public.



(Prior Code, § 8-14)  (Ord. passed 10-18-1982)



CHAPTER 97:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Definitions



   97.02   Prohibited at large; impoundment; disposal; fees



   97.03   Keeping of animals



   97.04   Keeping of poultry



   97.05   Cruelty to animals



   97.06   Carcass removal and burial



   97.07   Dogs and cats creating nuisance



   97.08   Dogs prohibited in public cemeteries



Dogs



   97.20   Dog law adopted



   97.21   Barking dogs prohibited



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AT LARGE.  An animal off the premises of the owner and not under
reasonable control.



   REASONABLE CONTROL.  Having an animal on a suitable leash or under the
oral control of the owner or custodian in all cases other than on private
property with permission or in the event the animal is confined in an
automobile or suitable cage.



   TO HARBOR.  To provide shelter and/or food for any domestic animal on
other than a periodic or temporary basis.



(Prior Code, § 6-1)  (Ord. passed 11-17-1986)



§ 97.02  PROHIBITED AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT; DISPOSAL; FEES.



   (A)   No person shall permit any dog, cat, fowl or other animal,
domestic or domesticated, to run at large in the city.



   (B)   Any police officer or any other person so designated by the
city is hereby authorized to seize and impound any such dog, cat, fowl,
domestic or domesticated animal running at large within the city limits, with
the same animal or fowl to be impounded as further provided herein.



   (C)   The City Manager or other designated city official is hereby
authorized to enter into contracts with licensed veterinary hospitals or
boarding kennels to carry out the impoundment provisions of this section.



   (D)   Any impounded dog, cat, fowl, domestic or domesticated animal
impounded shall be disposed of by the city or the veterinary or kennel
operator, as agent of the city, who retains the impounded animal, in the
following manner.



      (1)   If the animal or fowl has a collar, license or other
evidence of ownership, the city or its agents shall notify the owner in
writing and return the animal to the owner, upon demand and payment of any
fees or proof of any required certificates or licensing.  The disposition of
the animal otherwise without permission of the owner shall be made only after
seven days from the mailing of the written notice.



      (2)   If the owner or harborer of the animal or fowl cannot be
reasonably determined, the city or its agents are authorized to dispose of
the animal or fowl in any humane manner; provided, however, that, the
disposition shall not be made until after 96 hours.



      (3)   If the animal or fowl, in the opinion of the city or its
agent, is diseased or injured to the extent that the holding period would
cause undue suffering to the animal, the same shall be disposed of in a
humane manner.



   (E)   The city may establish criteria for the release of animals and
fowl impounded to owners and others claiming the animal or fowl, including
fees for the first and/or subsequent impoundments of the same animal or fowl,
and where applicable may require immunization certificates, neuterization or
proof of licensing.



(Prior Code, § 6-2)  (Ord. passed 11-17-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 287.388 and M.C.L.A. §§ 433.11 et
seq.; M.S.A. §§ 18.789(1)et seq.



§ 97.03  KEEPING OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall keep or confine horses, ponies, hogs, cattle,
sheep or any similar type farm animal within 100 feet of a public street,
alley or the dwelling house of any other person, nor in such manner that they
become offensive to those residing near or detrimental to the public health.



   (B)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal in a way as to
create a nuisance at one residence or business location or on a residential,
business or other lot in the city.



   (C)   No person shall refuse to show or exhibit for a health
inspection or other police investigation any dog, cat, fowl or other domestic
or domesticated animal in his or her possession or custody to any licensed
inspector, police officer or health official of the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-3)  (Ord. passed 11-17-1986)



§ 97.04  KEEPING OF POULTRY.



   No person shall keep fowl in any house or yard within 50 feet of the
dwelling house of any other person.



   (A)   Fowl enclosure shall be placed in a rear or side yard only.



   (B)   A household may not keep more than 18 fowl on the premises.



   (C)   Fowl shall be maintained in compliance with Chapter 92 Health
and Sanitation; Nuisances.



   (D)   Fowl shall not be permitted onto publicly-owned land or any
other property unless permission of the land owner is granted.



(Prior Code, § 6-4)  (Ord. passed 11-17-1986; Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed
8-17-2015)



§ 97.05  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   No person shall wantonly or cruelly ill-treat or injure any dog or
other domestic animal.  No person shall cause dogs to fight with each other
or with other animals.



(Prior Code, § 6-5)  (Ord. passed 11-17-1986)



§ 97.06  CARCASS REMOVAL AND BURIAL.



   (A)   When any animal or fowl dies within the city the owner or
person in possession of it shall within 12 hours thereafter cause the carcass
to be removed beyond the city limits or bury the same so that the entire
carcass shall be covered with earth not less than three feet in depth above
the carcass.



   (B)   No person shall bring the carcass of any dead animal into the
city.



(Prior Code, § 6-6)  (Ord. passed 11-17-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Sick or dead animals, see M.C.L.A.§ 750.57; M.S.A. §§ 12.581, 28.245



§ 97.07  DOGS AND CATS CREATING NUISANCE.



   No person shall allow or permit any dog or cat to defecate on any
school ground, public street, alley, sidewalk, park or any other public
grounds or any private property within the city, other than the premises of
the owner or person having custody of the dog or other animal unless the
defecation is removed immediately.



(Ord. 01-10, passed 6-18-2001)



§ 97.08  DOGS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC CEMETERIES.



   No person shall allow or permit any dog to enter into or be upon the
grounds of any public cemetery within the city, even if the dog is leashed
and within the immediate control of the owner or custodian of the dog.



(Ord. 01-10, passed 6-18-2001)



DOGS



§ 97.20  DOG LAW ADOPTED.



   The county dog wardens are authorized to operate inside the
incorporated limits of the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
of Public Act 339 of 1919, being M.C.L.A. §§ 287.261 et seq.; M.S.A. §§
12.511 et seq., as amended, which act is known as the Michigan Dog Law.



(Prior Code, § 6-16)



§ 97.21  BARKING DOGS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog which, by loud or frequent
or habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall cause annoyance to a resident
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-17)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1980)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Except as otherwise provided in § 10.99, any person who violates or
fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 6-7)  (Ord. passed 11-17-1986; Am. Ord. 98-2, passed
2-2-1998)



CHAPTER 98:  AIRPORT AND AIRCRAFT



Section



Airport Board



   98.01   Created



   98.02   Composition; appointment



   98.03   Terms



   98.04   Vacancies



   98.05   Removal of members



   98.06   Organization



   98.07   Meetings



   98.08   Indebtedness



   98.09   Funds



   98.10   Advice and assistance



   98.11   Powers



   98.12   Reports



Traffic Rules



   98.25   Generally



   98.26   Landings and take-offs



   98.27   Traffic pattern



   98.28   Compliance with Civil Air Regulations



AIRPORT BOARD



§ 98.01  CREATED.



   There is hereby created the municipality’s Airport Board.



(Prior Code, § 4-11)



§ 98.02  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The Airport Board shall consist of five members.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint members with Council approval. Of the
initial members, two shall serve a three year term, two shall serve a two
year term and one shall serve a one year term. Then, when the initial terms
expire their successors shall be appointed to terms of three years.



(Prior Code, § 4-12)  (Am. Ord. 01-15, passed 12-17-2001; Am. Ord. 2014-06,
passed 12-15-2014)



§ 98.03  TERMS.



   (A)   After the initial appointments, all appointments to the
Airport Board shall be made for terms of three years, except when the
appointment shall be made to fill an unexpired term.



   (B)   The Airport Board shall be considered to have taken office on
October 1, 1976.



   (C)   After original appointment, the City Council shall, prior to
October 1 of each year, appoint two members to take office on October 1 for a
period of three years.



(Prior Code, § 4-13)  (Am. Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-15-2014)



Charter reference:



   Authority to regulate city airport, see § 2.26



§ 98.04  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies on the Airport Board occasioned by removal, resignation or
otherwise shall be reported to the City Council who shall make an appointment
to fill the vacancy for the unexpired portion of the vacated term.



(Prior Code, § 4-14)



§ 98.05  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   Any member of the Airport Board may be removed by the City Council upon
the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Council members elect.



(Prior Code, § 4-15)  (Am. Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-15-2014)



§ 98.06  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Airport Board shall elect the Chairperson and such other
officers as are necessary.



   (B)   The Board shall have the power to adopt rules, regulations and
rules of procedure to facilitate the functioning of the Board and for the
conduct of its own business.  Four members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum.



(Prior Code, § 4-16)  (Ord. passed 3-5-1979)



§ 98.07  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Airport Board shall meet not less frequently than
quarterly; provided, however, that, the Chairperson may call a special
meeting and the Mayor shall have the power to call a special meeting of the
entire Board.



   (B)   Complete minutes shall be kept of all business transacted at
any meeting.



(Prior Code, § 4-17)  (Am. Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-15-2014)



§ 98.08  INDEBTEDNESS.



   Unless authorized by the City Council, the Airport Board shall not
incur any obligation or indebtedness or make any expenditure of funds, not
included in the annual budget, in excess of $100.



(Prior Code, § 4-18)



§ 98.09  FUNDS.



   All funds received from the operation of the airport and facilities
under the control of the Airport Board shall be used by the Board for the
purposes as set forth in this subchapter.  Appropriations granted by the
City Council also shall be used for the purposes set forth in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-19)



§ 98.10  ADVICE AND ASSISTANCE.



   The professional or technical advice or assistance which shall be
necessary to assist the Airport Board shall be secured, if possible, from the
regular appointed officers and employees of the city.  Charges shall be made
to the Board for the service proportionate to the costs thereof to the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-20)



§ 98.11  POWERS.



   The Airport Board shall have the following powers subject to the
approval of the City Council:



   (A)   To construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, operate and
regulate, any airport or flying field now or hereafter owned and controlled
by the city;



   (B)   To employ an airport manager, and such other employees as it
may deem necessary to fulfill its duties under this subchapter and to fix the
compensation of the airport manager or other employees and the terms of
employment;



   (C)   To adopt airport field rules and rules and regulations to
safeguard the public and protect the ports and landing fields and
aeronautical facilities in its charge, which rules shall be consistent with
and conform as nearly as may be with the laws of the state’s Department of
Aeronautics and to determine the charges for rental or use of any property,
including structures, facilities, services and lands under its control, and
the terms and conditions under which the properties may be used, provided
that in all cases the public is not deprived of its rightful, equal and
uniform use of the property; and



   (D)   The Board shall have and may enforce, by law, such liens as
may be provided in such cases for repairs to or improvement or storage or
care of any personal property to enforce the payment of any charge and to
exercise all powers necessary and incidental to the exercise of the general
powers herein granted.



(Prior Code, § 4-21)



§ 98.12  REPORTS.



   The Airport Board shall submit to the City Manager its proposed budget
annually.  In addition, the Board shall submit to the City Council an annual
report.



(Prior Code, § 4-22)  (Am. Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-15-2014)



TRAFFIC RULES



§ 98.25  GENERALLY.



   The traffic rules for airplanes and aircraft utilizing Brooks Field
shall be as provided in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-31)



§ 98.26  LANDINGS AND TAKE-OFFS.



   (A)   Landings and take-offs shall be made into the wind on the
runway most nearly aligned with the wind, or when the wind is light or calm,
in a direction designated by the airport manager.



   (B)   When landings or take-offs are made in a direction other than
as described in division (A) above, the pilot is solely responsible for
determining that the operation can be completed with safety and without
interference with, or disruption of, other traffic in the area.  The
landings and take-offs are not authorized for convenience and shall be made
only for bona fide reasons such as cross-winds, take-off and landing
instruction, use of a longer runway for heavily loaded or large aircraft and
the like.



   (C)   No landing or take-off shall be made, except at a safe
distance from buildings and other aircraft.



(Prior Code, § 4-32)



§ 98.27  TRAFFIC PATTERN.



   (A)   The “Standard Traffic Pattern” (Drawing No. ST-R-108),
approved by the Michigan Aeronautics Commission is hereby adopted, except
that no turn shall be made after take-off in an easterly direction, until
Homer Road has been reached and the aircraft has attained an altitude of at
least 400 feet and it has been ascertained there will be no danger of
collision with other aircraft.



   (B)   When the ceiling is such that compliance with the Standard
Traffic Pattern is impossible, the pattern altitudes may be reduced as
necessary down to, but no lower than, an altitude in accordance with Civil
Air Regulations, Part 60.



   (C)   Aircraft entering the traffic pattern shall exercise caution
and courtesy so as not to cause aircraft already in the pattern to deviate
from their course.



(Prior Code, § 4-33)



§ 98.28  COMPLIANCE WITH CIVIL AIR REGULATIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse the pilot from conforming to
applicable State or Federal Regulations.



(Prior Code, § 4-34)  (Am. Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-15-2014)



CHAPTER 99:  TREES



Section



   99.01   Purpose and intent



   99.02   Definitions



   99.03   Forestry management by the Department of Public Works



   99.04   Reforestation



   99.05   Permits required



   99.06   Developer’s or property owner’s responsibility



   99.07   Protection of trees and shrubs



   99.08   Compensation for trees destroyed or damaged



   99.09   Authority of city to inspect trees on private property



   99.10   Private trees; disease, insect and other hazards



   99.11   Trimming and removal of trees on private property



   99.12   Enforcement



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   It is in the best interest of the city and its citizens that a
comprehensive tree management program be adopted and that laws be adopted to
regulate this program to better control tree planting, tree removal, tree
maintenance and tree protection activities within the city.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to permit management and
protection of trees for public health, safety and the general welfare, to
preserve and promote the city and its landscape resource values and to define
the power and duties of those who administer this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-11)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996)



§ 99.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CURB LAWN.  The part of a street not covered by sidewalk or
paving, lying between the property line and the portion of the street paved
for vehicular traffic.



      DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Works of the city or
designated agents for the city.



      DEVELOPER.  All persons or organizations of any kind engaged in
construction or improvements that require site plan or subdivision approval.



      PARK.  All public parks or properties owned by the city to which
the public has free access as a park.



      PROHIBITED SPECIES.  Poplar, willow, box elder, silver maple,
black locust, horse chestnut, tree of heaven, catalpa, mulberry, Siberian elm
and any other species so determined by the city.



      PUBLIC UTILITY.  A person, municipal department, board or
commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or
city regulations to the public gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
communication, telegraph, transportation or water.



      STREET.  Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or approved by official action or, a street or way on a plat filed and
recorded in the office of the county register of deeds.  A STREET includes
the land between the street right-of-way lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise of pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and lawns.



      TREE.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation,
whether potted or not.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise
specifically stated herein, shall apply only to public streets, curb lawns,
parkways, parks, cemeteries and other land publicly owned or controlled by
the city.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-12)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 07-03,
passed 5-7-2007)



§ 99.03  FORESTRY MANAGEMENT BY THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Department to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, in
cemeteries and in other public areas when requested by City Council.



   (B)   The Department, when requested by the City Council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-13)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996)



§ 99.04  REFORESTATION.



   The planting, maintenance or removal of trees in public places in the
city will be done by the Department of Public Works or its duly assigned
agents in accordance with adopted policies and may be accomplished by the
order of the Department of Public Works Superintendent or the City Manager
upon recommendation of the City Council, or by petition of parties owning a
majority of lineal footage of the fronting property along a street.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-14)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996)



§ 99.05  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Tree planting or removal.



      (1)   No person shall hereafter plant, prune, transplant or
remove any tree upon or from any curb lawn, street, park or public place in
the city, nor cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining a
written permit from the office of the Superintendent of Public Works.



      (2)   Persons receiving the permit shall abide by the
ordinances and policies adopted by the city.



   (B)   Application for permits.  Application for permits must be
made at the office of the Superintendent of Public Works not less than 72
hours in advance of the time the work is to be done.



   (C)   Permit expiration.



      (1)   Each permit granted shall contain an expiration date and
the work shall be completed in the time allowed in the permit and in the
manner therein described.



      (2)   Any permit issued shall be void if its terms are
violated or if the work described is not substantially completed by its
expiration date.



      (3)   Permit extensions will be considered if conditions
warrant.



   (D)   Permit contents.



      (1)   Every permit issued by the superintendent shall describe
work to be done or state the number of trees to be removed or planted and the
locations, size, species or variety of each tree, the method of planting and
other information that the Superintendent may require to insure that the work
will be done properly.



      (2)   Whenever any tree shall be planted in conflict with the
provisions of the permit, it shall be lawful for the Superintendent to cause
removal of the same, and the cost for the removal shall be assessed to the
permittee as provided by law in the case of special assessments.



   (E)   Permit fee and supervision.



      (1)   No charge shall be made for any permit unless it is
necessary to retain a consultant to supervise the provisions of the permit,
and in such case, the City Clerk shall determine the charge for the service
based on actual cost plus an additional 1% of the actual cost of the services
for city administrative purposes.



      (2)   In issuing any and all permits, the Superintendent shall
act promptly and shall keep duplicate records of all permits issued and of
compliance therewith.



§ 99.06  DEVELOPER’S OR PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Developers shall be required to fulfill tree planting and
protection requirements as provided under the ordinances and policies of the
city including, but not limited to subdivision regulations and site plan
requirements.



   (B)   (1)   One tree of a species approved by the city, measuring
at least two to two and one-half inch caliper shall be planted in the curb
lawn at all new construction sites, residential or otherwise, for each site
or lot of 80 feet or less, and at least two trees for every lot in excess of
80 feet frontage.  Corner lots shall require at least one tree for each
street.  The developer shall show the location of the required trees on all
approved site plans.  Variations from these guidelines, upon the
recommendations of the city staff or the agency designated by the city, may
be approved by the Planning Commission.  The developer shall be responsible
for planting the required trees or shall escrow funds with the city in an
amount approved by the City for planting the required trees prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   Whenever greenbelts are required, applicants for permits
shall comply with the zoning code.



      (3)   Whenever the requirements of the zoning code are
applicable, the plans shall be reviewed by a licensed landscape architect
appointed by the city.



      (4)   The natural features and character of lands must be
preserved wherever possible.  Due regard must be shown for all natural
features such as large trees, natural groves and similar community assets
that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved.



      (5)   When a shade tree is planted under the electrical power
lines, the following understory species shall be allowed to assure that the
tree will not be in conflict with the power lines unless otherwise approved
by the city: crabapples, hawthorns, pears, redbud, dogwoods, lindens or other
similar species.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-16)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 07-03,
passed 5-7-2007)



§ 99.07  PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS.



   Unless a permit shall have been issued by the Superintendent, it shall
be unlawful for any person to do the following to any trees in or upon curb
lawns, parks or other public places:



   (A)   Fasten any sign, card, poster, wire, rope or other material
to, around or through any tree or its guard, except in emergencies such as
storms or accidents, except for any nursery tag identifying its species or
care.



   (B)   Remove, break, injure, mutilate, kill, cut, peel or destroy
any tree or shrub by any means or in any manner, except that a government
operated public utility may, without the permit, trim and remove trees and/or
shrubs in reasonable fashion when necessary to ensure the operation and
maintenance of the utility.



   (C)   Permit any fire to burn where the fire will injure any portion
of any tree or shrub.



   (D)   Permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain or to be emptied on
of about any tree or shrub



   (E)   Deposit, store, place or maintain on any curb lawn, parkway,
park or other public place, any brick, sand, stone, concrete or other
materials which may impede free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the
roots of any tree or shrub growing therein.



   (F)   Knowingly fail to repair or stop any leak existing or
occurring in any gas pipe or main a radius of 40 feet of any tree.



   (G)   Knowingly permit any electrical wire to be installed in
contact with any tree or shrub.



   (H)   Allow excavations and driveways, within any curb lawn, to be
placed within five feet of any tree without written permit from the
Department of Public Works Superintendent; and  (Any person making such
excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with
a good substantial frame box to be approved by the Department, and all
building materials or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any
tree.  At the discretion of the Superintendent, substitute planting may be
an option to resolve excavation conflicts.)



   (I)   Plant any prohibited species of tree, as herein defined under
§ 99.02, and as determined by the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-17)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996)



§ 99.08  COMPENSATION FOR TREES DESTROYED OR DAMAGED.



   (A)   The cost of public trees growing on streets, curb lawns,
parks, cemeteries or other public places which are destroyed or damaged to
the point where repair or replacement is needed, shall be paid for by the
person or persons causing the destruction or damage in the amount needed to
replace or repair the destroyed or damaged trees.



   (B)   The Superintendent shall determine all questions of cost
related to damage.



   (C)   Any value realized from any tree removed from public property
shall be for the exclusive benefit of the city.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-18)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996)



§ 99.09  AUTHORITY OF CITY TO INSPECT TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   Upon notifying the property owner or occupant, the  Department of
Public Works or designated city agent shall have the authority to enter upon
private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of examining any trees,
shrubs, plants or vines where hazardous conditions, destructive insects or
diseases are suspected which may be detrimental to the public welfare and may
remove such specimens as are required for analysis to determine the presence
of insect, disease or other detrimental conditions.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-19)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 07-03,
passed 5-7-2007)



§ 99.10  PRIVATE TREES; DISEASE, INSECT AND OTHER HAZARDS.



   (A)   When the Department of Public Works shall discover that any
tree growing on private property within the city is afflicted with any
dangerous insect, infestation, disease or condition, a written notice shall
immediately be served upon the property owner or his or her agent describing
the tree or trees, their location, the nature of the insect infestation,
disease or condition and, to prevent the spreading thereof, shall specify the
corrective measures required to be taken.  This notice may require the
pruning, treatment or destruction of the affected trees as reasonably
necessary.  Every such notice shall state a specific time period within
which compliance shall be required; provided however, all notices shall
provide at least ten days after service thereof for compliance.



   (B)   If, at the expiration of the time limit in the notice, the
owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the city’s Department
of Public Works or designated city agent shall notify the City Attorney who
shall seek relief in a court having to carry out the requirements of the
notice.  The cost of completing the work necessary to resolve the condition
complained in addition to any attorney fees shall be assessed against the
property on the next general assessment roll of the city and collected and
enforced in the manner as real property taxes are collected.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-20)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 07-03,
passed 5-7-2007)



§ 99.11  TRIMMING AND REMOVAL OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any tree growing on private property and so located as to
extend its branches over a public street, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place, or so located as to become a traffic hazard, shall be trimmed
or removed by the property owner on whose property the tree stands, so as to
remove the obstruction from the public street, highway, sidewalk, park or
public place and so as to eliminate the traffic hazard and the menace and the
danger to the public, pursuant to written notice by and under the supervision
of the Department of Public Works.  When the notice is given, the property
owner will be given a reasonable and definite time to comply with the order,
but not less than ten days unless immediate hazard exists.



   (B)   If the work is not satisfactorily completed within that time,
then the Department of Public Works or a designated city agent may enter the
property, make necessary trimming or removals and properly dispose of the
same; and the costs involved in the trimming or removal when done by the
Department or designated city agent shall be assessed against the property on
the next general assessment roll of the city and collected and enforced in
the manner as real property taxes are collected.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-21)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 07-03,
passed 5-7-2007)



§ 99.12  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Department of Public Works is hereby designated as the agent of the
city to enforce the provisions of this chapter or a qualified agent
designated by the city.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-23)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 07-03,
passed 5-7-2007)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
shall disobey any lawful order issued in pursuant of the provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a civil infraction, and subject to a fine of up
to $100.  Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this chapter shall
not be construed as a waiver of the right of the city to collect from the
defendant the costs of the tree or work done by the city which the defendant
was required to pay, but failed to pay under the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 27.5-22)  (Ord. 96-2, passed 3-18-1996)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



   111.   RESERVED



   112.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



   113.   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION



   114.   AMUSEMENTS



   115.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



   116.   ADVERTISING



   117.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



   118.   ADULT- AND SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



   119.   MEDICAL MARIHUANA



   120.   TEMPORARY BUSINESSES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Provisions complementary and supplemental



   110.02   Required



   110.03   Registration required



   110.04   State license or permit not exemption



   110.05   Application



   110.06   Expiration



Prerequisites



   110.20   Compliance with state law prerequisite to issuance



   110.21   Compliance with city regulations prerequisite to issuance



   110.22   Approval prior to issuance



   110.23   Payment of personal property taxes prerequisite to issuance



   110.24   Payment of fees prerequisite to issuance



Fees; Payment



   110.35   Prorated fee for partial year



   110.36   Exemptions from fees



   110.37   Evidence of liability to pay fees



   110.38   Businesses in conjunction



   110.39   Separate premises



Denial, Renewal and the Like



   110.50   Denial of revocation; causes



   110.51   Notice of denial or revocation



   110.52   Hearing; review by Council



   110.53   Renewal



   110.54   Penalty for failure to renew



Conditions and Regulations



   110.65   Carrying or display



   110.66   Display on vehicles or mechanical devices



   110.67   Display when expired or duplicated prohibited



   110.68   Transfer



   110.69   License for bed and breakfast inns; required; inspections



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  PROVISIONS COMPLEMENTARY AND SUPPLEMENTAL.



   The provisions of this chapter, together with other relevant provisions
of any other ordinance, or the provisions hereafter authorized or required by
state law, and any and all thereof relative to licenses, permits, businesses,
trades, occupations, premises or anything connected therewith, shall each be
construed to be complementary and supplemental to each other so far as
relevant, and unless otherwise prescribed or inconsistent herewith, shall
constitute a part of the regulations and conditions applicable generally to
any particular license in the same manner as though these provisions were
fully written into each separate ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 15-1)



§ 110.02  REQUIRED.



   No person shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct, maintain or
manage any business, trade, occupation or premises for which any license is
required by this code or any ordinance of the city without first procuring
such license in the manner prescribed in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 15-2)



§ 110.03  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   No person shall, directly or indirectly, engage in any business, trade,
profession or occupation, whether or not a license therefor is required by
this chapter or any other ordinance of the city unless he or she first
registers in a book on file in the office of the City Clerk, to be kept for
tax purposes.  He or she shall state such facts as may be required and his
or her name, business, trade or occupation and the address of the proposed
business premises.  Application for the registration shall be made by the
individual, one of the partners or an officer of the corporation, as the case
may be.



(Prior Code, § 15-3)



§ 110.04  STATE LICENSE OR PERMIT NOT EXEMPTION.



   The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the
state to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or management off any
business, trade, occupation or premises shall not exempt such person from the
necessity of procuring a license or permit from the city, if the license or
permit is required by any ordinance of the city.



(Prior Code, § 15-4)



§ 110.05  APPLICATION.



   Each person required to procure a license from the city shall make
application for the license to the City Clerk in the form and manner
prescribed by him or her and shall state, under oath, the facts as may be
required for, or applicable to, the granting of the license, including the
following:



   (A)   The full names, business addresses and residence addresses of
all owners, proprietors, officers, managers and local employees of
applicant’s business; the names and addresses of each officer, if the
applicant is a corporation;



   (B)   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to
maintain applicant’s business and the length of time during which it is
proposed that the business be conducted;



   (C)   The nature, character and quality of the goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant;



   (D)   The nature and kind of business which the applicant proposes
to conduct and the manner of operating same;



   (E)   A list of all assumed, trade or firm names under which. the
applicant intends to do business;



   (F)   The nature and character of advertising done or proposed to be
done in order to attract customers;



   (G)   Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or managing
the applicant’s business has been convicted of a crime or misdemeanor (or
the violation of any municipal ordinance) and, if so, full particulars in
connection therewith.



(Prior Code, § 15-5)



§ 110.06  EXPIRATION.



   The expiration date of each license or permit shall be indicated on the
face thereof.



(Prior Code, § 15-6)



PREREQUISITES



§ 110.20  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   No license shall be issued to any person who is required to procure a
license from the state until the licensee shall submit evidence that the
required state license has been issued and that all fees appertaining thereto
have been paid.



(Prior Code, § 15-7)



§ 110.21  COMPLIANCE WITH CITY REGULATIONS PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   No license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant has
complied with all of the provisions of this chapter and every other ordinance
of the city pertaining to the business for which the application for the
license is made.



(Prior Code, § 15-8)



§ 110.22  APPROVAL PRIOR TO ISSUANCE.



   No license shall be issued, if the approval of any officer of the city
is required, until the approval is made.  Approval, in each instance, shall
mean written approval by the designated officer upon the face of the
application for a license; subscribed by such officer; and the date of the
approval.



(Prior Code, § 15-9)



§ 110.23  PAYMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   No license shall be issued or renewed until any and all personal
property taxes, levied and assessed against the person by the city which may
be due and payable at the time of the filing of the application for the
license shall have been paid.



(Prior Code, § 15-10)



§ 110.24  PAYMENT OF FEES PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   No license shall be issued until the required fees shall be paid.



(Prior Code, § 15-11)



FEES; PAYMENT



§ 110.35  PRORATED FEE FOR PARTIAL YEAR.



   If the license year shall terminate within six months or less from the
date of the issuance of the license, the required license fee shall be
one-half of the required fee.



(Prior Code, § 15-12)



§ 110.36  EXEMPTIONS FROM FEES.



   No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from payment of
the fee by state or federal law.  The persons shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city.  The City
Clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons, licenses which are
clearly marked as to such exemption and the reason therefor.



(Prior Code, § 15-13)



§ 110.37  EVIDENCE OF LIABILITY TO PAY FEES.



   The fact that any person represents himself or herself as being engaged
in any business, trade or occupation for the transaction of which a license
is required, or that the person exhibited a sign or advertisement indicating
that he or she is engaged in the business, trade or occupation, shall be
prima facie evidence of the liability of such person to pay the required
license fee.



(Prior Code, § 15-14)



§ 110.38  BUSINESSES IN CONJUNCTION.



   Whenever any license to operate or conduct any business, trade or
occupation is required, the license fee to conduct or operate the business,
trade or occupation, whether it be connected or operated in conjunction with
any other business or not, shall be paid unless a contrary intention is
expressed.



(Prior Code, § 15-15)



§ 110.39  SEPARATE PREMISES.



   Whenever any license is required to operate or conduct any business,
trade or occupation, the required license fee shall be paid for each separate
premises maintained by the licensee.



(Prior Code, § 15-16)



DENIAL, RENEWAL AND THE LIKE



§ 110.50  DENIAL OR REVOCATION; CAUSES.



   The issuance of licenses may be denied by the City Clerk, and licenses
issued may be revoked or suspended by the City Clerk at any time for any of
the following causes:



   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the
application for license;



   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the
operation of a business;



   (C)   Any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
city;



   (D)   Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner
as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; and



   (E)   Failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the
requirements and provisions of this chapter and every other ordinance of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 15-17)



§ 110.51  NOTICE OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION.



   Written notice of suspension or revocation, stating the cause or causes
therefor, shall be delivered to the licensee personally or mailed to his or
her address as shown in his or her application for a license.



(Prior Code, § 15-18)



§ 110.52  HEARING; REVIEW BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Any person whose license is revoked or suspended, or any
person whose application for a license is denied, shall have the right to a
hearing before the City Council, provided, a written request therefor is
filed with the City Clerk within ten days following the delivery or mailing
of the notice of revocation or suspension, or within ten days following the
denial of the application for a license.



   (B)   The City Council may reverse any determination to issue or to
deny the issuance of a license or any revocation of a license and the Council
may grant or reinstate any license.  No person shall operate any business
during any time when his license therefor has been suspended, revoked or
cancelled.



(Prior Code, § 15-19)



§ 110.53  RENEWAL.



   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, an application for renewal
of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original
application.



(Prior Code, § 15-20)



§ 110.54  PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO RENEW.



   A penalty of 10% of any required license fee shall be assessed and paid
upon the failure of any licensee to renew the license on or before the
expiration date thereof.



(Prior Code, § 15-21)



CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS



§ 110.65  CARRYING OR DISPLAY.



   No licensee shall fail to carry his or her license upon his or her
person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or maintenance of
any business for which the license was issued; except that whenever the
business is operated,



conducted or maintained at a fixed place or establishment, the license shall
be displayed at all times in some conspicuous place in the business premises,
and the licensee shall produce the same for examination when applying for a
renewal thereof or when requested so to do by any city police officer.



(Prior Code, § 15-22)



§ 110.66  DISPLAY ON VEHICLES OR MECHANICAL DEVICES.



   No licensee shall fail to conspicuously display on each vehicle or
mechanical device or machine required to be licensed, such tags or insignia
as may be furnished by the City Clerk and required by any ordinance of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 15-23)



§ 110.67  DISPLAY WHEN EXPIRED OR DUPLICATED PROHIBITED.



   No person shall display any expired, suspended or revoked license, or
any license for which a duplicate has been issued.



(Prior Code, § 15-24)



§ 110.68  TRANSFER.



   No license shall be transferable.



(Prior Code, § 15-25)



§ 110.69  LICENSE FOR BED AND BREAKFAST INNS; REQUIRED; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate, lease, rent or occupy a
bed-and-breakfast inn, as that term is defined in the zoning code, unless
there is a current, valid license issued by the City Clerk in the name of the
owner for the specific bed-and-breakfast inn.  A license issued pursuant to
this section shall be issued for a bed-and-breakfast inn and shall at all
times be displayed by the owner in a conspicuous place within the
bed-and-breakfast inn.  The license shall only be issued upon compliance
with the requirements of the code, after inspection by the city and shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance.



      (2)   The inspections required by division (A) above shall be
conducted by the city annually prior to issuance or reissuance of the license
and shall determine the following:



         (a)   Compliance with the state’s Construction Code,
the Electrical Code, the Property Maintenance Code, the Mechanical Code and
the Fire Prevention Code as those codes may be applicable to dwellings and
lodging houses;



         (b)   Compliance with the requirements of the zoning
code;



         (c)   Compliance with such health and sanitation
standards as may from time to time be enacted by the city, Calhoun County and
or the state; and



         (d)   Compliance with all other requirements of the code.



      (3)   The owner of the bed and breakfast inn shall be
responsible for providing the inspector access to all parts and areas of the
property for the purpose of conducting the inspection.



(Prior Code, § 15-26)



   (B)   A license fee, set by resolution of the City Council, shall be
paid in full prior to issuance of the license.



(Prior Code, § 15-27)



   (C)   Whenever the city inspector finds that the owner of any
bed-and-breakfast inn has failed to comply with the requirements for issuance
of the license, the city inspector shall provide the owner with written
notice of the violation(s), which notice shall provide the owner with 30 days
to correct the violations.  If the violations are not corrected within the
30 days permitted by the notice of violation, the city inspector shall notify
the City Clerk of that fact and the City Clerk may revoke the license issued
pursuant to division (A) above.  No provision of this section shall limit or
in any way restrict the right of the city to exercise any remedies it may
have for other violations of the code.



(Prior Code, § 15-28)



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk denying
issuance or reissuance of a bed and breakfast inn license or revoking a bed
and breakfast inn license may appeal the denial of issuance or reissuance of
the license or the revocation of the license to the City Council.  Any such
appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten
days of the action taken by the City Clerk from which the appeal was taken. 
The appeal shall be heard before the City Council on a de novo basis.



(Prior Code, § 15-29)



(Ord. passed 8-17-1992)



CHAPTER 111:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   License required



   112.04   Application for license



   112.05   Fees required



   112.06   Exemptions



   112.07   Investigation and issuance; notice of denial



   112.08   Expiration of license



   112.09   Revocation of license; appeal



   112.10   Display of license



   112.11   Hours of business



   112.12   Sales from a vehicle



   112.13   Restrictions on operations of peddlers and solicitors



   112.14   Enforcement



   112.15   Relationship to other ordinances



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating peddlers and solicitors.



(Prior Code, § 20-1)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER AND SOLICITOR.  Any person who by profession, trade, or
occupation sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or services
by traveling about the city and, in the course of his or her business, may
enter upon residentially-owned property and is not subject to Marshall City
taxes on the subject business’ real or personal property.



   ROADSIDE STAND or TEMPORARY BUSINESS.  Any place at which goods,
wares, merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale, other than from
a permanent structure duly approved for such use.



   SOLICITOR or DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESPERSON.  Any person who sells or offers
for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or services by traveling about the
city and, in the course of his or her business, enters upon
residentially-owned property.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  Any person who temporarily offers for sale or
sells any goods, wares, merchandise or services from a permanent structure
duly approved for the use.



(Prior Code, § 20-2)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Peddlers and solicitors shall not operate within the city without first
obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 20-3)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Persons required to obtain a license shall apply for it at the office
of the City Clerk.  Each individual peddler or solicitor will apply for a
license and provide a valid driver’s license or State ID.  The content of
the application form shall be prescribed by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 20-4)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 07-05, passed
7-2-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-3-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Home solicitation sales, see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.111 et seq.; M.S.A. §§
19.416(201)et seq.



§ 112.05  FEES REQUIRED.



   A license fee, set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid in
full prior to issuance of the license.



(Prior Code, § 20-5)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983)



§ 112.06  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following persons and entities shall not be required to
obtain licenses as specified herein and shall not be required to pay the fees
prescribed herein: duly authorized solicitors on behalf of any religious
organization; entities which qualify or could qualify as tax-exempt
organizations by the United States Internal Revenue Service; governmental
entities. The City Clerk shall make the final determination regarding
exemptions.  Exempt persons or organizations shall be required to register
with the City Clerk for identification purposes when engaging in any activity
regulated by this chapter.



   (B)   Persons selling newspapers, commercial travelers or selling
agents calling upon commercial establishments in the usual course of
business, and any business operating under the auspices of a civic event
sanctioned by the city, shall not be required to obtain a license.



(Prior Code, § 20-6)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.07  INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE; NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a peddler’s or
solicitor’s business license, the City Clerk and the Chief of Police may
cause the investigation of the person’s or persons’ business
responsibility or moral character to be made as they deem necessary for the
protection of the public good.  If, as a result of the investigation, the
applicant’s character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory,
the City Clerk shall proceed to issue a license.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall keep a full record in his or her office
of all licenses issued and shall submit a copy of the record to the Chief of
Police.  Within three working days of receipt of an application, the City
Clerk shall either issue to the applicant the requested license or issue a
written notice of denial and the reason therefor.  The person whose license
has been denied shall have the right to file an appeal to the City Council
within seven days of the denial.



(Prior Code, § 20-7)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.08  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued under the provisions of the chapter shall expire
within ten, 30, 60 or 90 days of issuance. No peddler or solicitor may be
issued a license for more than 90 days in a 12-month period.



(Prior Code, § 20-8)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.09  REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.



   (A)   The licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at
any time by the City Clerk or the Chief of Police, or their duly authorized
representatives, for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in the application for license;



      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or
services;



      (3)   Any violation of a city ordinance, including the city
zoning code and the city sign code;



      (4)   Conviction of the applicant or other persons acting
under the authority of the applicant’s license for any felony or of a
misdemeanor conviction involving moral turpitude within five years; and/or



      (5)   Conducting the business permitted under this chapter in
an unlawful manner or in such a manner as, to constitute a breach of the
peace, nuisance or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.



   (B)   Within three working days of the revocation of a license, the
City Clerk shall send to the person whose license has been revoked, notice
setting forth specifically the grounds of the revocation.  The notice shall
be mailed to the person to whom the license was issued at the address shown
on the license application.



   (C)   The person whose license has been revoked shall have the right
to file an appeal to the City Council within seven days of the revocation.



(Prior Code, § 20-9)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.10  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Any peddler or solicitor licensed under the provisions of this chapter
shall have the license issued to him or her in his or her immediate
possession and shall display the same upon demand of any duly authorized
representative of the city.  Peddlers and solicitors shall produce their
license upon demand by any person.



(Prior Code, § 20-10)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.11  HOURS OF BUSINESS.



   No person shall engage in any door-to-door soliciting at any residence
within the city during the period from dusk until 9:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 20-11)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.12  SALES FROM A VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling about the city doing
business from any vehicle which is self-propelled, propelled by human power
or propelled by any other means to:



   (A)   Operate a vehicle when under the age of 18 years;



   (B)   Double park in any manner;



   (C)   Operate the vehicle backwards in making or attempting to make
a sale;



   (D)   Permit any person to hang on the vehicle;



   (E)   Refuse to remove the vehicle from any street, sidewalk or
public place in the city upon the request of a police officer when, in the
opinion of the police officer, the vehicle is causing traffic congestion;



   (F)   Cry his wares in a loud voice or use any noise-making device
other than a soft chime and the limit of audibility of his or her voice or
chime shall not be more than 200 feet from the source of the sound; or



   (G)   Make or attempt to make a sale from a side of a vehicle not
closest to the curb.



(Prior Code, § 20-13)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONS OF PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.



   (A)   The City Manager, City Clerk or Chief of Police may place such
reasonable restrictions upon the location, hours, provisions for parking,
ingress or egress or methods of operation of any solicitor, roadside stand or
temporary business licensed under this chapter, as deemed necessary to
protect the general public health, safety or welfare.  The restrictions may
be imposed, modified or withdrawn at the time of licensure or any point
thereafter.



   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish general
policies and guidelines, in addition to the provisions of this chapter,
governing the location, hours or methods of operation of solicitors, roadside
stands or temporary business in general, or any class thereof.  Any such
resolution shall not have the effect of invalidating any license already
issued.



(Prior Code, § 20-14)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.14  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Chief of Police and the City Clerk and their duly authorized
representatives shall have the authority to examine all places of business
and persons within the city, subject to the provisions of this chapter, to
determine if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating same.



(Prior Code, § 20-15)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



§ 112.15  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES.



   The terms of this chapter shall in no manner alter the interpretation
or requirements of any other chapter of the City Code, whether the person is
licensed or exempt under this ordinance shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the city’s Zoning, Sign and Building Codes.  The City Clerk
may require evidence of compliance with the codes prior to issuing a license.



(Prior Code, § 20-16)  (Ord. passed 3-21-1983; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed
1-3-2011)



CHAPTER 113:  COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Definition



   113.02   Franchise; required



   113.03   Factors to consider



   113.04   Severability



Basic Cable Service Regulation



   113.15   Definitions



   113.16   Purpose; interpretation



   113.17   City’s right to regulate rates; notification; filing;
additional information; burden of proof



   113.18   Proprietary information



   113.19   Review of rates; public notice



   113.20   Public hearing notice



   113.21   Tolling order



   113.22   Public hearing during the tolling period; public notice



   113.23   Staff of consultant report; written response



   113.24   Rate decisions and orders



   113.25   Refunds; notice



   113.26   Written decisions; public notice



   113.27   Rules and regulations



   113.28   Additional hearings



   113.29   Additional powers



   113.30   Failure to comply; remedies



Cross-reference:



   Telecommunications, see Chapter 117



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION.  The business of transmission,
distribution and sale of television signals by means of cable to persons
located inside the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-1)



§ 113.02  FRANCHISE; REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall install, maintain or operate a community
antenna television system in the city without first having obtained a
franchise from the city authorizing the establishment of the business, nor
shall any person furnish the service without having first obtained such a
franchise.



   (B)   No person shall use, occupy or traverse the city streets,
alleys, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, bridges or any other public place in the
city for the purpose of installing, operating or furnishing community antenna
television service to subscribers without first having obtained a franchise
as herein required.



(Prior Code, § 9-2)



Statutory reference:



   Consent of municipal authorities required for cable television, see
M.C.L.A. § 247.183; M.S.A. § 9.263



§ 113.03  FACTORS TO CONSIDER.



   The City Council shall exercise its discretion in granting or refusing
any application for a franchise under this chapter.  In determining whether
such a franchise shall be granted to an applicant, the City Council may
consider the following factors:



   (A)   The extent to which city streets, alleys, rights-of-way,
utility poles or the like may be utilized or encumbered by applicant and
others;



   (B)   The ability, including financial resources, of the applicant
to provide proper services to the public;



   (C)   The type and variety of service and programming proposed to be
furnished by the applicant;



   (D)   The terms and conditions upon which the applicant is willing
to operate such a system, including, but not limited to the degree of
regulation and control by, and the consideration to, the city; and



   (E)   The best interests of the city and its inhabitants.



(Prior Code, § 9-3)



§ 113.04  SEVERABILITY.



   The various parts, sections, and clauses of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.  If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or
clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby.



(Prior Code, § 9-28)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



BASIC CABLE SERVICE REGULATION



§ 113.15  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   (B)   These definitions shall be supplemented and interpreted in
accordance with the language and meaning of the Act and FCC rules and
amendment thereto.



      ACT or THE CABLE ACT OF 1992.  The Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460
(7.992), and all subsequent amendments thereto.



      ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT.  Converter boxes, remote control units,
connections for additional television receivers and other cable home wiring.



      BASIC CABLE SERVICE.  The provision of basic service tier
channels and associated equipment to subscribers and all service aspects of
the provision.



      BASIC SERVICE TIER.  All signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of the
station, regardless of how the signal is ultimately received by the cable
system) any public, educational and governmental programming required by the
city to be carried as part of the basic cable service offered to subscribers,
and any additional video programming signals added to the basic cable service
offered to subscribers by the cable operator.



      CABLE OPERATOR.  The entity or entities authorized by the city
to provide basic cable services within the city.



      C.F.R.  The Code of Federal Regulations.



      COST OF SERVICE SHOWING.  A request by the cable operator to
exceed benchmark rates established by the FCC as being reasonable, if the
cable operator makes the necessary cost showings.



      EXISTING RATES.  The rates in effect for the basic service tier
and associated equipment on the date which local notice is given to the cable
operator that the city is certified to regulate the basic service tier and
associated equipment rates pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.910.



      FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



      FCC RULES.  All rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time
pursuant to the Act.



      FINES.  Any financial penalty or monetary forfeiture imposed on
the cable operator by the city for the cable operator’s failure to comply
with a rate decision or refund order.



      INCREASE IN RATES.  An increase in rates or a decrease in
programming or customer services.



      INTERESTED PARTIES.  The city and any cable subscriber or
prospective cable subscriber in the city.



      PROSPECTIVE RATE REDUCTION.  An order by the city to implement a
reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary
to bring the rates in compliance with the standards of the Act and FCC rules.



      PRESCRIBED RATE.  A reasonable rate prescribed by the city for
the basic service tier or associated equipment upon determination of the city
that the rate proposed by the cable operator is unreasonable.



      REFUND.  An order by the city to return monies to current or
previous subscribers for the portion of the previously paid rates which were
determined to be in excess of the rates permitted by the Act or FCC rules for
the basic service tier and associated equipment or above the rates determined
to be reasonable after a cost of service showing.



      U.S.C.  The United States Code.



(Prior Code, § 9-11)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.16  PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The purpose and intent of the city by adoption of this
subchapter is to adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC rules
with respect to basic cable service regulation, and describe procedures to
provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested
parties in connection with basic cable service and associated equipment rate
regulation by the city.



   (B)   This subchapter shall be implemented and interpreted
consistent with the Act and FCC rules.



(Prior Code, § 9-12)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.17  CITY’S RIGHT TO REGULATE RATES; NOTIFICATION; FILING;
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION; BURDEN OF PROOF.



   (A)   The city shall have the authority to regulate basic service
tier and associated equipment rates and service standards as permitted and
authorized by the code, the Act and FCC rules.



   (B)   The city shall notify the cable operator in writing as soon as
the city becomes certified under the Act and adopts such regulations as are
required by the Act to regulate the basic service tier rates.



   (C)   Within 30 days of the cable operator receiving the notice as
specified in division (B) above, the cable operator shall submit to the City
Clerk a schedule of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated
equipment, or any proposed increase in rates as required by this subchapter,
the Act and the FCC rules.  The cable operator shall include, as part of its
submission, such information as is necessary to show that its existing rates
or any proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC rules. 
If the cable operator desires to make a cost of service showing, the showing
must be submitted with its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment.  The information submitted shall include, but not be
limited to detailed information regarding the cable operator’s rate base,
cost of capital, depreciation and operating expenses.  The cable operator
shall file ten copies of all information and documents registered by this
section with the City Clerk.  If the cable operator claims that any of the
information filed is proprietary, the cable operator shall also file, in
addition, at least five copies of the same schedule of proposed rates which
contains no proprietary information.  The copies shall be made available for
public inspection.  Any filing by the cable operator pursuant to this
section shall be deemed to have been made when all information required by
this section has been received by the City Clerk.



   (D)   In addition to information and data required by rules and
regulations of the city and the FCC pursuant to this section, a cable
operator shall provide all information requested by the City Manager or his
or her designee in connection with the city’s review and regulation of
existing rates for the basic service tier and associate equipment or a
proposed increase in rates.  The City Manager may establish deadlines for
submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply
with the deadlines.



   (E)   A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule
of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or any
proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC rules including,
without limitation, 47 U.S.C. §§ 543, 76.922 and 76.923.



   (F)   In reviewing any existing rates for basic service tier and
associated equipment or any proposed increases in rates, the city shall
follow and comply with regulations established by the FCC pursuant to the Act.



(Prior Code, § 9-13)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.18  PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.



   (A)   The city may require the production of proprietary information
from the cable operator to make a rate determination.  In such cases the
city shall comply with the procedures for the handling and protection of this
information as set forth in this section, the Act and FCC rules, when a
written request to protect the confidentiality of the information is received
from the cable operator.



   (B)   (1)   At the time the information which is claimed to be
proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that
specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and
not made routinely available for public inspection.



      (2)   Except where the records are not the property of the
city or the disclosure of those records is prohibited by law, the city will
review requests from members of the public for permission to inspect
particular records withheld from inspection under the provisions of this
section, and will weigh the policy considerations favoring non-disclosure
against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in the light of the facts
of the particular case.



      (3)   The city will promptly notify the requesting party and
the cable operator, in writing, of its determination of the proprietary
nature of the material and how the city has disposed of the request.  The
city may grant, deny, or condition a request.  The requesting party or the
cable operator may seek review of the decision of the city as provided for by
state law.  Disclosure of the information claimed to be confidential will be
delayed for a period of ten days from the date of the city’s written
decision so as to allow the cable operator an opportunity to seek review as
provided for by this section.



   (C)   This section shall be interpreted consistently with the rules
of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality, including, without
limitation 47 C.F.R. § 0.459.  Any dispute as to the interpretation of this
section shall be determined, if necessary, by reference to the 47 C.F.R. §
0.459.



(Prior Code, § 9-14)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.19  REVIEW OF RATES; PUBLIC NOTICE.



   Upon the filing of the required copies of the schedule of existing
rates for the basic service tier or the proposed increase in rates as
required by § 113.17 above, the City Clerk shall publish a public notice in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that:



   (A)   The filing has been received by the City Clerk and, except
those parts which may be withheld as proprietary, it is available for public
inspection and copying; and



   (B)   Copies of the existing rate schedule or the proposed increase
in rates and related information, except those parts which may be withheld as
proprietary, are available for inspection or copying at the City Clerk’s
office.



   (C)   Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments
regarding the filing, to the City Clerk not later than seven days after the
public notice is published.



(Prior Code, § 9-15)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.20  PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE.



   The City Council, or an administrative body or hearing officer
designated by the City Council, shall hold a public hearing to consider the
schedule of existing rates or any proposed increases in rates.  The City
Clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time and place of
the public hearing.  Notice shall be mailed by first class mail, at least
three days before the date of the public hearing.  In addition, if a written
staff or consultant report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase
is prepared for the City Council (or administrative body or hearings officer)
the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first class mail to the
cable operator at least three days before the date of the public hearing.



(Prior Code, § 9-16)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.21  TOLLING ORDER.



   After the cable operator has filed its schedule of existing rates for
the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in
rates and any cost of service showing, the proposed increase in rates shall
become effective 30 days after



the date of the filing of the proposed increase in rates by the cable
operator as provided for in § 113.17, unless the City Council or the City
Manager shall deny the proposed increase in rates pursuant to § 113.24 or
toll the proposed increase in rates, as provided for in 47 C.F.R. § 76-933,
by issuing a brief written tolling order within 30 days of the rate
submission by the cable operator.  The City Council or the City Manager, by
issuance of a written tolling order, may toll the 30-day deadline for an
additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings, and for
an additional 150 days in cases involving a cost of service showing.  The
tolling shall begin immediately upon the expiration of the 30-day deadline.



(Prior Code, § 9-17)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993; Am. Ord. 94-7, passed
10-3-1994)



§ 113.22  PUBLIC HEARING DURING THE TOLLING PERIOD; PUBLIC NOTICE.



   (A)   If a written tolling order has been issued pursuant to §
113.21 and 47 C.F.R. § 76.933, the cable operator shall submit to the city
any and all additional information required or requested pursuant to §
113.17.  The City Council (or an administrative body or hearing officer
designated by the City Council), after issuance of a written tolling order,
shall hold the public hearing required by § 113.20 within the additional
90-day or 150-day period established by § 113.21.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall publish a public notice of the public
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall
state:



      (1)   The date, time and place at which the hearing shall be
held; and



      (2)   Interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by
letter at such a hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing
rates or the proposed increase in rates.



   (C)   The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days
before the public hearing.  In addition, the City Clerk shall mail by first
class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15
days before the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 9-18)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.23  STAFF OF CONSULTANT REPORT; WRITTEN RESPONSE.



   Following the public hearing identified in § 113.22, the City Manager
shall cause a report to be prepared for the City Council which shall (based
on the filing of the cable operator, comments or objections of interested
parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response,
staff of consultant’s review, information obtained at the public hearing
and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision
of the City Council required by § 113.24.  Except when issuing an order
allowing the existing rates or proposed increase in rates to become effective
subject to a refund order, the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the report to
the cable operator by first class mail not less than 20 days before the City
Council acts pursuant to § 113.24.  The cable operator may file a written
response to the report with the City Clerk.  If at least ten copies of the
response are filed by the cable operator with the City Clerk within ten days
after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the City Clerk shall
forward it to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-19)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993; Am. Ord. 94-4, passed
7-5-1994)



§ 113.24  RATE DECISIONS AND ORDERS.



   (A)   The City Council shall issue a written order, by resolution or
otherwise, before the expiration of the tolling period, which either:



      (1)   Approves the existing rates for the basic cable service
and associated equipment or a proposed increase in rates;



      (2)   Denies the existing rates or proposed increase in rates;



      (3)   Orders a prospective rate reduction;



      (4)   Establishes a prescribed reasonable rate;



      (5)   Allows the existing rates or proposed increase in rates
to become effective subject to a refund; or



      (6)   Orders any combination of the above remedies, or other
appropriate relief in accordance with FCC rules.



      (7)   If before the expiration of the tolling period, the City
Council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase in
rates to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable
operator to keep an accurate accounting of all amounts received by reason of
the rates in issue and on whose behalf the amounts were paid, pursuant to 47
C.F.R. § 76.933.



(Prior Code, § 9-20)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.25  REFUNDS; NOTICE.



   The City Council may order a refund to subscribers as permitted in 47
C.F.R. § 76.942.  Before the City Council orders any refund to subscribers,
the City Clerk shall give at least seven days written notice to the cable
operator by first-class mail of the date, time and place at which the City
Council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an
opportunity for the cable operator to comment.  The cable operator may
appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of
submitting comments to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-21)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.26  WRITTEN DECISIONS; PUBLIC NOTICE.



   (A)   Any order of the City Council pursuant to §§ 113.24 and
113.25 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the City
Council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption.  The
Clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city which shall:



      (1)   Summarize the written decision; and



      (2)   State that copies of the text of the written decision
are available for inspection or copying at the City Clerk’s office.



   (B)   In addition, the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the text of
the written decision to the cable operator by first-class mail.



(Prior Code, § 9-22)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.27  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and
regulations, prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be
included as part of a cable operator’s filing of any schedule of existing
rates or proposed increase in rates, establish procedures for basic service
tier rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct
of hearings), or adopt other rules and regulations consistent with the Act
and the FCC rules.



(Prior Code, § 9-23)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.28  ADDITIONAL HEARINGS.



   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the City Council may
hold additional public hearings upon the reasonable notice as the City
Council, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe.



(Prior Code, § 9-25)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.29  ADDITIONAL POWERS.



   (A)   The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the
FCC rules, the cable operator’s franchise and all other applicable laws.



   (B)   The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC rules and
this subchapter shall be in addition to other powers conferred upon the city
by law or otherwise.



   (C)   The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the
FCC rules to protect the public interest in connection with the regulation of
basic cable service.



(Prior Code, § 9-26)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



§ 113.30  FAILURE TO COMPLY; REMEDIES.



   The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against
the cable operator including, without limitation, the remedies provided under
the cable operator’s franchise agreement with the city and/or the issuance
of fines as permitted by the Act, for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC
rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this subchapter,
any requirements of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated
hereunder.  Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the
FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this
subchapter, any requirements of this subchapter, or any rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or
denial of renewal of a cable operator’s franchise agreement and assertion
of any, remedies for default thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 9-27)  (Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993)



CHAPTER 114:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



   114.01   Pay-offs prohibited



   114.02   License required



   114.03   Application; approval



   114.04   Fees



   114.05   Expiration; renewal



   114.06   Transfer



   114.07   Revocation



§ 114.01  PAY-OFFS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall offer or give any prize, award, merchandise,
except free play, or anything of value, to any player, or to any operator of
a coin-operated amusement device, or offer anything whatsoever tending to
induce persons to make use thereof.



   (B)   No person shall operate any coin-operated amusement device, or
any slot machine, or other type of machine, containing any automatic, or
semi-automatic pay-off device, or which is so constructed that it may be
converted into an automatic pay-off device, for the return or discharge of
coins, tokens, slugs, merchandise or checks to the operators thereof.



(Prior Code, § 5-11)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate, or place for operation, or keep on his or her
premises for operation any coin-operated amusement device or music machine
unless the owner, lessee, bailee or person in possession thereof, has
obtained a license to operate the same and the license tag is attached to the
machine.



(Prior Code, § 5-21)



§ 114.03  APPLICATION; APPROVAL.



   (A)   Application shall be made for each amusement device or music
machine to be licensed, and shall contain a statement describing the machine,
the owner thereof, the lessee or bailee thereof, and the premises upon which
it is to be placed.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall present the application to the City
Council at its next regular meeting, and the City Council may approve or
reject the application.



   (C)   The application shall also be approved by the Chief of Police.



   (D)   If the application is approved, the license shall be attached
to the device so licensed in a conspicuous place thereon where it shall at
all times be open to inspection.



(Prior Code, § 5-22)



§ 114.04  FEES.



   The license fee for amusement devices and music machines shall be as
presently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution.



(Prior Code, § 5-23)



§ 114.05  EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.



   All licenses issued under this chapter expire on April 30 following
their issuance.  License may be renewed in the manner provided for the
issuance of the original license.



(Prior Code, § 5-24)



§ 114.06  TRANSFER.



   Licenses issued under this division are not transferable, except that
if a licensed machine is removed from the city during the term of the
license, the license, upon approval by the Chief of Police, may be
transferred to another machine, provided an application for the transfer,
setting forth all the facts required in the application for the original
license, is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 5-25)



§ 114.07  REVOCATION.



   Licenses issued under this chapter are subject to revocation by the
City Council if it shall be satisfied, after hearing, that the device is
kept, operated or maintained in a method detrimental to the public
interests.  The license shall be forthwith revoked if any person owns or
operates any such device in violation of this chapter or the laws of the
state.



(Prior Code, § 5-26)



CHAPTER 115:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   115.01   Applicability and exemptions



   115.02   Application for approval of new license or transfer of
location; grounds for denial



   115.03   Available licenses; selection among qualified applicants



   115.04   Term of license approval; conditional approval



   115.05   Objections to license renewal; requests for revocation



§ 115.01  APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all applications for
approval or transfer of licenses to sell alcoholic liquor for on-premises
consumption and all renewals thereof, except for those licenses issued
pursuant to the “special license” provisions of the Michigan Liquor
Control Act.



(Prior Code, § 4.5-1)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1993)



§ 115.02  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF NEW LICENSE OR TRANSFER OF LOCATION;
GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.



   (A)   Applications for approval of a license to sell alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises or any application for approval of a
transfer of the license to a new licensee or a new location shall be made to
the City Clerk in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a
duly authorized agent thereof if a copartnership or corporation, or other
legal entity authorized by statute, and shall contain the following
statements and information:



      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant, or if the
applicant is a legal entity recognized by the laws of the state, such as, but
not limited to a copartnership, limited partnership or corporation, the name,
age and address of all persons who own at least a 5% interest in the entity
(investors), as well as its officers and directors;



      (2)   The nature of business of the applicant and, in the case
of a legal entity recognized by the laws of the state, a copy of the form
filed with the state which authorizes the entity and which is marked
“filed” by the state;



      (3)   The length of time the applicant has been in the
business for which it seeks the license;



      (4)   The location and description of the premises which is to
be operated under the license;



      (5)   If the business of the applicant is to be operated or
conducted by a local manager or agent; the name and address of the manager or
agent;



      (6)   A statement as to whether the applicant has, prior to
this application, made application for a license to sell alcoholic liquor and
the date, place and disposition of the application or applications;



      (7)   A statement that neither the applicant nor, if
applicable, any investor has ever been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive approval for a license by reason of any matter or
thing contained in this chapter or the laws of the state;



      (8)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of
the ordinances of the city or laws of the state or of the United States in
the conduct of its business;



      (9)   A statement that, should any of the information provided
in the application or any attachment thereto change during the term of this
license or any renewal thereof, the applicant will notify the City Clerk, in
writing, within 30 days of the change; and



      (10)   Any application for approval of a new license or for
approval of the transfer of any currently valid or renewal license to a new
location shall be accompanied by an 8.5-inch by 11-inch building and grounds
layout diagram showing the entire structure, premises and grounds and, in
particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized.  The
plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse
disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and
noise control.



   (B)   The City Council may establish an application fee in such
amount as they deem appropriate from time to time to defray the reasonable
costs of processing any application required by this chapter.



   (C)   No such license shall be approved for any person or entity
when:



      (1)   The City Council determines, by a majority vote, that
the proposed location is unsuitable for on-premises consumption of alcoholic
liquor considering:



         (a)   The proximity of other premises licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption;



         (b)   The lack of any other facilities or uses on the
premises to be licensed which are compatible with a license for on-premises
consumption of alcoholic liquor (such as restaurant, hotel);



         (c)   The distance from public or private schools for
minors;



         (d)   The proximity of an inconsistent zoning
classification or land use;



         (e)   Traffic safety;



         (f)   The accessibility to the site from abutting roads;



         (g)   The capability of abutting roads to accommodate
the commercial activity; and



         (h)   Such other relevant factors as the City Council
may deem appropriate.



      (2)   The City Council determines by a majority vote that the
premises does not or will not, within six months of the approval of a license
by the City Council or prior to the commencement of business, whichever
occurs first, have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal
facilities, screening, noise or nuisance control.  Provided, however, that
upon timely request and for good cause shown, the City Council may extend any
deadline established by this section.



      (3)   The premises does not comply with the applicable
building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning
regulations or applicable public health regulations; provided, however, the
City Council may approve an application subject to compliance with the
applicable codes and regulations within 60 days.



      (4)   The applicant does not own the premises for which the
license approval is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full
period for which the license is to be issued.



      (5)   The applicant or any investor is a law enforcing public
official or any member of the City Council.



      (6)   The applicant or any investor is delinquent in the
payment of any taxes, fees or other debts or charges owed to or collected by
the city.



      (7)   The applicant or any investor has had a liquor license
revoked within the last two years or has held an ownership interest or
management/officer/director position with any entity whose license has been
revoked within the past two years.



      (8)   The manager of the applicant’s business fails to meet
any of the standards established by this chapter.



      (9)   The applicant or any investor has been convicted of a
violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture or sale of
alcoholic liquor.



      (10)   The City Council determines that, based on other
relevant factors, the license should not be issued.



(Prior Code, § 4.5-2)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1993)



§ 115.03  AVAILABLE LICENSES; SELECTION AMONG QUALIFIED APPLICANTS.



   When a license shall be available for issuance to a new applicant,
either by lapse of a current license or by the authorization and allocation
of additional licenses to the city, and there exist more qualified applicants
for the license or licenses than the number of new licenses available for
issuance, the City Council shall choose the most qualified applicant(s) for
approval based upon the following criteria:



   (A)   The location of the proposed new business and its desirability
in light of its location, the preferability of locations in the central
business district as opposed to outlying locations, the surrounding land uses
and its proximity to other premises licensed for on-premises consumption;



   (B)   The experience of the applicant;



   (C)   The other uses proposed to be included on the premises or in
the development (such as restaurant, motel);



   (D)   The cost and size of the overall project and number of new
jobs to be created by the new business;



   (E)   The relative suitability of the design and size of the new
business to the property on which it is proposed to be located, as evidenced
by any building and grounds layout diagram required to be submitted with the
application;



   (F)   The overall development or redevelopment of the city; and



   (G)   Such other relevant factors as the City Council may deem
appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 4.5-3)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1993)



§ 115.04  TERM OF LICENSE APPROVAL; CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.



   (A)   Approval of a license shall be for a period of one year with
renewal subject to the provisions of § 115.05.



   (B)   Approval of a license shall be upon the condition that any
necessary remodeling or new construction for the use of the license required
by the City Council or indicated on the building and grounds layout diagram
submitted pursuant to § 115.02 above shall be completed within six months of
the approval of the license by the City Council, or prior to the commencement
of business, whichever occurs first.



   (C)   Provided, however, that upon timely request for good cause
shown the City Council may extend the remodeling or new construction deadline
established by this section.  Approval of a license shall also be upon the
condition that any work on the premises necessary to comply with the
applicable codes and regulations in § 115.02 be completed within 60 days of
City Council approval of the license.



(Prior Code, § 4.5-4)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1993)



§ 115.05  OBJECTIONS TO LICENSE RENEWAL; REQUESTS FOR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Council may recommend non-renewal or revocation of a
license to the Liquor Control Commission upon a determination by the City
Council that, based upon evidence presented at a hearing, any of the
following exist:



      (1)   Violation of any of the grounds for denial set forth in
§ 115.02;



      (2)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises;



      (3)   Failure to complete necessary remodeling and/or new
construction as required by § 115.04 or to complete, within six months of
the approval of the license by the City Council (or any extension thereof),
or prior to the commencement of business, whichever occurs first, any
construction contemplated in the building and grounds layout diagram
submitted pursuant to § 115.02;



      (4)   Failure to complete any work on the premises necessary
to comply with the applicable codes and regulations in § 115.02 above within
60 days of City Council approval of the license;



      (5)   Failure to comply with the requirements of the Michigan
Liquor Control Act or the Administrative Rules of the Liquor Control
Commission;



      (6)   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter;



      (7)   Violation of any law or ordinance in the conduct of its
business;



      (8)   Failure to comply with promises or representations made
by the applicant to the City Council or any conditions imposed upon the
applicant as a basis for the approval; and



      (9)   Failure to pay any taxes, fees or other debts or charges
owed to or collected by the city.



   (B)   Before filing an objection to renewal or request for
revocation of a license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the City
Council shall serve the license holder, either personally or by first class
mail, with a notice of hearing, which notice shall contain the following:



      (1)   Notice of the proposed action;



      (2)   Reasons for the proposed action;



      (3)   Date, time and place of hearing; and



      (4)   A statement that the licensee may present evidence and
testimony, confront adverse witnesses and be represented by counsel.



   (C)   The City Council may delegate to a hearing officer the
function of holding the hearing.  The hearing officer shall thereafter
submit his or her findings and recommendations to the Council.  The licensee
may, at his or her expense, employ a reporter to transcribe the testimony
given at the hearing and make a transcript of the testimony.  Following the
hearing, the City Council shall submit to the license holder and the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission a written statement of its findings and
determination.



(Prior Code, § 4.5-5)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1993)



CHAPTER 116:  ADVERTISING



Section



General Provisions



   116.01   Unlawful posting of advertising



   116.02   Destruction of lawful advertising prohibited



   116.03   Sound amplifiers



Distribution of Handbills



   116.15   Scope



   116.16   Definitions



   116.17   Exemptions



   116.18   Restricted in public places



   116.19   Placing in vehicles prohibited



   116.20   Distribution on uninhabited or vacant private premises



   116.21   Prohibited where posted



   116.22   Distribution on inhabited private premises



   116.23   Ringing door bells; walking on laws or gardens



   116.24   Hours of distribution



Licenses



   116.35   Required



   116.36   Application



   116.37   Fees



   116.38   No refund of fee



   116.39   Registration



   116.40   Transfer



   116.41   Revocation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.01  UNLAWFUL POSTING OF ADVERTISING.



   (A)   Except for legal or official notices, no person shall paint,
print, post or in any way affix any picture, bill, banner or advertising
matter of any kind upon any post, hydrant, curb, sidewalk, lamp post, tree or
public improvement in any public ground or street, or upon any bridge, public
building or structure belonging to the city without the express consent of
the City Council.



   (B)   No person shall paint, post or in any way affix any pictures,
bills, signs or advertising matter upon any post, fence, billboard or
signboard, or upon any building or structure without the consent of the owner
or the person in control of the building, lot or object.



   (C)   No person shall post or affix any bill or advertising
containing pictures, illustrations or printed matter of an obscene or immoral
character.



   (D)   No bill poster shall scatter, daub or leave any paste, glue or
other like substances, used for affixing bills, upon any public sidewalk or
pavement or scatter or throw any old bills or waste materials removed from
billboards on any public street or alley, private grounds or in the rear of
any billboards or signboards.



(Prior Code, § 3-1)



Statutory reference:



Prohibited Signs, see M.C.L.A. § 252.318



§ 116.02  DESTRUCTION OF LAWFUL ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall tear off, tear down, burn, disfigure, mutilate or in
any way destroy, deface, or damage any billboard, signboard or any
advertising matter affixed thereto.



(Prior Code, § 3-2)



Statutory reference:



   False advertising, see M.C.L.A. § 750.33; M.S.A. § 28.222



   Highway Advertising Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 252.301et seq.; M.S.A. §§
9.391(101)et seq.



§ 116.03  SOUND AMPLIFIERS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of advertising by means
of a sound amplifier without a license.



   (B)   Application for a license to use a sound amplifier shall state
what is to be advertised and how it is to be done and the time for which the
license is sought.



   (C)   The fee for the license shall be as presently established or
as hereafter adopted by resolution.



(Prior Code, § 3-3)



DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS



§ 116.15  SCOPE.



   This subchapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any
provision of this code or city ordinance, either prohibiting, regulating or
licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants or any person
using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise or
for commercial sales not covered herein.



(Prior Code, § 3-16)



§ 116.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature:



      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product,
commodity or thing;



      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales;



      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the
terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a
collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to
the meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when
one of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
dissemination which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency,
good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided that, nothing
contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or
taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of
any kind, without a license, where the license is or may be required by any
law of this state, or under any provision of this code or ordinance of the
city; or



      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than
advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person engaging or engaged in the business
for hire or gain of distributing commercial or non-commercial handbills,
other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person
receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of the
handbill.



   NEWSPAPER.  Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and
in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and
sold to the public.



   NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS.  Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of
any matter or literature not included in the definition of a commercial
handbill or newspaper.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other
structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys
or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas,
grounds and buildings.



(Prior Code, § 3-17)



§ 116.17  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, nor to
handbills primarily or solely pertaining to religious, social or political
activities.



(Prior Code, § 3-18)



§ 116.18  RESTRICTED IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter,
cast, hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public
place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
non-commercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept
the non- commercial handbill.



(Prior Code, § 3-19)



§ 116.19  PLACING IN VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon
any automobile or other vehicle.  The provisions of this section shall not
be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any
non-commercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or
other vehicle who is willing to accept the same.



(Prior Code, § 3-20)



§ 116.20  DISTRIBUTION ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PRIVATE PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly distribute, deposit,
place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non- commercial handbill in
or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant.



(Prior Code, § 3-21)



§ 116.21  PROHIBITED WHERE POSTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill upon any
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed
on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign
bearing the words:  “No Handbills,” “No Advertisement” or any
similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do
not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left upon the premises.



(Prior Code, § 3-22)



§ 116.22  DISTRIBUTION ON INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.



   No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or any other
person, shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which
are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or any other person then present in or upon the
private premises; provided, however, that, in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, the aforesaid
licensed or other person, unless requested by an adult occupant of such
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon the
inhabited private premises, if the handbill is so placed or deposited as to
secure or prevent the handbill from being blown or drifted about the premises
or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by
federal postal laws or regulations.



(Prior Code, § 3-23)



§ 116.23  RINGING DOOR BELLS; WALKING ON LAWNS OR GARDENS.



   While distributing, no handbill distributor shall ring door bells or
walk across lawns or gardens.



(Prior Code, § 3-24)



§ 116.24  HOURS OF DISTRIBUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place,
throw or scatter any handbill before the hour of 8:00 a.m. and after the hour
of 6:00 p.m. or at any time on Sundays and the following holidays:  New
Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and
Christmas.



(Prior Code, § 3-25)



LICENSES



§ 116.35  REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as a handbill distributor
for hire, or for any person to distribute commercial or non-commercial
handbills, without first obtaining a license to do so; provided that, nothing
contained herein shall apply to any person advertising his or her business or
activity upon his or her own premises, if the business or activity is
regularly established at a definite location in the city, and also if a
license has been obtained therefor, if the license be required under the
terms of any applicable law or ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 3-30)



§ 116.36  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring to engage, as principal, in the business of
distributing commercial or non-commercial handbills for hire, shall make
application to and receive from the City Clerk a license in the manner and
for the period prescribed by the terms of this section.  The applicant shall
make written application to the City Clerk upon a form or forms provided for
such purpose by the City Clerk.  The forms shall contain, among other things
that may be required, the name, the business address, telephone number and a
brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the
applicant, the approximate number of agents and employees so to be engaged,
together with a request for a license for the period for which the applicant
seeks to engage in the business.



(Prior Code, § 3-31)



§ 116.37  FEES.



   At the time of making application for a license required by the
provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee
as determined by the City Council by ordinance or resolution from time to
time and on file in the office of the City Clerk; provided, however, that,
persons acting for licensees, as agents or employees, in the distribution of
handbills, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a fee, but each
such person shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-32)



§ 116.38  NO REFUND OF FEE.



   If a license issued under this chapter shall be surrendered by the
licensee therein named, or shall be revoked for cause, neither the licensee
named in the license, nor any other person, shall be entitled to any refund
or any part of the required fee.



(Prior Code, § 3-33)



§ 116.39  REGISTRATION.



   Each day that distribution of handbills is to be made within the city
under a license, the licensee or his or her agent shall first register with
the Police Department and shall provide the Department with the following
information:  the name under which the license is issued; the license
number; the agent’s name; the address and the telephone number at which the
licensee or his or her agent or the person in charge of the distribution may
be reached during the period of distribution; the number of handbill
distributors at work in the city and their respective names and addresses;
the length of time required to complete the distribution, a sample copy of
the item being distributed, and such other information as may be required by
the Police Department from time to time to properly enforce this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-34)



§ 116.40  TRANSFER.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.



(Prior Code, § 3-35)



§ 116.41  REVOCATION.



   Without excluding other just grounds for revocation of a license under
this chapter, the City Council may revoke any license obtained under an
application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the
applicant with intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent
representations, or for violation of this chapter, or any other grounds
specified by law.



(Prior Code, § 3-36)



CHAPTER 117:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   117.01   Purpose



   117.02   Conflict



   117.03   Definitions



   117.04   Reservation of police powers



   117.05   Authorized city officials



   117.06   Municipal civil infraction



   117.07   Severability



Conditions; Regulations



   117.15   Permits; issuance



   117.16   Conduit or utility poles



   117.17   Route maps



   117.18   Repair of damage



   117.19   Cable television operators



   117.20   Existing rights



   117.21   Compliance



Fees; Funds



   117.35   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee



   117.36   Modifications of existing fees



   117.37   Savings clause



   117.38   Use of funds



   117.39   Annual report



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 117.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of- Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002) (“Act”) and other applicable law,
and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by
modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.02  CONFLICT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to
conflict with the Act or other applicable law.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT.  The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002), as amended from time to
time.



      CITY.  The City of Marshall.



      CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Marshall or its
designee.  This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the City Council.



      CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager or his or her designee.



      PERMIT.  A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and
this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way
in the city for its telecommunications facilities.



   (B)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation
the following:



      AUTHORITY.  The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to § 3 of the Act.



      M.P.S.C.  The Michigan Public Service Commission in the
Department of Consumer and Industry Services and shall have the same meaning
as the term “Commission” in the Act.



      PERSON.  An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area on, below or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway.  PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
does not include a federal, state or private right-of-way.



      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES.  The equipment or
personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches,
conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive,
transmit, carry, amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals. 
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment, shelters or houses and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally
licensed commercial mobile service, as defined in § 332(d) as part I of
Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47
U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
C.F.R. § 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device.



      TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES.



         (a)   Those terms as defined in § 102 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102. 
TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not include a person or an affiliate of that
person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as
defined in § 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934, chapter
652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as commercial mobile
radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3, or service provided by any wireless,
two-way communication device.



         (b)   For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only,
a PROVIDER also includes all of the following:



            1.   A cable television operator that provides a
telecommunications service.



            2.   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a
person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public
right-of-way.



            3.   A person providing broadband internet
transport access service.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.04  RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.



   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the
city’s right to review and approve a telecommunication provider’s access
to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city’s authority
to ensure and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.05  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the
Municipal Chapter Violation Bureau) for violations under this chapter as
provided by the City Code.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.06  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall be subject to a fine as from time to time established by Resolution of
the City Council.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of
this chapter or a permit.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.07  SEVERABILITY.



   The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable.  If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



CONDITIONS; REGULATIONS



§ 117.15  PERMITS; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights- of-way in
the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a
permit pursuant to this chapter.



      (2)   Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the M.P.S.C. in accordance with § 6(1) of
the Act.  A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager and one copy
with the City Attorney.  Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall make seven
copies of the application and distribute a copy to each member of the City
Council.  Applications shall be complete and include all information
required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the
location of the provider’s existing and proposed facilities in accordance
with § 6(5) of the Act.



      (3)   If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion
of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade
secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the
Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications
provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application
shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the
amount of $500.



      (5)   The City Manager may request an applicant to submit such
additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably necessary or
relevant.  The applicant comply with all such requests in compliance with
reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the City
Manager.  If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of
additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall
notify the M.P.S.C. as provided in § 6(2) of the Act.



      (6)   Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or
permits previously issued by the city under § 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2251,
and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications
providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements
of this chapter.



      (7)   Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from
November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications
provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of
such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under
§ 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.  Pursuant to § 5(3) of
the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this
subsection is not required to pay the $500 application fee required under
division (A)(3) above.  A provider under this division shall be given up to
an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the
Authority, as provided in § 5(4) of the Act.



   (B)   (1)   The authority to approve or deny an application for a
permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager.  Pursuant to § 15(3) of the
Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit
within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an
application for a permit under division (A) above for access to a public
right-of- way within the city.  Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act, the City
Manager shall notify the M.P.S.C. when the City Manager has granted or denied
a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application
was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied.  The City
Manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.



      (2)   If an application for permit is approved, the City
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the M.P.S.C., with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1),
6(2) and 15 of the Act.



      (3)   Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way.



      (4)   Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation
on division (B)(3) above, the City Manager may require that a bond be posted
by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit.  If a bond
is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after
the telecommunications provider’s access and use.



   (C)   (1)   A telecommunications provider shall not commence
construction upon, over, across or under the public rights- of-way in the
city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as shall
from time to time be required by the city for construction within the public
rights-of-way.



      (2)   No fee shall be charged for such a construction or
engineering permit.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.16  CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.



   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.17  ROUTE MAPS.



   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the M.P.S.C. and to the
city.  The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the
Commission determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.18  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair
all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over,
below or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public
right-of-way to its preexisting condition.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.19  CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.



   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy
an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues
from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.20  EXISTING RIGHTS.



   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that
a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by
the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications
provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.21  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in
adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act,
and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve
that purpose.



   (B)   The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
the Act, including, but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of
Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 215.231,
215.246, as provided in § 117.15(A);



      (2)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy
the permit requirements of this chapter, in accordance with § 117.15(A)(6);



      (3)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to
submit an application for a permit, aid excusing such providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with § 117.15(A)(7);



      (4)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within
45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for
a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in
accordance with § 117.15(B);



      (5)   Notifying the M.P.S.C. when the city has granted or
denied a permit, in accordance with § 117.15(B)(1);



      (6)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with § 117.15(B)(1);



      (7)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by M.P.S.C., with
or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in §
117.15(B)(2);



      (8)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a
permit to the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with § 117.15(B)(3);



      (9)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider
which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication
provider’s access and use, in accordance with § 117.15(B)(4);



      (10)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any
additional fees for construction permits, in accordance with § 117.15(C);



      (11)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by
the city’s right-of-way fees with a copy of this ordinance, in accordance
with § 117.36;



      (12)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in
accordance with § 117.39; and



      (13)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for
a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 117.19.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



FEES; FUNDS



§ 117.35  ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.



   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set
forth in § 117.15(A), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the city’s public right-of-way shall pay an annual
maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.36  MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.



   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, the city
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act,
which shall be paid to the Authority.  In compliance with the requirements
of § 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the
fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way
within the city’s boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees
required under § 8 of the Act.  The city shall provide each
telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter,
in compliance with the requirement of § 13(4) of the Act.  To the extent
any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts
permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act,
the imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city’s policy and
intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be
promptly refunded as having been charged in error.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.37  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act, if § 8 of the Act is found to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 117.36 shall
be void from the date the modification was made.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.38  USE OF FUNDS.



   Pursuant to § 9(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from
the Authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related
purposes.  In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the
city from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or
the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Public Act 51 of 1951.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



§ 117.39  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual
report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the Authority.



(Ord. 02-07, passed 10-7-2002)



CHAPTER 118:  ADULT- AND SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Authorization



   118.03   Uses specified



   118.04   Site location principles



   118.05   Site development requirements



   118.06   Use regulations



   118.07   Conditions and limitations



   118.08   Time limits for review



   118.09   Revocations



   118.10   Reconstruction of damaged regulated uses



   118.11   Limit on reapplication



   118.12   Enforcement



   118.13   Injunction



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ADULT-ONLY USES or SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.  Any business
which primarily features sexually stimulating material and/or performances,
including the following.



         (a)   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment having more
than 20% of its stock in trade books, magazines and other periodicals and/or
photographs, drawings, slides, films, video tapes, recording tapes,
paraphernalia and novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material
which segment or section exceeds 10% of the useable floor area of the
establishment.



         (b)   ADULT CABARET.



            1.   GROUP A CABARET.  An establishment which
features nude or seminude entertainers, topless dancers, go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, nude or semi-nude
waitresses or waiters or similar entertainers or an establishment which
features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” for
observation by patrons therein.



            2.   GROUP B CABARET.  An establishment licensed
by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, which offers beer or intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the premises and features nude or semi-nude
entertainers, topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male
or female impersonators, nude or semi-nude waitresses or waiters, or similar
entertainers, or which features live entertainment distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas,” for observation by patrons therein.



         (c)   ADULT MEDIA.  Magazines, books, videotapes,
movies, slides, cd-roms or other devices used to record computer images or
other media that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”



         (d)   ADULT MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where models who
display “specified anatomical areas,” (as defined herein) are present to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by persons who pay some form of compensation or gratuity.  This
definition shall not apply to any accredited art school or similar
educational institution.



         (e)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE or MINIATURE MOTION
PICTURE THEATER.  Any place where motion picture machines, projectors or
other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at anyone time, and where the images displayed depict,
describe or relate to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”



         (f)   ADULT MOVIE THEATER or ADULT LIVE STAGE PERFORMING
THEATER.  An enclosed building or room used for presenting motion picture
films, video tapes, cable or satellite television or any other visual media
having as a dominant theme, materials distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual
activity” or “specified anatomical areas,” for observation by patrons
therein.  Such an establishment is customarily not open to the public
generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor
by reason of age.



         (g)   ADULT OUTDOOR MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A drive-in
theater where at least 20% of the material presented is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” for
observation by patrons of the theater.  Such establishment is customarily
not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the
public, excluding any minor by reason of age.



         (h)   ADULT PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS.



            1.   A business having as its primary activity a
person, while nude or while displaying “specified anatomical areas,”
providing personal services for another person.  Such a business includes,
but is not limited to modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling
studios and conversation parlors.



            2.   Any establishment, club or business by
whatever name designated, which offers or advertises, or is equipped or
arranged to provide as part of its services; massages, body rubs, body
painting, alcohol rubs, physical stimulation, baths or other similar
treatment by any person.



            3.   An adult personal service establishment may
include, but is not limited to establishments commonly known as massage
parlors, health spas, sauna baths, Turkish bathhouses and steam baths.  The
following uses shall not be included within the definition of an adult
personal service establishment:



               a.   Establishments that routinely provide
such services by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed
physical therapist, a licensed nurse practitioner or any other similarly
licensed or certified medical professional;



               b.   Establishments which offer massages
performed by certified massage therapists;



               c.   Gymnasiums, fitness centers and health
cubs;



               d.   Electrolysis treatment by a licensed
operator of electrolysis equipment;



               e.   Continuing instruction in martial or
performing arts or in organized athletic activities;



               f.   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical
clinics or medical offices;



               g.   Barber shops, beauty parlors, hair
stylists and salons which offer massages by certified massage therapists;



               h.   Adult photography studios whose
principal business does not include the taking of photographs of “specified
anatomical areas;” and



               i.   Tattooing and/or body piercing services.



         (i)   ADULT VIDEO STORE.  An establishment having at
least 20% of its stock in trade or at least 10% of useable floor area devoted
to the distribution, display, storage or on-premises viewing of films,
movies, motion pictures, video tapes, slides or other visual representations
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”



         (j)   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, agrees
or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.



         (k)   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association
who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of
its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.



         (l)   MAINSTREAM MEDIA STORE.  A video store, bookstore
or newsstand having less than 20% of its stock or less than 10% of useable
floor area devoted to the distribution, display or storage of adult media.



         (m)   SEXUAL PARAPHERNALIA STORE.  An establishment
having at least 20% of its stock in trade or at least 10% of useable floor
area devoted to the distribution, display or storage of instruments, devices
or paraphernalia designed for use related to “specified anatomical areas”
or as part of, in connection with, or related to “specified sexual
activities,” or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.



   (B)   With respect to adult regulated uses or sexually oriented
businesses, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Portions of the human body
defined as follows:  less than completely and opaquely covered:



         (a)   Human genitalia and pubic region;



         (b)   Buttock and anus;



         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or



         (d)   Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered.



      (2)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  The explicit display of
one or more of the following:



         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



         (b)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitalia, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;



         (c)   Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated including, but not limited to human masturbation, oral copulation,
sexual intercourse, or sodomy;



         (d)   Human excretory functions as part of, or as
related to, any of the activities described above; and



         (e)   Physical violence, bondage, mutilation or rape,
actual or simulated, as part of or related to, any of the activities
described above.



      (3)   SEXUAL INTERCOURSE.  Fellatio, cunnilingus, anal
intercourse or any other intrusion, however slight, of any part of a persons
body, or of any object, into the genital or anal openings of another’s body.



      (4)   SODOMY.  Sexual bestiality.



      (5)   BUTTOCK.  The anus and perineum of any person.



      (6)   MASSAGE PARLOR. An establishment wherein private massage
is practiced, used or made available as a principal use and primary service
of the premises.



      (7)   MASSAGE.  The manipulation of body muscle or tissue, by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating, through the use of a
physical, mechanical or other device, of the body of another for a fee.



      (8)   NUDE MODELING STUDIO.  Any building, structure,
premises or a part thereof used primarily as a place which offers as its
principal activity the providing of models to display specified anatomical
areas for artists and photographers for a fee or other consideration.



      (9)   MASSAGE THERAPIST (CERTIFIED).  An individual
specifically trained and certified in massage therapy and the healing arts by
the American Massage Therapy Association or similar organization.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.02  AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   In the preparation, enactment and enforcement of this section,
it is recognized that there are some uses relating to sexual material which,
because of their very nature have serious operational characteristics that
have a deleterious effect upon residential, office and commercial areas. 
Because certain forms of expression relating to sexual material have
particular functional and inherent characteristics with a high potential of
being injurious to surrounding properties by depreciating the quality and
value of such property, it is the intent of this chapter to provide a
framework of reasonable regulatory standards which can be used for approving
or disapproving the establishment of this type of use in a viable and
accessible location, where the adverse impact of their operations may be
minimized.



   (B)   It is recognized that the specified controlled uses have
legitimate rights under the United States Constitution.  The City of
Marshall recognizes these legitimate rights and seeks to enforce the
Constitution while serving its role as a protector of its residents.  This
chapter is so written to minimize the negative impacts of sexual oriented
businesses on children, businesses and other residents and visitors, as well
as on the future sale and use of land throughout the city.  Special
designation and regulation in the I-2 and B-2 Districts is therefore
necessary to ensure that adverse effects of the uses will not contribute to
the degradation of adjacent parcels and the surrounding area and to limit the
visual impacts of sexually-oriented businesses in areas highly visible to the
public, this chapter also instills standards for major thoroughfares and
expressways.  These controls are intended to provide commercially viable
locations within the city, where these uses are considered more compatible
and less deleterious.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.03  USES SPECIFIED.



   (A)   Uses subject to these controls as defined herein as
“adult-only businesses” and/or “sexually-oriented businesses” are as
follows:



      (1)   Adult bookstores;



      (2)   Adult video stores;



      (3)   Adult cabarets;



      (4)   Adult motion picture arcade or miniature motion picture
theater;



      (5)   Adult movie theater or adult live stage performing
theater;



      (6)   Adult outdoor motion picture theater;



      (7)   Adult model studios;



      (8)   Escort and escort agencies;



      (9)   Adult personal service business; and



      (10)   Other sexually-oriented businesses, as determined by
the City Council.



   (B)   Any business now classified as a sexually-oriented business
lawfully operating on March 4, 2002, that is in violation of division (C)
below shall be deemed a non-conforming use.



   (C)   A lawfully operating and conforming sexually-oriented business
is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location of a sexually-oriented
business of any use listed in division (B) above within 1,000 feet.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.04  SITE LOCATION PRINCIPLES.



   (A)   The following principles shall be utilized to evaluate the
proposed location of any such use.



   (B)   These principles shall be applied by the Planning Commission
as general guidelines to help assess the impact of such a use upon the
district in which it is proposed:



      (1)   An adult only business shall be located as a conditional
or special use in the I-2 and B-2 Districts.



      (2)   No adult only business shall be located within 600 feet
in an I-2 District and 300 feet in a B-2 District, of a(n):  residential
zoning district, church, monastery, temple or similar place of worship,
school, library, public park or playground, non-commercial assembly facility,
public office building, licensed day care facility as defined in Public Act
116 of 1973, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 et seq., arcade or
Marshall city limit.  Measurement of the required radius shall be made from
the outer most boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which the proposed adult
use will be situated.



      (3)   No adult only business shall be permitted within a
1,000-foot radius of an existing adult only business. Measurement of the
1,000-foot radius shall be made from the outer most boundaries of the lot or
parcel upon which the proposed adult use will be situated.



      (4)   No adult only business shall be permitted within 1,000
feet of Interstate 94 or Interstate 69, nor shall any adult only business
have frontage on BL-94 (Michigan Avenue) or old U.S. 27 (Kalamazoo Avenue/
Brewer Street)



      (5)   A person is in violation of this chapter if he or she
causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or
transfer of ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business within 1,000
feet of another sexually-oriented business.



      (6)   A person is in violation of this chapter if he or she
causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than
one sexually-oriented business in the same building, structure or portion
thereof.



      (7)   A person is in violation of this chapter if he or she
causes or permits the substantial enlargement of any sexually-oriented
business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another
sexually-oriented business.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.05  SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The site layout, setbacks, structures, function and overall
appearance shall be compatible with adjacent uses and structures.



   (B)   Windows, displays, signs and decorative structural elements of
buildings shall not include or convey examples of a sexual nature.  All such
displays and signs shall be in conformance with this chapter and shall be
approved by the Planning Commission prior to their use.



   (C)   All building entries, windows and other such openings shall be
located, covered or screened in a manner as to prevent viewing into the
interior from any public or semi-public area as determined by the Planning
Commission.



   (D)   No loud speakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult
only business that projects sound outside of the adult only business so that
sound can be discerned by the public from public or semi-public areas.



   (E)   An adult only business shall clearly post at the entrance to
the business, or that portion of the business utilized for adult only
purposes, that minors are excluded.



   (F)   Mainstream media outlets carrying less than 20% of adult media
and/or devoting less than 10% of useable floor area to adult media are not
subject to the standards of sexual oriented businesses.  The conditions for
mainstream media outlets include:  adult media in a shop to which this
section is applicable shall be kept in a separate room or section of the
shop, which room or section shall:



      (1)   Not be open to any person under the age of 18;



      (2)   Be physically and visually separated from the rest of
the store by an opaque wall of durable material, reaching at least eight feet
high or to the ceiling, whichever is less;



      (3)   Be located so that the entrance to it as far as
reasonable practicable from media or other inventory in the store likely to
be of particular interest to children;



      (4)   Have access controlled by electronic or other means to
provide assurance that persons under age 18 will easily not gain admission
and that the general public will not accidentally enter the room or section
or provide continuos video or window surveillance of the room by store
personnel; and



      (5)   Provide signage at the entrance stipulating that persons
under 18 are not permitted inside.



   (G)   Adult cabarets are required to include a stage raised at least
three feet from the viewing floor, with a barrier of at least two feet at the
edge of the stage.  A person is in violation of the chapter if he or she
permits an entertainer off of the stage or a customer on the stage.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.06  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall reside in or permit a person to reside in the
premises of an adult-only business.



   (B)   No person shall operate an adult only business unless there is
conspicuously placed in a room where the business is carried on, a notice
indicating the process for all services performed therein.  No person
operating or working at such a place of business shall solicit or accept any
fees, except those indicated on any such notice.



   (C)   The owners, operators or persons in charge of an adult only
business shall not allow entrance into the building or any portion of a
building used for the use, to any minors as defined by M.C.L.A. §§ 722.51
et seq., as amended.



   (D)   No adult only business shall possess or disseminate or permit
persons therein to possess or disseminate on the premises any obscene
materials as defined by M.C.L.A. §§ 752.361 et seq., as amended.



   (E)   No person shall operate an adult personal service business
without obtaining a current zoning and building occupancy permit.  The
licenses shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector or
duly appointed designee following an inspection to determine compliance with
the relevant ordinances of the City of Marshall.  The license shall be
subject to all regulations of federal, state and local governments.



   (F)   No person shall lease or sublease, nor shall anyone become the
lessee or sublessee of any property for the purpose of using the property for
an adult entertainment business without the express written permission of the
owner of the property for the use and only upon having obtained the
appropriate licenses and permits from the City of Marshall, County of Calhoun
and State of Michigan.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.07  CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS.



   Prior to the granting of any permit herein provided, the Planning
Commission or City Council may impose any such conditions or limitations upon
the location, construction, maintenance or operation of the establishment or
regulated use, as may in its judgement, be necessary for the protection of
the public interest.  Failure to follow the limitation or condition will act
to immediately terminate any permit or license issued.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.08  TIME LIMITS FOR REVIEW.



   The following time limits shall apply to the review of an application
by the City of Marshall Planning Commission and City Council for special
approval of a sexually-oriented businesses as defined herein.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall publish notice and hold a public
hearing as required for special approval review within 60 days of receiving a
complete special approval and site plan application as required hereby for a
sexually-oriented business.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall rule on its recommendation
regarding the special approval application for a sexually oriented business
at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission following
the public hearing held to review the application.



   (C)   The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded to the City Council within 30 days of the meeting at which Planning
Commission issues its recommendation.  The City Council shall render its
decision to grant or deny special approval of the sexually-oriented business
or to grant approval with conditions as stipulated by the zoning ordinance
within 45 days from the date received from the Planning Commission.



   (D)   Failure of the city to act within the above specified time
limits shall be deemed to constitute granting of special approval to the
sexually-oriented business.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.09  REVOCATIONS.



   In any case where a building permit for a regulated use is required and
has not been obtained within six months after the granting of special
approval by the City Council, the grant of special approval shall become null
and void.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.10  RECONSTRUCTION OF DAMAGED REGULATED USES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or
rebuilding and continued use of any building or structure, the use of which
makes it subject to the controls of this chapter which is damaged by fire,
collapse, explosion or act of God, provided that the expense of the
reconstruction does not exceed 60% of the reconstruction cost of the building
or structure at the time the damage occurred, provided that where the
reconstruction, repair or rebuilding exceeds the above- stated expense, the
re-establishment of the use shall be subject to all provisions of this
chapter and further provided, that the re-established use complies with the
off-street parking requirements hereof.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.11  LIMIT ON REAPPLICATION.



   No application for an adult use which has been denied wholly or in part
shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of
denial, except on the grounds of new evidence not previously considered or
proof of a change in conditions from the original request.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.12  ENFORCEMENT.



   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall result, in addition
to the remedies provided herein, possible criminal violations.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



§ 118.13  INJUNCTION.



   As an alternative to the provisions of this section, the city, at its
option, may commence proceedings in the circuit court under the appropriate
court rule or statute to enjoin any activity conducted by a sexually-oriented
business that is deemed to be in violation of these provisions.



(Ord. 02-01, passed 3-4-2002)



CHAPTER 119:  MEDICAL MARIHUANA



Section



   119.01   Legislative findings



   119.02   Purposes and intent



   119.03   Definitions



   119.04   Grower



   119.05   Processor



   119.06   Secure transporter



   119.07   Safety compliance facility



   119.08   Municipality compliance with State Board



   119.09   Future legislation or initiative to allow adult use of
marihuana



   119.10   Severability



§ 119.01  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City of Marshall, through its elected City Council,
recognizes that the State of Michigan has permitted, by legislative action,
the medical use of marihuana, in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act
(hereinafter referred to as the MMMA, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq.)
and provided for the licensing and regulation of medical marihuana growers,
processors, provisioning centers, secure transporters, and safety compliance
facilities, in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act
(hereinafter referred to as the MMMFLA, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.)



   (B)   It is further recognized that the MMMFLA provides that a
municpal ordinance is a pre- requisite for state approval of any state
license issued under the MMMFLA.



   (C)   It is further recognized that, at the time of the enactment of
this chapter, marihuana remains subject to criminal penalties under both
federal and state law.



   (D)   It is further recognized that while federal and state
regulation of marihuana may be pervasive, and local regulation of marihuana
subject to a claim of preemption, the MMMFLA expressly permits local control
or regulation of certain aspects of the operation of a medical marihuana
facility, but only if the city enacts an ordinance permitting some, or all,
of the facilities also regulated by the MMMFLA.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 119.02  PURPOSES AND INTENT.



   The City of Marshall adopts this chapter:



   (A)   To implement the provisions of the MMMFLA with respect to
local zoning and land use;



   (B)   To establish a new chapter in the City of Marshall Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the permitted distribution of medical marihuana
consistent with state law. Nothing in this chapter purports to permit
activities that are otherwise illegal under state or local law;



   (C)   To prevent the diversion of medical marihuana for unlawful use
and protect the safety and welfare of the community; and



   (D)   To provide for and limit the location, type, and number of
facilities licensed under the MMMFLA within the city limits, without totally
prohibiting the types of land uses otherwise permitted by the MMMFLA.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 119.03  DEFINITIONS.



   The following phrases, when used in this chapter, shall be construed as
defined in the MMMFLA, as amended. These definitions are for guidance only,
and the actual definition is in the MMMFLA.



   CO-LOCATION.  The aggregation of multiple types of licenses, or
additional licenses of the same type permitted under the MMMFLA and located
on one, or more, lot of record owned by an existing MMMFLA licensee, approved
for operation in the City of Marshall.



   GROWER.  A licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state
that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a
processor or provisioning center.



   MARIHUANA.  Term as defined in the Public Health Code, M.C.L.A. §
333.7106.



   MARIHUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT.  A topical formulation, tincture, beverage,
edible substance, or similar product containing any usable marihuana that is
intended for human consumption in a manner other than smoke inhalation.
Marihuana-infused products shall not be considered a food for purposes of the
Food Law, M.C.L.A. §§  289.1101 - 289.8111.



   PROCESSOR.  A licensee that is a commercial entity located in this
state that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the
marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in
packaged form to a provisioning center.



   SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY.  A licensee that is a commercial entity
that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary
caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other
cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to the
marihuana facility.



   SECURE TRANSPORTER.  A licensee that is a commercial entity located in
this state that stores marihuana and  transports marihuana between marihuana
facilities for a fee.



   SECURITY PLAN.  A plan for preventing unauthorized access to, or theft
and pilferage from, an MMMFLA licensed facility, approved for operation in
the City of Marshall. A security plan must be approved by the City Manager
with the advice of the Director of Public Safety. The plan shall be subject
to review and reasonable approval by city staff, but shall include, at a
minimum, the following components:



      (1)   An eight foot tall perimeter fence;



      (2)   An exterior lighting system;



      (3)   A building security system;



      (4)   An on-site security guard program;



      (5)   An off-site official contact list;



      (6)   Established hours of operation;



      (7)   Appropriate signage;



      (8)   A plan for facility inspection by the City of Marshall,
which shall include no less than an annual comprehensive fire and security
inspection; and



      (9)   Such other conditions as may be suitable for the
particular license or facility to be operated by the MMMFLA licensee.



   STACKING.  Where an existing MMMFLA licensee, approved for operation
in the City of Marshall, by written agreement, leases to or operates for
another MMMFLA licensee, approved for operation in the City of Marshall.



   STATE OPERATING LICENSE.  Unless the context requires a different
meaning, “license” means a license that is issued under the MMMFLA that
allows the licensee to operate as one of the following, specified in the
license:



      (1)   A grower;



      (2)   A processor;



      (3)   A secure transporter; or



      (4)   A safety compliance facility.



   VOLATILE SUBSTANCES PROCESSING ROOM.  A Class 1, Division 1 room, as
defined by the National Fire Protection Act, or such other fire, mechanical
or electrical code adopted or in use by the City of Marshall, concerning the
use of gas or other volatile substances in an extraction process.



   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance, adopted
September 16, 2016, as amended.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 119.04  GROWER.



   (A)   The location at which a grower cultivates medical marihuana is
a permitted use in the following zoning districts: I-1 and I-2, as provided
by and subject to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance § 3.19-20. The
city will restrict locations and entity but shall not restrict number of
licenses managed by that entity.



   (B)   The grower must also meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The odor must be managed at the site and by the
installation of an operable filtration to ventilation and exhaust equipment
and odors must otherwise be effectively confined to the interior of the
building or dwelling from which the odor is generated;



      (2)   The facility must not be within 2,640 feet of another
grow or processing facility;



      (3)   For a facility using artificial light for night time
growing period, a plan to contain demonstrating that the owner can contain
all artificial light to the interior space of the facility;



      (4)   An approved Security Plan; and



      (5)   Co-location and stacking of this license shall be
permitted up to, but not beyond, any applicable lot coverage limitations set
forth in the City of Marshall Zoning Code.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-21-2017)



§ 119.05  PROCESSOR.



   (A)   The location at which a processor extracts resin from the
marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product is a permitted use in the
following zoning districts: I-1 and I-2, as provided by and subject to the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance § 3.19-20. The city will restrict
locations and entity but shall not restrict number of licenses managed by
that entity.



   (B)   The processor must meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The odor must be managed by the installation of an
operable filtration to ventilation and exhaust equipment and odors must
otherwise be effectively confined to the interior of the building or dwelling
from which the odor is generated;



      (2)   No marihuana shall be manufactured or processed in any
manner that would create excessive noise byeond the interior of the structure
if adjoining tenants may be disturbed by said noise;



      (3)   The facility must not be within 2,640 feet of another
grow or processing facility;



      (4)   An approved Security Plan; and



      (5)   Co-location and stacking of this license shall be
permitted up to, but not beyond, any applicable lot coverage limitations set
forth in the City of Marshall Zoning Code.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-21-2017)



§ 119.06  SECURE TRANSPORTER.



   (A)   The location at which a secure transporter stores marihuana
and transports marihuana from is a permitted use in the following districts:
I-1 and I-2, as provided by and subject to the requirements of the Zoning
Code § 3.19-20. The city will allow up to two state approved and licensed
secure transporters.



   (B)   A transporter must meet the following requirements:



      (1)   An approved Security Plan; and



      (2)   Co-location of this license shall be permitted up to,
but not beyond, any applicable lot coverage limitations set forth in the City
of Marshall Zoning Code.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 119.07  SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY.



   (A)   The location at which a safety compliance facility tests
medical marihuana and marihuana-infused products is a permitted use in the
following zoning districts: I-1 and I-2, as provided by and subject to the
requirements of the Zoning Code § 3.19-20. The city will allow up to two
state approved and licensed safety compliance facilities.



   (B)   A safety compliance facility must meet the following
requirements:



      (1)   An approved Security Plan; and



      (2)   Co-location of this license shall be permitted up to,
but not beyond, any applicable lot coverage limitations set forth in the City
of Marshall Zoning Code.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 119.08  MUNICIPALITY COMPLIANCE WITH STATE BOARD.



   (A)   The city shall provide the following information to the State
Medical Marihuana Licensing Board within 30 days after the city receives
notification from the applicant that he or she has applied for a license
under MMMFLA.



      (1)   A copy of the local ordinance that authorizes the
Medical Marihuana Facility.



      (2)   A copy of any zoning regulations that apply to the
proposed Medical Marihuana Facility within the city.



      (3)   A description of any violation of the local ordinance or
zoning regulations included under divisions (1) and (2) committed by the
applicant, but only if those violations related to activities licensed under
the MMMFLA or MMMA.



   (B)   The Board may consider this information submitted in division
(A), however, the failure of the city to provide the information to the Board
shall not be used against the applicant.



   (C)   A municipal ordinance may establish an annual, nonrefundable
fee of not more than $5000 to defray the administrative and enforcement costs
of associated with the operation of a medical marihuana facility in the
municipality.



   (D)   Information a municipality obtains from an applicant related
to licensure under this section is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom
of Information Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231-15.246.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 119.09  FUTURE LEGISLATION OR INITIATIVE TO ALLOW ADULT USE OF MARIHUANA.



   In the event that future laws deem adult use of marihuana to be legal
in the State of Michigan, the city hereby preserves the ability to allow
additional marihuana facilities in accordance with law and market demand.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 119.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or word of this
chapter is deemed to be invalid, the invalidity of such provision shall not
affect the validity of any other sections, subsections, paragraphs,
sentences, or words of this chapter or the application thereof; and to that
end, the sections, subsection, paragraphs, sentences, and other words of this
chapter shall be deemed severable.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-5-2017)



CHAPTER 120:  TEMPORARY BUSINESSES



Section



   120.01   Purpose



   120.02   Definitions



   120.03   License required



   120.04   Application for license



   120.05   Fees required



   120.06   Exemptions



   120.07   Application and Conditions; notice of denial



   120.08   Expiration of license



   120.09   Revocation of license; appeal



   120.10   Display of license



   120.11   Location



   120.12   Restrictions on operations of temporary businesses



   120.13   Enforcement



   120.14   Relationship to other ordinances



§ 120.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the health, safety and
welfare of citizens, as well as promote fairness to permanent businesses
located within the city, through regulation of temporary businesses.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERMANENT BUSINESS.  Any profession, trade, occupation, shop, store
and any other kind of calling carried on in a building that is subject to
Marshall City taxes on the subject lot or business.



   TEMPORARY BUSINESS.  Any profession, trade, occupation, shop, store
and every other kind of calling carried on at a lot or business within the
city, the instrumentalities of which are not subject to Marshall City taxes.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Temporary businesses shall not operate within the city without first
obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Permanent Businesses are exempt.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Persons required to obtain a license shall apply for it at the office
of the City Clerk. The content of the application form shall be prescribed by
§ 120.07.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.05  FEES REQUIRED.



   A license fee, set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid in
full prior to issuance of the license.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.06  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following persons and entities shall not be required to
obtain licenses as specified herein and shall not be required to pay the fees
prescribed herein: duly authorized solicitors on behalf of any religious
organization; and entities which qualify or could qualify as tax-exempt
organizations by the United States Internal Revenue Service. The City Clerk
shall make the final determination regarding exemptions. Exempt persons or
organizations shall be required to register with the City Clerk for
identification purposes when engaging in any activity regulated by this
chapter.



   (B)   Mobile food vending shall follow the requirements in § 4.51
of the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011; Am. Ord. 2016-08, passed 10-3-2016)



§ 120.07  APPLICATION AND CONDITIONS; NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   (A)   The applicant shall provide the following information to the
City Clerk:



      (1)   Applicant’s name, location of business, home address,
social security number and preferred telephone number;



      (2)   A description of the type of business operation the
applicant will conduct, including hours of operation;



      (3)   Name and social security number of each employee, agent,
or independent contractor working on behalf of the proposed business within
the city;



      (4)   A description of the goods, wares, merchandise or
services the applicant will offer for sale;



      (5)   Written permission from the owner of the business
location, acknowledging responsibility for the care and custody of the
property from/on which the business will operate;



      (6)   Address of the applicant’s most recent place of
business; and



      (7)   Issuance of city license does not absolve applicant of
responsibility to obtain all applicable county, state and federal licensing.



   (B)   Upon the receipt of application, the City Clerk will issue a
notice of review for:



      (1)   Approval of a criminal background check by the Police
Department;



      (2)   Approval by the Planning and Zoning Department with
respect to compliance with the city’s zoning and sign ordinances;



      (3)   Approval through the City Engineers office with respect
to the use of streets, sidewalks, and right-of-ways;



      (4)   Approval by the Building Official with respect to the
safety and compliance of any structures being used; and



      (5)   Approval by the Fire Department with respect to
compliance with Fire Code.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall keep a full record in his or her office
of all licenses issued, approvals given, and shall submit a copy of the
record to the Chief of Police. Within ten working days of receipt of an
application, the City Clerk shall either issue to the applicant the requested
license or issue a written notice of denial and the reason therefor. The
person whose license has been denied shall have the right to file an appeal
to the City Council within ten days of the denial.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.08  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
within ten, 30, 60 or 90 days of issuance. No business may be issued a
license for more than 90 days in a 12-month period. All evidence of temporary
business shall be removed at the end of permitted time period.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.09  REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE; APPEAL.



   (A)   The licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at
any time by the City Clerk or the Chief of Police, or their duly authorized
representatives, for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in the application for license;



      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or
services;



      (3)   Any violation of a city ordinance, including the city
zoning code and the city sign code;



      (4)   Conviction of the applicant or other persons acting
under the authority of the applicant’s license for any felony or of a
misdemeanor conviction involving moral turpitude within the preceding five
years; or



      (5)   Conducting the business permitted under this chapter in
an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace, nuisance or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.



   (B)   Within three working days of the revocation of a license, the
City Clerk shall send to the person whose license has been revoked, notice
specifically setting forth the grounds of the revocation. The notice shall be
mailed to the person to whom the license was issued at the address shown on
the license application.



   (C)   The person whose license has been revoked shall have the right
to file an appeal to the City Council within ten days of the revocation.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.10  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Any person or business licensed under the provisions of this chapter
shall have the license issued to him or her in his or her immediate
possession and shall display the same at the place of business.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.11  LOCATION.



   Temporary businesses shall comply with the following location
requirements:



   (A)   Temporary stands or businesses are allowed, with owner
permission and license approval, on all non-residential, taxable parcels for
a period of up to 90 days per calendar year. The temporary business must be a
permitted use in the district in which it is locating; and



   (B)   Stands or businesses must meet the following requirements:



      (1)   Structures must not be less than 16 feet from the face
of each curb abutting a street; and



      (2)   Structures must provide not less than six feet clearance
on all public walks or pedestrian ways.



   (C)   When located on public property other than the public
rights-of-way, the stands or businesses shall be permitted at the discretion
of the City Manager under the policy guidance of the City Council. The City
Council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish such additional programs
or requirements it deems fit for the operation on public property of any
business regulated by this chapter.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.12  RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONS OF TEMPORARY BUSINESSES.



   (A)   The City Manager, City Clerk or Chief of Police may place such
reasonable restrictions upon the location, hours, provisions for parking,
ingress or egress or methods of operation of any temporary business licensed
under this chapter, as deemed necessary to protect the general public health,
safety or welfare. The restrictions may be imposed, modified or withdrawn at
the time of licensure or any point thereafter.



   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish general
policies and guidelines, in addition to the provisions of this chapter,
governing the location, hours or methods of operation of temporary business.
Any such resolution shall not have the effect of invalidating any license
already issued.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Chief of Police and the City Clerk and their duly authorized
representatives shall have the authority to examine all places of business
and persons within the city, subject to the provisions of this chapter, to
determine if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating same.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 120.14  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES.



   The terms of this chapter shall in no manner alter the interpretation
or requirements of any other chapter of the city code, whether the person is
licensed or exempt under this chapter shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the city’s zoning, sign and building codes. The City Clerk
may require evidence of compliance with the codes prior to issuing a license.



(Ord. 2011-03, passed 1-18-2011)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION



   132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



   133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



   134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



   135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



   136.   OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS



   137.   OFFENSES RELATING TO CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES



   138.   OFFENSES RELATING TO SCHOOLS



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Reserved



   130.02   Fortune-telling



   130.03   Spitting



   130.04   Radio and television interference



   130.05   Urination or defecation in public places



§ 130.01  RESERVED.



§ 130.02  FORTUNE-TELLING.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to, for a fee or compensation which
he directly or indirectly solicits or receives, claim or pretend to tell
fortunes, or hold himself or herself out as being able by claimed or
pretended use of occult powers to answer questions or give advice on personal
or business matters or to exercise, influence or affect evil spirits or
curses.



(Prior Code, § 18-2)



§ 130.03  SPITTING.



   No person shall spit upon any sidewalk, in any park or public grounds,
upon the floor, stairs or steps of any public hall, theater or other building
frequented by the public, or upon the floor of any vehicle used for public
travel.



(Prior Code, § 18-3)



§ 130.04  RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.



   (A)   Between the hours of 6:30 p.m. and 12:30 a.m., no person shall
knowingly operate within the city any machine, device, apparatus or
instrument, the operation of which causes reasonably preventable electrical
interference with radio or television reception within the city.  X-ray
pictures, examinations or treatments may be made at any time if the machines
or apparatus used therefor are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or
reasonably preventable interferences with radio or television reception and
are not negligently operated.



   (B)   This section does not regulate any transmitting, broadcasting
or receiving device used or useful in interstate commerce, or the operation
of which device is licensed or authorized by or under the provisions of any
act of the Congress of the United States.



(Prior Code, § 18-4)



§ 130.05  URINATION OR DEFECATION IN PUBLIC PLACE.



   No person shall urinate or defecate in any public place, or on any
outdoor private property, except in designated public or private restrooms.



(Ord. 2010-07, passed 11-17-2010)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION



Section



   131.01   Obstructing government operations



   131.02   False alarms



   131.03   False reporting to law enforcement officials



   131.04   Obstructing an officer



   131.05   Resisting arrest



   131.06   False impersonation



   131.07   Providing false information to officer



§ 131.01  OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally obstruct,
impair or hinder the performance of a governmental function or the use of
government property by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical
interference or obstacle.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      GOVERNMENT.  Any principal subdivision or agency of the United
States, State of Michigan, City of Marshall or any agency of local government
operating within the City of Marshall.



      GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.  Any activity which a public agency or
public servant is legally authorized to undertake.



(Prior Code, § 18-16)



§ 131.02  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ALARM SYSTEM.



         (a)   An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to
signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which
Police and/or Fire Department personnel are expected to respond.  ALARM
SYSTEMS include those through which Police Department personnel or Fire
Department personnel are notified directly of the signals through automated
recording devices or are notified indirectly by way of third persons who
monitor the alarm system and who report its signals to the Police Department
and/or Fire Department.  ALARM SYSTEMS include alarms designed to register a
signal which is so audible, visible or in other ways perceptible outside a
protected premises as to notify persons in the area or neighborhood beyond
the premises where the alarm system is located, who in turn may notify,
either directly or indirectly, the Police or Fire Department of the alarm.



         (b)   ALARM SYSTEMS also include automatic or manual
hold-up alarm systems, burglar alarm systems, security alarm systems,
intrusion alarms, robbery alarms, medical emergency alarms, automatic or
manual fire alarm systems and any other alarm which requires emergency
response by Police Department or Fire Department personnel.  FIRE ALARM
SYSTEMS, as used in this definition, include alarms received from smoke
detectors, automatic extinguishing systems, manual pull stations and related
supervisory systems.  ALARM SYSTEMS which monitor temperature or humidity
and do not require any response by Police or Fire Department personnel and
alarm systems installed by telephone companies to protect telephone equipment
are excluded from this definition.



      ALARM USER.  Any person who owns, possesses, controls or
otherwise exercises dominion over a premises or property which has an alarm
system, or who regularly supervises the operation of any business on a
premises or property which has an alarm system or on whose behalf the alarm
system is maintained.  Owners or users of alarm systems within or on
vehicles shall not be included; provided, however, when an alarm signal in or
on a vehicle is connected, either by wire, signal or other means with an
alarm system in or on a premises or property, the person owning or using the
vehicle alarm system is an ALARM USER.  A person owns, possesses or controls
a premises or property if he or she is the grantee under a deed, a purchaser
under a land contract or a tenant of the property.



      FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or as a result of the
negligence, misuse or misconduct of an alarm user or of his or her employees,
agents or persons under his or her control.  FALSE ALARM shall not include
alarms caused by severe weather, natural or manmade disaster, power or
telephone service outages, alarm testing for which prior notification of the
Police and Fire Departments had been made, the malicious acts of a person or
persons not the employee or agent or under the control of the alarm user, or
alarms for which the Police and/or Fire Departments have not initiated a
response.



      PERSON.  Any natural person or a firm, association, club,
society, organization, partnership or corporation.



      PREMISES.  Any private or public residential, commercial or
industrial land and/or buildings located within the city.



   (B)   Alarm systems through which Police Department personnel or
Fire Department personnel are notified directly of the signal by automated
recording devices or are notified indirectly by way of third persons who
monitor the alarm system and who report its signals to the Police Department
And/or Fire Department shall be registered with the city by an alarm user. 
All alarm systems required to be registered by this division shall be
registered within ten days of installation or within 30 days of February 16,
1993, whichever shall be later.



   (C)   The alarm user shall be responsible under division (D) below
for all false alarms sent due to the activation of an alarm system in, on or
in regard to his or her premises or property, or because of the actions or
statements of any of his or her agents, employees or persons under his or her
control if the action or statement was likely to result in the sending of an
alarm.



   (D)   For the third false alarm and for each subsequent false alarm
occurring within a single calendar year with regard to the same premises or
property, the alarm user shall be assessed a service fee.  The service fee
shall be in such amount as shall be from time to time established by
resolution of the City Council.



   (E)   Knowingly sending a false alarm or causing a false alarm to be
sent, sending a false alarm without caring whether or not it is false or
failing to register an alarm system, as required by division (B) above, shall
be a misdemeanor punishable as provided for in § 10.99.



   (F)   No action or proceeding taken by the city pursuant to this
section shall waive, preclude or be a precondition to the city exercising,
enforcing or invoking any other right or action which it might otherwise be
permitted to take by law.



   (G)   The alarm user shall be solely responsible for the
installation, maintenance and/or functioning of its alarm system and the
city, its Police Department, Fire Department or any of its agents shall not
be responsible for the installation, maintenance or functioning of any alarm
system.



   (H)   (1)   If any service fee due to the city pursuant to
division (D) above shall remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after the date
of the bill for the service fee, it shall thereafter accrue interest at the
rate of 6% per year from the date of the false alarm to which the bill
applies.



      (2)   The city may seek to collect the service fee by a suit
at law or may assess the same against the premises or property.  The
assessment shall constitute a lien upon the premises or property and may be
billed and collected as part of the real property tax applicable to the
premises or property.



   (I)   Any person against whom a service fee has been assessed, as
provided for in division (D) above, who believes that the service fee has
been improperly assessed, may appeal the assessment to an appeals board made
up of five members consisting of the Director of Public Safety, Deputy Fire
Chief, City Manager and two citizens at large, to be appointed by the Mayor
and approved by City Council.  Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall
be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of the date of the bill for the
service fee.



(Prior Code, § 18-17)



Statutory reference:



   False fire alarms, see M.C.L.A. § 750.240; M.S.A. § 28.437



§ 131.03  FALSE REPORTING TO LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to:



   (A)   Make a report or intentionally cause the transmission of a
report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within
their concern when he or she knows that it did not occur; or



   (B)   Make a report or purposely cause the transmission of a report
to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to
a crime or other incident within their concern when he or she knows that he
or she has no such information.



(Prior Code, § 18-18)



Statutory reference:



   False report on crime, see M.C.L.A. § 750.411a; M.S.A. § 28.643(1)



§ 131.04  OBSTRUCTING AN OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist,
hinder or oppose any member of the Police Department or any peace officer.



   (B)   An individual who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-19)  (Ord. 95-1, passed 5-1-1995; Am. Ord. 01-13, passed
9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 2010-08, passed 11-17-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Obstruction of police officer, see M.C.L.A. § 750.479; M.S.A. § 28.747



§ 131.05  RESISTING ARREST.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally prevent or attempt
to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official
authority, from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by:



   (A)   Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against
the peace officer or another; or



   (B)   Using any other means creating a substantial risk of causing
physical injury to the peace officer or another.



(Prior Code, § 18-20)



§ 131.06  FALSE IMPERSONATION.



   No person shall falsely personate any member of the police or any city
officer or employee or wear the uniform, star or badge or carry the club or
handcuffs designated for the police force with intent to falsely personate
any member of the police force.



(Prior Code, § 18-21)



Statutory reference:



   False personation of officers, see M.C.L.A. § 750.215; M.S.A. § 28.412



§ 131.07  PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION TO OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to:



   (A)   Provide false information, including, but not limited to,
name, address or other identifying information about one’s self or another,
to a police officer.



   (B)   Refuse to identify himself or herself by name and date of
birth, when requested by a police officer, where the officer has encountered
the person under circumstances which reasonably indicate to the officer that
the person has committed, is committing or is about to commit a violation of
a local, state or federal law.



   (C)   A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 01-12, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 2010-08, passed 11-17-2010)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   132.01   Threats; assault and battery



   132.02   Harassing communications



§ 132.01  THREATS; ASSAULT AND BATTERY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to menace, threaten or assault or
to unlawfully touch, shove, jostle or batter any person.



(Prior Code, § 18-31)  (Ord. passed 9-19-1983)



§ 132.02  HARASSING COMMUNICATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person, with intent to harass or
alarm another person, to communicate with a person, anonymously or otherwise,
by telephone or by telegraph, mail or any other form of written
communications, in a manner likely to harass or cause alarm.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any service
provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize,
frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or
to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following:



      (1)   Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or
property in the course of a telephone conversation;



      (2)   Falsely and deliberately reporting any telephone or
telegraph message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill,
has suffered death or has been the victim of a crime or of an accident;



      (3)   Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a
connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone
and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone,
thereby interfering with any communications service; and



      (4)   Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive
language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a
telephone conversation.



      (5)   Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without
speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or
after the telephone call is answered.



      (6)   Deliberately calling a telephone of another person in a
repetitive manner which causes interruption in telephone service or prevents
the person from utilizing his or her telephone service.



(Prior Code, § 18-32)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 11-17-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.540e; M.S.A. § 28.808(5)



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   133.01   Malicious mischief



   133.02   Larceny



   133.03   Trespassers



   133.04   Retail fraud



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or wantonly injure,
damage, deface, break, tamper with or otherwise harm or assume control over
any property, public or private, real or personal, not his or her own.



(Prior Code, § 18-41)



Statutory reference:



   Malicious mischief, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.377a et seq.; M.S.A. §§
28.609et seq.



§ 133.02  LARCENY.



   A person who does any of the following is guilty of larceny:



   (A)   Steals, or attempts to steal, the property of another.



   (B)   Embezzles, fraudulently coverts to his or her own use,
secretes with the intent to embezzle or fraudulently uses property of another.



(Prior Code, § 18-42) (Am. Ord. 08-05, passed 5-19-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Larceny, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.356 et seq.; M.S.A. §§ 28.588et seq.



§ 133.03  TRESPASSERS.



   No person shall be a trespasser.



(Prior Code, § 18-43)



Statutory reference:



   Trespass, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.546 et seq.; M.S.A. §§ 28.814et seq.



§ 133.04  RETAIL FRAUD.



   A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate
vicinity is guilty of retail fraud:



   (A)   While the store is open to the public, alters, transfers,
removes and replaces, conceals or otherwise misrepresents the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or
to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale;



   (B)   While the store is open to the public, steals property of the
store that is offered for sale; and/or



   (C)   With the intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain
money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that
was not paid for and belongs to the store.



(Prior Code, § 18-45)  (Ord. passed 4-16-1990)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.356d



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is listed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or
premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to
so do by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or
any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to
depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either,
who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall
be deemed to be a trespasser and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days or by a fine of
not more than $50, or both, in the discretion of the court.



(Prior Code, § 18-43)



   (C)   A person who does any of the violations listed in § 133.04 is
guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both.



(Prior Code, § 18-45)  (Ord. passed 4-16-1990)



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section



Public Peace



   134.01   Loitering



   134.02   Disturbing the peace generally



   134.03   Disorderly house



   134.04   Disorderly conduct



   134.05   Disturbance in business or public place or of lawful
meetings



   134.06   Disturbance of religious worship



   134.07   Fighting



   134.08   Unlawful assembly



   134.09   Riot; incitement



   134.10   Window peeping



Safety



   134.25   Firearms



   134.26   Throwing missiles at or from automobiles



   134.27   Barbed wire and electric fences



   134.28   Discarded refrigerators



   134.29   Covering or fencing wells or cisterns



   134.30   Fireworks



   134.31   Hunting



 



   134.99   Penalty



PUBLIC PEACE



§ 134.01  LOITERING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or about any
street, sidewalk, overpass or other public place when ordered to clear the
public way by the city police or other lawful authority.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to linger,
loiter, sit or stand in any street or public way, or in any public room in
any hotel, motel, office or business establishment in the city, or any
courthouse corridor, or any bus or railroad station, or the hallways or
entrances of any public building, or to use any public room for business or
social purposes, or to obstruct the entrance to any business establishment,
without so doing for some lawful purpose, or if contrary to the expressed
wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of
the building or premises.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         PUBLIC ROOMS.  Any basement, attic, building entrance or
doorway, lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public rest
room, sitting room or any other place used in common by the public, tenants,
occupants, guests or customers, and situated in a hotel, motel, office
building, public building or business establishment in the city.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LOITERING.  The act of standing or idling so as to hinder,
obstruct or impede or tend to hinder, obstruct or impede the passage of
pedestrians or vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 18-51)



Statutory reference:



   Loiterers defined as disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167;
M.S.A. § 28.364



§ 134.02  DISTURBING THE PEACE GENERALLY.



   Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or
improper diversion, or any rout or riot, or ring or sound any gong, by which
the peace and good order of the neighborhood are disturbed, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-52)



§ 134.03  DISORDERLY HOUSE.



   (A)   No person shall permit or suffer any house, building or other
place owned or occupied by him to be a resort for noisy, boisterous or
disorderly persons, nor permit or suffer to remain therein any noisy,
boisterous or disorderly persons.



   (B)   No person shall attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of
any place where prostitution, gambling or the illegal sale or use of
intoxicating liquor is permitted or conducted or where any other illegal
business or occupation is permitted or conducted.



(Prior Code, § 18-53)  (Am. Ord. 2010-10, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 134.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall resort to any house, building, street or other
place within the city for the purpose of making any noisy or disorderly
conduct, nor shall any person make in any house, building, street, place of
business or any other place, or in any assemblage of people, any loud, noisy
or disorderly conduct or disturbance.



   (B)   Disorderly conduct shall include, but shall not be limited to,
prostitution, window peeping, engaging in an illegal occupation or business,
being intoxicated in a public place or refusing detoxification or acting in a
manner that causes a public disturbance, engaging in indecent or obscene
conduct in a public place, vagrancy, begging in a public place, loitering in
a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness
is practiced, encouraged or allowed, knowingly loitering in or about a place
where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted, or a person who
is found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place.



(Prior Code, § 18-54)  (Am. Ord. 00-09, passed 11- -2000)



§ 134.05  DISTURBANCE IN BUSINESS OR PUBLIC PLACE OR OF LAWFUL MEETINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance
or contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or
any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public
building, grounds or park, or at any election or other public meeting where
citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled.



(Prior Code, § 18-55)



§ 134.06  DISTURBANCE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any
congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making any noise or
making any profane discourse or engaging in any indecent behavior in or near
the place of worship as to disturb the solemnity of the meeting.



(Prior Code, § 18-56)



Statutory reference:



   Disturbance of religious worship, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.169, 752.525;
M.S.A. §§ 28.366, 28.133



§ 134.07  FIGHTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in fighting or in
violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior.



(Prior Code, § 18-57)



§ 134.08  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an unlawful assembly for a
person to assemble or act in concert with four or more persons for the
purpose of engaging in conduct constituting the crime of riot, or to be
present at an assembly that either has or develops such a purpose and to
remain thereat with intent to advance such purpose.



(Prior Code, § 18-58)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 752.543; M.S.A. § 28.790(3)



§ 134.09  RIOT; INCITEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute the crime of riot
for five or more persons, acting in concert, to wrongfully engage in violent
conduct and thereby intentionally or recklessly cause or create a serious
risk of causing public terror or alarm.



(Prior Code, § 18-59)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute incitement to riot
for a person or persons, intending to cause or to aid or abet the institution
or maintenance of a riot, to do an act or engage in conduct that urges other
persons to commit acts of unlawful force or violence, or the unlawful burning
or destroying of property, or the unlawful interference with a police
officer, peace officer, firefighter or a member of the national guard or any
unit of the armed services officially assigned to riot duty in the lawful
performance of his or her duty.



(Prior Code, § 18-60)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 752.541, 752.542; M.S.A. §
28.790(1), 28.790(2)



§ 134.10  WINDOW PEEPING.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to look, peer or peep into any window
on the property of another person under circumstances in which would be
likely to cause affront or alarm to a reasonable person if he or she were
aware of such activity.



(Prior Code, § 18-61)  (Am. Ord. 2010-11, passed 12-6-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167; M.S.A. § 28.364



SAFETY



§ 134.25  FIREARMS.



   (A)   This section shall be known and cited as the "Firearm Section".



   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person shall not
discharge a firearm within 150 yards of an occupied building, dwelling,
house, residence, or cabin, or any barn or other building used in connection
with a farm operation.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, "firearm" shall be defined
as a weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by an
explosive, or by gas or air. Firearm does not include a smooth bore rifle or
handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling by a spring, or
by gas or air, BB's not exceeding .177 caliber.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, "dwelling" shall be defined as a
facility habitually used by one or more individuals as a place of abode,
whether or not an individual is present in the facility.



   (E)   For the purposes of this section an "occupied structure" is a
facility in which one or more individuals are present.



   (F)   Except as provided in division (1) below, an individual less
than 18 years of age shall not possess a firearm in public except under the
direct supervision of an individual 18 years of age or older.



      (1)   Division (F) does not apply to an individual less than
18 years of age who possesses a firearm in accordance with Part 401 (wildlife
conservation) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act
No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, being MCLA §§ 324.40101 to 324.40119,
or part 435 (hunting and fishing licensing) of Act No. 451 of 1994, being
§§ 324.43501 to 324.43561. However, an individual less than 18 years of age
may possess a firearm without a hunting license while at, or going to or
from, a recognized target range or trap or skeet shooting ground if, while
going to or from the range or ground, the firearm is enclosed and securely
fastened in a case or locked trunk of a motor vehicle.



   (G)   No person shall sell, loan or furnish to any minors any
firearms, dynamite, dynamite fuse or caps, gunpowder or any other explosive
substance.



(Ord. 08-03, passed 5-19-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Firearms and weapons, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.222 et seq., 750.234b,
750.234f, 324.40111; M.S.A. §§ 28.419 et seq.



§ 134.26  THROWING MISSILES AT OR FROM AUTOMOBILES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object
from any moving automobile; or



   (B)   Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object
toward any automobile.



(Prior Code, § 18-72)



§ 134.27  BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.



   No person shall build, erect, maintain or construct either of the
following:



   (A)   A barbed wire fence upon or along any street, alley or
sidewalk, or upon that portion of any premises adjacent to any street, alley
or sidewalk; or



   (B)   An electric fence anywhere within the limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-73)



§ 134.28  DISCARDED REFRIGERATORS.



   No person shall store, maintain, discard or dispose of any unused
refrigerator or ice-box or any other container or appliance capable of
containing a child and having self-locking doors on the exterior, without
first complying with one or more of the following safety precautions:



   (A)   The removal of all exterior locks;



   (B)   The removal of all doors or covers permitting entrance to the
appliance;



   (C)   Padlocking all exterior doors or covers; and



   (D)   Storing the appliance in such a manner as to make entry
inaccessible by causing the doors or covers to be firmly pressed against a
wall or a floor.



(Prior Code, § 18-74)



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned refrigerators, see M.C.L.A. § 750.493d; M.S.A. § 28.761 (4)



§ 134.29  COVERING OR FENCING WELLS OR CISTERNS.



   Any person who shall knowingly abandon or fail to keep safely covered
or fenced any well or cistern of a depth of four feet or more and with a top
width of 12 inches or more on property owned or occupied by the person shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-75)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.493b; M.S.A. § 28.761(2)



§ 134.30  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Definitions:



      AGRICULTURAL AND WILDLIFE FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices
distributed to farmer, ranchers, and growers through a wildlife management
program administered by the United States Department of the Interior or the
Department of Natural Resources of this state.



      ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC. Pyrotechnic devices for professional use
that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and
construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits
for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified
as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.



      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to
produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. parts
1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1,  3.1.2, 3.1.3, or
3.5. CONSUMER FIREWORKS does not include low-impact fireworks.



      DEPARTMENT. The department of licensing and regulatory affairs.



      DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive
materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, as
provided in 27 C.F.R. 555.11, 49 C.F.R. 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1.



      FIREWORK or FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a
starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks,
articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects.



      SPECIAL EFFECTS. A combination of chemical elements or chemical
compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere
and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or
thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television,
theatrical or opera production or live entertainment.



      NATIONAL HOLIDAY. Shall mean:



         (a)   New Year's Day, January 1.



         (b)   Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, the third Monday in
January.



         (c)   Washington's Birthday (President's Day), the third
Monday in February.



         (d)   Memorial Day, the last Monday in May.



         (e)   Independence Day, July 4.



         (f)   Labor Day, the first Monday in September.



         (g)   Columbus Day, the second Monday in October.



         (h)   Veterans Day, November 11.



         (i)   Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November.



         (j)   Christmas Day, December 25.



   (B)   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks
within the limits of the City of Marshall except on a national holiday, as
defined in this ordinance, or on the day preceding or the day after a
national holiday.



   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation may apply to the City
Council in writing on forms provided by the department for a permit for the
use of agricultural or wildlife fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks or special effects manufactured for outdoor pest control or
agricultural purposes, or for public or private display within the City, by
fair associations, amusement parks or other organizations or individuals
approved by the City, if the applicable provisions of this ordinance and
M.C.L.A. 28.451 et seq. are complied with. After a permit has been granted,
sales, possession or transportation of fireworks for the purposes described
in the permit only may be made. A permit granted under this subsection is not
transferable and shall not be issued to a minor.



      (2)   Before a permit for articles pyrotechnic or a display
fireworks ignition is issued, the person, firm or corporation applying for
the permit shall furnish proof of financial responsibility by a bond or
insurance in an amount, character and form deemed necessary by the City to
satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an
act or omission on the part of the person, firm or corporation or an agent or
employee of the person, firm or corporation, and to protect the public.
Payment of a permit fee as set by the City shall also be required, which
shall be retained by the City.



      (3)   A permit shall not be issued under this ordinance to a
nonresident person, firm or corporation for ignition of articles pyrotechnic
or display fireworks in this state until the person, firm or corporation has
appointed in writing a resident member of the bar of this state or a resident
agent to be the legal representative upon whom all process in an action or
proceeding against the person, firm or corporation may be served.



      (4)   The City shall rule on the competency and qualifications
of articles pyrotechnic and display fireworks operators as required under
NFPA 1123, as the operator has furnished in his or her application form, and
on the time, place and safety aspects of the display of articles pyrotechnic
or display fireworks before granting permits.



(Prior Code, § 18-76)  (Ord. passed 11-7-1983; Am. Ord. 2012-04, passed
6-18-2012)



§ 134.31  HUNTING.



   (A)   This section shall be known and cited as the “Hunting
Section.”



   (B)   In the interest of public health, safety and the general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Marshall, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, except those specified in division (C) below, to hunt or
pursue any animal or wildlife at any time within the city limits of the City
of Marshall by means of a firearm, either hand gun or rifle, or by any weapon
or explosive device, including air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrow,
slingshot or by any other instrument potentially dangerous to human safety.



   (C)   Any prohibition against hunting made under this section shall
not apply to:



      (1)   Any state or local law enforcement officers or their
agents in the discharge of their official duties;



      (2)   Any governmental official when the hunting is necessary
or incident to a scientific or biological survey or when related to any
aspect of wildlife management and control; nor to



      (3)   Any person lawfully hunting pursuant to a limited permit
issued by the city when such hunting is related to any aspect of wildlife
management and control.



(Prior Code, § 18-77)  (Ord. passed 2-19-1985; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-1988)



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500 for each offense or shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail
not to exceed 90 days, or by both the fine and imprisonment.  Each act or
incident in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 18-77)  (Ord. passed 2-19-1985; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-1988)



CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



General Provisions



   135.01   Indecent exposure



   135.02   Indecent language or conduct



Prostitution



   135.15   Offense generally



   135.16   Accosting and soliciting



   135.17   Patronizing



   135.18   Keeping a house



   135.19   Transporting a female



Gambling



   135.30   Gaming room or apparatus



   135.31   Playing



   135.32   Frequenting or attending gaming places



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 135.01  INDECENT EXPOSURE.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to make an open and indecent exposure
of his or her person under circumstances in which he or she knows or should
know that his or her conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm.



(Prior Code, § 18-86)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.335a; M.S.A. § 28.567(1)



§ 135.02  INDECENT LANGUAGE OR CONDUCT.



   Any person who shall be guilty of using indecent or immoral language,
or be guilty of any indecent or immoral conduct or behavior, in any public
building, street, alley, lane or other public place in the city or on any
private property where the same may be heard or observed by persons outside
of the private property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-87)



Statutory reference:



   Cursing and swearing, see M.C.L.A. § 750.103; M.S.A. § 28.298



   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167; M.S.A. § 28.364



   Indecent language in presence of woman or child, see M.C.L.A. §
750.337; M.S.A. § 28.569



PROSTITUTION



§ 135.15  OFFENSE GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in, or agree or
offer to engage in, sexual conduct with another person in return for a fee.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT.  An act of sexual gratification between persons
not married, involving the sexual or intimate parts of the human anatomy.



(Prior Code, § 18-96)



Statutory reference:



   Prostitution, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.448 et seq.; M.S.A. § 28.703et seq.



§ 135.16  ACCOSTING AND SOLICITING.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to invite another person, in any
public place or in or from any building or vehicle by words, gesture or any
other means, to do any lewd or immoral act or act of moral perversion.



(Prior Code, § 18-97)



§ 135.17  PATRONIZING.



   A person commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute if:



   (A)   Pursuant to a prior understanding a fee is paid to another as
compensation for engaging in or having a third person engage in sexual
conduct;



   (B)   A fee is agreed to be paid to another person in understanding
that in return that person or a third person will engage in sexual conduct;
and/or



   (C)   There is a solicitation or request made to another person to
engage in sexual conduct in return for a fee.



(Prior Code, § 18-98)



§ 135.18  KEEPING A HOUSE.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to have possession or control of
premises that he or she knows are being used for prostitution and fail to
make reasonable efforts to halt or abate the use.



(Prior Code, § 18-99)



§ 135.19  TRANSPORTING A FEMALE.



   Any person who shall knowingly transport or cause to be transported, or
aid or assist in obtaining transportation for, by any means of conveyance,
any female person for the purpose of prostitution shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-100)



GAMBLING



§ 135.30  GAMING ROOM OR APPARATUS.



   (A)   A person who for hire, gain or reward, keeps or maintains a
gaming room, gaming table, game of skill or chance, or game partly of skill
and partly of chance, used for gaming, or who permits a gaming room, or
gaming table, or game to be kept, maintained or played on premises occupied
or controlled by the person, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to a mechanical amusement device
which may through the application of an element of skill reward the player
with the right to replay the mechanical device at no additional cost if the
mechanical amusement device is not allowed to accumulate more than 15 replays
at one time; the device is designed so that accumulated free replays may only
be discharged by reactivating the device for one additional play for each
accumulated free replay; and the device makes no permanent record directly or
indirectly of the free replays awarded.



   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to a slot machine if the
slot machine is 25 years or older and is not used for gambling purposes.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         SLOT MACHINE.  A mechanical device, an essential part of
which is a drum or reel which bears an insignia and which when operated may
deliver, as a result of the application of an element of chance, a token or
money or property, or by operation of which a person may become entitled to
receive, as a result of the application of an element of chance, a token or
money or property.



   (D)   A slot machine which is being used for a gambling purpose in
violation of division (C) above shall be confiscated and turned over to the
Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 18-106)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.303; M.S.A. 28.535



§ 135.31  PLAYING.



   Any person, who by playing at cards, dice or any other game, or by
betting or putting up money on cards, or by any other means or device in the
nature of betting on cards, or betting of any kind, shall win or obtain any
sum of money or any goods, or any article of value whatever shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-107)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.314; M.S.A. § 28.546



§ 135.32  FREQUENTING OR ATTENDING GAMING PLACES.



   Any person who shall attend or frequent any place where gaming or
gambling is suffered or permitted, or any place operated or occupied as a
common gaming or gambling house or room, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-108)



Statutory reference:



   Gambling, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.301 et seq.; M.S.A. §§ 28.533 et seq.



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.309; M.S.A. § 28.541



CHAPTER 136:  OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS



Section



   136.01   Lawful drinking age



   136.02   Juvenile curfew; parental and amusement operator
responsibility



   136.03   Smoking by minors in public places and sales of tobacco
products to minors



§ 136.01  LAWFUL DRINKING AGE.



   (A)   No person, either directly or indirectly, by himself, herself,
clerk, agent, servant or employee, shall sell, furnish, give or deliver any
alcoholic beverage, beer or wine to any person under the age of 21 years, or
to any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, nor shall
any person knowingly furnish a place where at the time of furnishing the
place any alcoholic liquor, beer or wine is consumed by any person under the
age of 21 years.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, where the word
“person” is used, it is intended that that word shall include both adults
and minors.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the use of the word
“place” is intended to include a home, apartment, condominium, other
dwelling unit or any building accessory to a residence or an outbuilding or
yard, pool or vacant property or rental hall or building.



   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years shall represent himself to
be over the age of 21 years, or make any false statements or give false
information regarding his or her age to any police officer or person or
employee in charge of any place where beer and wine and other alcoholic
beverages are sold, in order to procure the sale or furnishing of beer, wine
or other alcoholic beverage.



   (C)   No person shall make any false representation to procure the
sale or furnishing of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage to a person
under the age of 21 years.



   (D)   No person under the age of 21 years may be permitted in any
place where beer and wine or other alcoholic beverages are sold for
consumption on the premises, excepting places in which the principal business
is:



      (1)   Preparing and serving of meals to the public;



      (2)   The operation of bowling lanes; or



      (3)   The operation of a golf course.



   (E)   (1)   A person less than 21 years of age shall purchase or
knowingly possess transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle as
an operator or occupant unless the person is employed by a licensee under the
Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, a common carrier designated by the
Liquor Control Commission under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, the
Liquor Control Commission or an agent of the Liquor Control Commission and is
transporting or having alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the
person’s control during regular working hours and in the course of the
person’s employment.  This section does not prevent a person less than 21
years of age from knowingly transporting alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle
it a person at least 21 years of age is present inside the motor vehicle.



      (2)   A person who violates this division is guilty of a
misdemeanor.  As part of the sentence, the person may be ordered to perform
community service and undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his
or her own expense as described in M.C.L.A. § 436.1703.



   (F)   (1)   A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase
or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume
alcoholic liquor or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as
provided by law.  A person less than 21 years of age who violates this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by the fines and
sanctions set forth in Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. § 436.1703(b).



      (2)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a
person less than 21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor may require
the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis.  A peace
officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a
preliminary breath analysis.  The results of a preliminary chemical breath
analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal
prosecution to determine whether the person less than 21 years of age has
consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor.  A person less than 21 years of age
who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis, as
required in this division, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be
ordered to pay a civil fine.



(Prior Code, § 18-117)  (Ord. passed 8-21-1978; Am. Ord. passed 9-17-1979;
Am. Ord. passed 7-1-1985; Am. Ord. passed 5-16-1988; Am. Ord. 99-1, passed
1-4-1999; Am. Ord. 99-9, passed 10-4-1999)



Statutory reference:



   Liquor Control Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 et seq.; M.S.A. §§
18.971et seq.



§ 136.02  JUVENILE CURFEW; PARENTAL AND AMUSEMENT OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   No juvenile under the age of 12 years shall loiter, idle,
wander; stroll, play, pleasure ride, park or be in or on any type of vehicle
in, on or about any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings, vacant lots, places of
amusement or entertainment or other unsupervised places in the city, at any
time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (B)   No juvenile 12 years of age or older shall loiter, idle,
wander, stroll, play, pleasure ride, park or be in or on any type of vehicle
in, on or about any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings, vacant lots, places of
amusement or entertainment or other unsupervised places in the city, at any
time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above do not apply to
a juvenile accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the juvenile; where the juvenile is on an
emergency errand or business as specifically directly by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having care and custody of the juvenile; when
the juvenile is going to, attending or coming directly from an organized
church, municipal or school function; or to a juvenile whose lawful
employment makes it necessary that such juvenile be in, on or about places
contrary to the provisions of division (A) hereof.



   (D)   No parent, guardian or other adult person having care and
custody of any juvenile shall allow or permit any such person to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll, play, pleasure ride, park or be in or on any type of
vehicle in, on or about any public street, highway, road, alley, park,
playground or other public grounds, public places and public buildings,
vacant lots, places of amusement or entertainment or other unsupervised
places in the city contrary to the provisions of division (A) above, nor
shall the person fail or neglect to cause any such juvenile to refrain from
being in, on or about the places set forth in division (A) above, except as
otherwise provided for in division (B) above.



   (E)   No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment in
the city shall permit any juvenile to enter such place of amusement or,
entertainment during the hours prohibited by division (A) above unless the
juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having care and custody of the juvenile.



   (F)   Any police officer may, without a warrant, take into custody
any juvenile found violating any of the provisions of division (A) above and
detain the juvenile for a reasonable time until the parent, guardian or other
person having care and custody of the juvenile is notified of the violation
and detention.  Any person found violating any of the provisions of
divisions (A) through (D) of this section shall be deemed responsible for a
municipal civil infraction subject to such penalties as shall be established
pursuant to the code.



(Prior Code, § 18-118)  (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-2-1998; Am. Ord. 98-4, passed
4-6-1998)



Statutory reference:



   Curfew for minors, see M.C.L.A. §§ 722.751 et seq.; M.S.A. §§
28.342(1)et seq.



§ 136.03  SMOKING BY MINORS IN PUBLIC PLACES AND SALES OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
TO MINORS.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall use or possess
cigarettes or any age regulated tobacco product in any form on any public
highway, street, alley, park or other land used for public purposes, or in a
public place of business or amusement.



   (B)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase, or attempt to
purchase, or otherwise obtain or possess cigarettes or any other age
regulated tobacco product.



   (C)   Any person who violates this section shall be deemed
responsible for a municipal civil infraction subject to such penalties as
shall be established pursuant to the code.



(Prior Code, § 18-119)  (Ord. 98-4, passed 4-6-1998)



CHAPTER 137:  OFFENSES RELATING TO CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES



Section



General Provisions



   137.01   Possession of alcoholic beverages while a pedestrian



   137.02   Consumption of alcoholic beverages while a pedestrian



   137.03   Possession of and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor while
in city parks



   137.04   Possession or use of marijuana



   137.05   Possession or use of drug paraphernalia



   137.06   Association with controlled substances



Medical Marihuana Dispensary



   137.20   Findings



   137.21   Purpose



   137.22   Definitions



   137.23   Dispensaries prohibited



   137.24   Severability



   137.25   Penalty provision



 



   137.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 137.01  POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WHILE A PEDESTRIAN.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage
in a container which is uncapped or has a broken seal and available for
immediate consumption while a pedestrian on any city street, sidewalk,
alleyway or parking lot or parking area with restricted parking zones.



(Prior Code, § 18-120)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1982)  Penalty, see § 137.99



§ 137.02  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WHILE A PEDESTRIAN.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages
while a pedestrian on any city street, sidewalk, alleyway or parking lot or
parking area with restricted parking zones.



(Prior Code, § 18-121)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1982)  Penalty, see § 137.99



§ 137.03  POSSESSION OF AND/OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR WHILE IN
CITY PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess alcoholic liquor, as
that term is defined by the Michigan Liquor Control Act, in a container which
is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken, or to consume alcoholic
liquor in any city park. Alcoholic liquor may be sold, possessed and consumed
in a city park during the period of a special permit granted, in writing, by
the city upon approval of the City Council.  The City Council may condition
the grant of the special permit upon the restrictions the City Council shall
deem appropriate, which conditions shall be noted on the permit.  The permit
shall require the permittee to obtain a license from the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission for any and all sales of alcoholic liquor.



(Prior Code, § 18-122)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1982; Am. Ord. passed 6-7-1993) 
Penalty, see § 137.99



§ 137.04  POSSESSION OR USE OF MARIJUANA.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or
intentionally possess marijuana unless the substance was obtained directly
from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription order of a practitioner while
acting in the course of the practitioner’s professional practice, or except
as otherwise authorized by Public Act 333 of 1978.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use marijuana unless
the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid
prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of the
practitioner’s professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by
Public Act 333 of 1978.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish a
place where at the time of furnishing the place the person knowingly permits
the use of marijuana on the premises.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, where the word
“person” is used, it is intended that that word shall include both adults
and minors.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the use of the word
“place” is intended to include a home, apartment, condominium, other
dwelling unit or any building accessory to a residence or an outbuilding, or
yard, pool or vacant property, or rental hall or building.



(Prior Code, § 18-123)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1982; Am. Ord. passed 7-1-1985)



§ 137.05  POSSESSION OR USE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Drug paraphernalia defined.  “Drug paraphernalia” means
any equipment, product, material, or combination of equipment, products or
materials, which are specifically designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance, including but not
limited to:



      (1)   An isomerization device specifically designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;



      (2)   Testing equipment specifically designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing, the strength, effectiveness or purity of a
controlled substance;



      (3)   A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use
in weighing or in measuring a controlled substance;



      (4)   A diluent or adulterant including, but not limited to,
quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically
designed for use with a controlled substance;



      (5)   A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marihuana;



      (6)   An object specifically designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish
oil into the human body, such as:



         (a)   A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic,
or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, a permanent screen, a hashish head,
or punctured metal bowl;



         (b)   A water pipe;



         (c)   A carburetion tube and device;



         (d)   A smoking and carburetion mask;



         (e)   A roach clip: meaning an object used to hold a
burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand;



         (f)   A miniature cocaine spoon, and a cocaine vial;



         (g)   A chamber pipe;



         (h)   A carburetor pipe;



         (i)   An electric pipe;



         (j)   An air-driven pipe;



         (k)   A chillum;



         (l)   A bong; or



         (m)   An ice pipe or chiller.



      (7)   A kit specifically designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which
is a controlled substance, or from which a controlled substance can be
derived;



      (8)   A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing a controlled
substance;



      (9)   A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is
specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing a controlled substance into the human body, and which consists of
at least a razor blade and a mirror;



      (10)   A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is
specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of a controlled substance
to the user;



      (11)   A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is
specifically designed to carry a small amount of a controlled substance to
the user's nose;



      (12)   A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is
specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an
automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil,
or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and
concealing a controlled substance;



      (13)   A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a
small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the human body;



      (14)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding a controlled
substance;



      (15)   A capsule, balloon, envelope or other container used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of a
controlled substance;



      (16)   A container and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in storing or concealing a controlled substance; and



      (17)   A hypodermic syringe, needle and other instrument or
implement adapted, for the use of any controlled substance by subcutaneous
injection or intracutaneous injection, or any other manner or method of
introduction into the human body.



   (B)   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, any drug
paraphernalia for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body,
a controlled substance.



   (C)   Manufacture, delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture with intent to
deliver or to sell, to possess with intent to deliver or to sell, to deliver,
or to sell, any drug paraphernalia for planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body, a controlled substance.



   (D)   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It is unlawful
for any person to place any advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, sign, poster, or other publication knowing that the purpose of such
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.



   (E)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses,
hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical
doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians,
pharmacists and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective
business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any
other medical condition requiring self-injection.



   (F)   Civil forfeiture. Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed
with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent sell in violation of
this section shall be seized and forfeited to the city.



   (G)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any person who shall be convicted of violating any of
the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or by both in the discretion of the court.



      (2)   Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense and may be punished accordingly.



(Ord. 08-06, passed 5-19-2008)



§ 137.06  ASSOCIATION WITH CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   No person shall knowingly loiter in or about any building, apartment,
store, automobile, trailer or other place, or an area open to the public,
where a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia is being illegally used,
sold, dispensed, furnished, given away or stored.



(Ord. 2011-11, passed 6-6-2011)  Penalty, see § 137.99



MEDICAL MARIHUANA DISPENSARY



§ 137.20  FINDINGS.



   The City of Marshall adopts this Ordinance based on the following
findings of fact:



   (A)   In November, 2008 the people of the State of Michigan adopted
an initiative which lead to the enactment of the Michigan Medical Marihuana
Act (MMMA) at M.C.L.A. 333.26421 et. seq.



   (B)   The MMMA creates a procedure by which a "qualifying patient"
may obtain a certification from a physician and a "registry identification
card" from the State Department of Community Health which prohibit
prosecution and other penalties for cultivating a limited number of marihuana
plants.



   (C)   The MMMA also authorizes a "primary caregiver" to obtain a
"registry identification card" authorizing such person to lawfully cultivate
and distribute marihuana to a limited number of "qualifying patients".



   (D)   Notwithstanding all of the above, Michigan law continues to
make the manufacture, possession and use of marihuana serious criminal
offenses. Michigan's Public Health Code provides penalties ranging from a
misdemeanor for possession of a small amount of marijuana to life
imprisonment for "habitual" manufacturers and distributors.



   (E)   Likewise, the Federal Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801
et. seq.) makes the following unlawful:



      (1)   The manufacture, distribution or possession with intent
to distribute marihuana;



      (2)   The leasing, renting, maintaining or using of property
for the manufacturing, storing or distributing of controlled substances;



      (3)   The distribution or manufacture of marihuana within
1,000 feet of schools and playgrounds, and within 100 feet of youth centers
or video arcade facilities.



      (4)   The use of any communication device to commit a felony
violation of the Controlled Substances Act.



   (F)   As of the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, (August,
2011) the interpretation of the MMMA is unsettled. Various trial courts
throughout Michigan have addressed questions regarding the interpretation of
the MMMA and its' application. The MMMA has been addressed in only five
reported decisions from the Court of Appeals and no decisions of the Michigan
Supreme Court. Further, the Michigan legislature has not acted to clarify the
state of the law.



   (G)   The MMMA defines the "Medical use" of marihuana as "the
acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession,
delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating
to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered
qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated
with the debilitating medical condition". (M.C.L.A. 333.24623(e)) This
definition does not include the sale of marihuana as a Medical use.



   (H)   The MMMA provides "(a) registered primary caregiver may
receive compensation for costs associated with assisting a registered patient
in the medical use of marihuana. Any such compensation shall not constitute
the sale of controlled substances". (M.C.L.A. 333.24624(e)) Emphasis added.



   (I)   The drafters of the initiative adopted by voters in 2008 did
not intend to authorize cooperative marihuana growing operations or
dispensaries. See People v. Redden, 290 Mich. App. 65 (2010), citing
Satyanarayana, Is Marijuana Good Medicine? Detroit Free Press, October 25,
2008,
http://www.freep.com/article/20081025/NEWS15/810250341/Is-marijuana-good-medici
ne- (accessed August 8, 2011).



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-6-2011)



§ 137.21  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate the conduct of activity
pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act ("MMMA") M.C.L.A. 333.26421 et
seq., and to regulate the conduct of activity pursuant thereto in the City of
Marshall, Michigan so as to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
general public. This ordinance shall be interpreted with reference to the
changing state of the law as it relates to the MMMA in Michigan; it is not
the intent of the Marshall City Council to authorize any person to engage in
any activity that is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, nor,
except as expressly provided herein, is it the intent of the Marshall City
Council to prohibit conduct allowed under the MMMA.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-6-2011)



§ 137.22  DEFINITIONS.



   Any term used in this Ordinance which is defined in the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act (M.C.L.A. 333.26421 et. seq.) shall have the meaning
given it by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot, the dimension and configuration of which are
shown on a map recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds, or a
lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is
attested to by a professional engineer or land surveyor (registered and
licensed in the state and likewise recorded on a file with the county.)



   MARIHUANA DISPENSARY. A use of a lot of record by more than two
individuals for the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture,
delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating
to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered
qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated
with the debilitating medical condition.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-6-2011)



§ 137.23  DISPENSARIES PROHIBITED.



   The use of any lot of record as a Marihuana Dispensary is prohibited.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-6-2011)



§ 137.24  SEVERABILITY.



   If sections of this ordinance shall be deemed to be invalid, the same
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be invalid.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-6-2011)



§ 137.25  PENALTY PROVISION.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 137.99, any person, firm, or
corporation in violation of any provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed
responsible of violating a municipal civil infraction and shall, upon finding
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than One Hundred and 00/100
($100.00) Dollars, plus Court costs and the cost of prosecution not to exceed
Five Hundred and 00/100 ($500.00) Dollars. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be considered a separate offense. The City of Marshall may, in
addition, seek injunctive relief.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-6-2011)



§ 137.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in § 10.99 of the code, any
person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
10.99.



   (B)   A person arrested for violation of any section of this chapter
which is a misdemeanor may, as an alternative to being taken promptly before
a magistrate, be issued an appearance ticket as described and provided in
M.C.L.A. § 764.9(f)(1), M.S.A. § 28.868(6), and released from custody.



(Prior Code, § 18-124)  (Ord. passed 5-3-1982; Am. Ord. 98-2, passed
2-2-1998)



CHAPTER 138:  OFFENSES RELATING TO SCHOOLS



Section



   138.01   Definitions



   138.02   Unauthorized entry or trespass on school property



   138.03   Disturbing peace, quietude or good order in schools



   138.04   Persons creating disturbance on school property to leave
when directed by school principal



   138.05   Forcing school student to give or lend money or other thing
of value



   138.06   Damaging, destroying or defacing school property



§ 138.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PRINCIPAL.  Any principal of any elementary or secondary school or the
chief administrative officer of any elementary or secondary school or college.



   SCHOOL.  Any public, private or parochial pre-elementary, elementary
(grades K-6), secondary (grades 7-12) school or any college or combination
thereof.



(Prior Code, § 18-128)  (Ord. passed 10-18-1982)



§ 138.02  UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY OR TRESPASS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person who is not a regularly enrolled student, or parent
or guardian of a student, or a school official, teacher or other public or
school employee or person conducting legitimate school business, shall enter
or trespass upon or loiter in or upon any school building or school property
for any reason whatsoever unless the person has received specific authority
from the principal or other person designated by the principal to be in or
upon or to remain in or upon the school building or school property.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons engaging in or
attending a school or recreation department authorized activity or to persons
lawfully using the school playground or any playground equipment after school
hours or when school is not in session unless the entry or use shall have
been otherwise prohibited by order, rule or regulation of the school board,
school principal or other person, department, board or committee with
authority to prohibit the use or entry.



(Prior Code, § 18-129)  (Ord. passed 10-18-1982)



§ 138.03  DISTURBING PEACE, QUIETUDE OR GOOD ORDER IN SCHOOLS.



   No person or persons shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in
making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace,
quietude or good order of any school is disturbed.



(Prior Code, § 18-130)  (Ord. passed 10-18-1982)



§ 138.04  PERSONS CREATING DISTURBANCE ON SCHOOL PROPERTY TO LEAVE WHEN
DIRECTED BY SCHOOL PRINCIPAL.



   Any person, whether lawfully or unlawfully in or upon any school
building or school property, who is found to be creating a disturbance in or
upon any such school building or property, shall leave immediately when so
directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the principal,
or by any peace officer.



(Prior Code, § 18-131)  (Ord. passed 10-18-1982)



§ 138.05  FORCING SCHOOL STUDENT TO GIVE OR LEND MONEY OR OTHER THING OF
VALUE.



   No person shall by violence, threats of violence or other illegal form
of coercion, force or attempt to force any school student or any other person
in or on school property, to give or lend any money or any other thing of
value to any person at any time.



(Prior Code, § 18-132)  (Ord. passed 10-18-1982)



§ 138.06  DAMAGING, DESTROYING OR DEFACING SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   No person shall damage, destroy or deface any school building or school
property or the grounds, building, vehicles, fences, trees or other
appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto.



(Prior Code, § 18-133)  (Ord. passed 10-18-1982)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



   151.   PLANNING



   152.   RESERVED



   153.   MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS



   154.   FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



   155.   SUBDIVISIONS



   156.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section



State Construction Codes



   150.001   State Construction Code enforcing agency



   150.002   Construction Board of Appeals



   150.003   Duties of Building Official



   150.004   Permit fees



   150.005   Fire limits



Contractor Licenses



   150.067   Examination for and issuance of electrical licenses



   150.068   Registration of licenses



   150.069   Expiration dates of registration



Property Maintenance Code



   150.084   Purpose



   150.085   Adoption of a model property maintenance code



   150.086   Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code
(IPMC)



   150.087   Creation and appointment to the Property Maintenance Board
of Appeals



   150.088   Compensation



Moving of Buildings



   150.095   Continuous movement; least obstruction



   150.096   Compliance with code requirements and all laws



   150.097   Lights on building at night



   150.098   Fencing/barricading and backfilling



   150.099   Permit required; application; review; fees



Unsafe Structures



   150.110   Adoption of dangerous and unsafe buildings provisions of
the housing law



Demolition of Building or Structures



   150.120   Definitions



   150.121   Letter of credit



   150.122   Standards



   150.123   Enforcement



   150.124   Penalty



Administration



   150.134   Recovery of costs and prosecution



STATE CONSTRUCTION CODES



§ 150.001  STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.



   Pursuant to the provisions of § 8b of Act 230 of the Public Acts of
1972, as amended, the city hereby assumes, either individually or through
joint services with other governmental agencies pursuant to an inter-local
agreement, responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such Act
and the building, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing codes adopted
thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 7-11)  (Am. Ord. 05-02, passed 3-18-2005)



§ 150.002  CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS.



   A Construction Board of Appeals shall be created, either individually
by the city or through an inter-local agreement, in accordance with § 14(1)
of State Construction Code Act, as amended.  All appeal notices shall comply
with Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976 as to time, date and place of the
meeting.



(Prior Code, § 7-12)  (Ord. 98-10, passed 9-21-1998; Am. Ord. 00-06, passed
6-5-2000; Am. Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



Statutory reference:



   State Construction Code Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.; M.S.A.
§§ 5.2949(1)et seq.



§ 150.003  DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   In addition to those duties prescribed in the Uniform Code adopted by
the State Construction Code Act, the Building Official shall be responsible
for providing field inspections, handling complaints, reviewing plans for
conformance with state and local rules and regulations, issuing permits,
collection of fees, proposing and overseeing the Building Department budget
as adopted by the City Council, supervising inspection staff, creating
policies and procedures in order to carry out the functions of the Department
that are in conformance with law and city policies, attend meetings as
needed, as well as other duties assigned by the City Manager or his or her
designee.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



§ 150.004  PERMIT FEES.



   Permit fees shall be established by the City Council from time to time
by resolution in accordance with § 2 of the State Construction Code Act, as
amended.



(Prior Code, § 7-15)  (Am. Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



§ 150.005  FIRE LIMITS.



   The fire limits of the city are hereby established and shall include
all of that portion of the city situated between Kalamazoo Avenue on the west
and Marshall Avenue on the east, Mansion Street on the north and Green Street
on the south.



(Prior Code, § 7-17)  (Am. Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



CONTRACTOR LICENSES



§ 150.067  EXAMINATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF ELECTRICAL LICENSES.



   The State of Michigan shall be responsible for the examination for and
issuance of electrical licenses for an electrical contractor, master
electrician, journeyman or electrical apprentice.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



§ 150.068  REGISTRATION OF LICENSES.



   No person, corporation or business required to be licensed by the State
of Michigan or by any political subdivision of the State of Michigan shall
perform work within the corporate limit of the city without first registering
their license(s) with the city.  A fee shall be paid for each contractor’s
license.  The fees for registering contractor license(s) in the city shall
be established by the City Council by resolution.



(Prior Code, § 7-75)  (Am. Ord. 00-10, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. 05-02,
passed 3-8-2005)



§ 150.069  EXPIRATION DATES OF REGISTRATION.



   The expiration date of the registration of each contractor’s license
shall correspond with the expiration date of the license.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 150.084  PURPOSE.



   The city deems it necessary to provide a minimum level of health,
safety and welfare within the corporate limits of the city by adopting
minimum standards for maintaining existing buildings and structures using a
model code with amendments to eliminate conflicts with other chapters of the
code.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-18-2005)



§ 150.085  ADOPTION OF A MODEL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   There is hereby adopted by reference the International Property
Maintenance Code (IPMC) as published and periodically amended by the
International Code Council, which code and such amendments shall be in full
force and effect in the city as if fully set forth herein.



(Prior Code, § 7-91)  (Ord. passed 3-16-1987; Am. Ord. 05-02, passed
3-18-2005)



Charter reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see § 4.07



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. §
117.3(k); M.S.A. § 5.2073(k)



§ 150.086  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE (IPMC).



   In order to provide consistency in enforcement with other city
ordinances the following International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC)
sections shall be amended as follows:



   (A)   Section 110 of the IPMC regarding demolition shall be deleted
(Chapter 150 of the City Code shall govern);



   (B)   Section 302.3 of the IPMC regarding sidewalks and driveway
shall be deleted (§§ 90.16 through 90.18 of the City Code shall govern);



   (C)   Section 302.4 of the IPMC regarding noxious weeds shall be
deleted (Chapter 92 of the City Code shall govern);



   (D)   Section 302.8 of the IPMC regarding inoperable abandoned
vehicles shall be deleted (The Uniform Traffic Code and Chapter 70 of the
City Code shall govern); and



   (E)   Section 305 of the IPMC regarding rubbish and garbage shall be
deleted (Chapter 50 of the City Code shall govern).



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-18-2005; Am. Ord. 08-04, passed 5-19-2008)



§ 150.087  CREATION AND APPOINTMENT TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE BOARD OF
APPEALS.



   There is hereby established, in accordance with the Housing Law of
Michigan (Act 167 of 1917, as amended) a Property Maintenance Board of
Appeals for the purposes of hearing appeals related to property maintenance
issues and dangerous buildings matters except for matters under §§ 110.0,
302.3, 302.4, 302.8 and 305 of the International Property Maintenance Code
(IPMC) over which the Board of Appeals shall have no jurisdiction.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-18-2005)



§ 150.088  COMPENSATION.



   The City Council, at its discretion, may compensate Property
Maintenance Board of Appeals members for their time and expenses in amounts
as from time to time shall be established by city policy or by resolution of
the City Council.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-18-2005)



MOVING OF BUILDINGS



§ 150.095  CONTINUOUS MOVEMENT; LEAST OBSTRUCTION.



   The moving of a building, once commenced, shall be conducted in a
continuous manner until completion with the least possible obstruction to
streets and thoroughfares and shall be placed upon a new foundation, which
complies with the requirements of the Building Code, promptly after it is
moved to the new location.



(Prior Code, § 7-101)  (Ord. 98-11, passed 10-19-1998)



§ 150.096  COMPLIANCE WITH CODE REQUIREMENTS AND ALL LAWS.



   When any building is moved within the city it shall be moved in a
manner which is in compliance with all provisions of the Building Code,
Electrical Code, Plumbing Code and other general codes adopted by the city
and in compliance with all state laws.



(Prior Code, § 7-102)  (Ord. 98-11, passed 10-19-1998)



§ 150.097  LIGHTS ON BUILDING AT NIGHT.



   Lighted signals shall be kept in a conspicuous place on each side of a
building being moved between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour prior to
sunrise.



(Prior Code, § 7-103)  (Ord. 98-11, passed 10-19-1998)



§ 150.098  FENCING/BARRICADING AND BACKFILLING.



   All excavation sites shall be fenced/barricaded during the moving
process in a manner deemed appropriate by the Building Inspector.  The
excavation sites shall include both the original site of the building and the
new site which the building is to occupy.  Backfilling must occur as soon as
possible after the moving of the building, or immediately upon the request of
the Building Inspector in a manner in which the Building Inspector deems
appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 7-104)  (Ord. 98-11, passed 10-19-1998)



§ 150.099  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; REVIEW; FEES.



   (A)   No building shall be moved from one place to another without
first obtaining a permit from the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-106)



   (B)   Each person seeking a permit for the moving of a building
within the city shall make application for the permit to the City Clerk, in
writing and signed by the applicant, containing such information as shall be
requested on a form provided by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 7-107)



   (C)   (1)   Any application for a permit for the moving of a
building shall be submitted for review to the Department of Public Services,
Department of Public Safety and the Building Inspector.  After review by the
Department of Public Services, Department of Public Safety and the Building
Inspector, the application shall be submitted to the City Council for review
and action.  Prior to being submitted to the City Council for review the
city shall give notice of the date on which the request for moving permit
will be submitted by the City Council to all abutting property along the
designated route requested in the application.



      (2)   The City Council, may approve the permit as requested,
approve the permit based upon a route other than that proposed by the
applicant, approve the permit with conditions and/or deny the permit.  Any
denial of a permit to move a building shall be based upon a determination
that the proposed move would be unduly destructive to trees within the public
right-of-way and curb lawn areas, that the utility outages which would be
incurred based upon the moving of the building would be unduly damaging to
the citizens of the city and/or that the proposed move would otherwise be
unduly destructive to privately-owned or city-owned property.



(Prior Code, § 7-108)



   (D)   Before a permit for the moving of a building may be issued
under this division, the applicant shall give to the city a surety bond in a
sum as shall be approved by City Council, which shall provide among other
things that the permittee will defend and indemnify the city and hold the
city harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expense occurring
as a result of the granting of the permit.  The city may also charge fees
and require a deposit be made with the City Clerk in such amount as shall be
necessary to cover all fees and costs incurred by the city, including, but
not limited to legal fees occasioned by the review of the application, notice
costs, all costs associated with any permit review, tree trimming, tree
replacement and electric line disconnection and reconnection as well as all
costs associated with traffic management measures necessitated by the
granting of the permit.



(Prior Code, § 7-109)



   (E)   Every permit to move a building shall designate in the permit
the exact route to be taken and a time limit within which the move must be
completed.



(Prior Code, § 7-110)



   (F)   The fees charged by the city shall be a lien on the building
moved and on the real property to which it is being moved.  The lien may be
enforced by placing the amount owed on the next successive real property tax
bill and foreclosing said lien in the manner used for the foreclosure and
collection of real property taxes.  The City Council, at the time of
issuance of the permit, by affirmative vote, shall have the power and
authority to waive any and/or all fees for permits issued to public entities
and nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organizations.



(Prior Code, § 7-111)



(Ord. 98-11, passed 10-19-1998)



UNSAFE STRUCTURES



§ 150.110  ADOPTION OF DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDINGS PROVISIONS OF THE
HOUSING LAW. 



   Sections 137 through 142 of the Housing Law of Michigan (Act 167 of
1917, as amended) are hereby adopted for the purposes of regulating dangerous
and unsafe buildings.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



DEMOLITION OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURES



§ 150.120  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions provided for in the
Michigan Building Code, Michigan Residential Code, and/or ICC Property
Maintenance Code shall apply.



(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 150.121  LETTER OF CREDIT.



   The city shall require a letter of credit, performance bond, or such
other assurances, in an amount determined by city staff to cover the cost of
restoring the lot to its preconstruction state as well as any other required
work needed to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
City of Marshall including those items listed in § 150.122 STANDARDS.



(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2016-09, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 150.122  STANDARDS.



   When a building or structure is demolished, the property owner of
record shall be responsible for making sure the following items are completed
prior to, during, and after the demolition of said building or structure:



   (A)   All necessary permits and inspections shall be applied for and
all fees paid. Including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Demolition permit – City of Marshall.



      (2)   Soil sedimentation and erosion permit if applicable–
contact Calhoun County Road Department.



      (3)   Hazardous materials inspection – State approved
contractor must submit approval letter.



   (B)   Contact all utility companies to disconnect the service and
remove any meters prior to demolition.



   (C)   The foundation walls shall be removed to a depth of three feet
minimum below the finish grade adjacent to the wall.



   (D)   Any concrete floor and footings shall be removed in accordance
with plans submitted to city staff.



   (E)   Lot shall be finished graded, grass seed planted, and mulched.



   (F)   Temporary construction fencing shall be provided around the
foundation until items (C), (D) and (E) can be complied with.



   (G)   Sanitary sewer pipe shall be plugged outside the foundation
wall and inspected and approved by city staff prior to being covered.



   (H)   Water service pipe shall be capped or crimped and inspected
and approved by city staff prior to being covered.



   (I)   If the site contains a well and septic tank, the well shall be
properly sealed and inspected by the Calhoun County Health Department and the
septic tank collapsed and filled.  Exception – If the property is to be
re-developed and the owner has an approval letter from the Calhoun County
Health Department allowing the well and septic system to remain and the
property owner has secured a valid building and zoning permit this section
need not apply.



   (J)   Restoration of the lot shall be completed within 30 days from
the start of the building or structure removal.



(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2016-09, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 150.123  ENFORCEMENT.



   Those individuals designated under § 10.10 APPEARANCE TICKETS are
authorized to enforce this section as well as any sworn police officer for
the City of Marshall, the City Manager or his or her designee.



(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-22-2008)



§ 150.124  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of §§ 150.120 through 150.123 for
which no specific penalty is set out shall be subject to § 10.99 GENERAL
PENALTY.



(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-22-2008)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 150.134  RECOVERY OF COSTS AND PROSECUTION.



   (A)   Any expense incurred in or related to the enforcement of this
chapter, including but not limited to permit fees, demolition fees, and
professional consultation fees, city administrative fees and those expenses
allowed under the Michigan Housing Law shall be paid by the landowner,
occupant or person in control of such lands prior to the issuance of any
permit for all permit fees and within 30 days of receipt of an invoice for
all other fees, all costs and all expenses billed pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Should any invoice not be paid as provided herein, then it
shall accrue interest at the rate of 6% annum and the city may, at its
option, assess the same against the land for which the fee, cost or expense
was invoiced, which shall constitute a lien against those lands from the date
of the invoice and may be billed and collected as part of the tax applicable
to the land.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed a cause for delay or
termination of prosecution of an owner, owners or responsible local agent for
failure to correct violations of this chapter. 



   (C)   A person may be charged with more than one violation of the
provisions of this chapter in a single complaint or appearance ticket,
provided each violation so charged relates to the same building, structure or
dwelling.  A conviction for a violation of any provision of this chapter is
punishable by imprisonment and fines as permitted by § 10.99(A) of this
Code.  The court may, as a condition of probation, if probation is a part of
the defendant’s sentence, order said defendant to reimburse the city for
all costs of the enforcement of this chapter attributable to the violations
for which the defendant was convicted, including but not limited to the costs
of demolition, prosecution and administration.



(Ord. 05-02, passed 3-8-2005)



CHAPTER 151:  PLANNING



Section



   151.01   Adoption of state act



   151.02   Planning Commission



   151.03   State Mapped Improvement Act adopted



§ 151.01  ADOPTION OF STATE ACT.



   The city hereby adopts the municipal plan act set forth in Public Act
285 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 et seq., M.S.A. §§ 5.2991 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 21-1)



§ 151.02  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   There is hereby created the Planning Commission for the city to consist
of the number of members, to have the qualifications, to be appointed, to
hold office and to have the powers as set forth in Public Act 285 of 1931,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 et seq., M.S.A. §§ 5.2991 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 21-2)



§ 151.03  STATE MAPPED IMPROVEMENT ACT ADOPTED.



   The city hereby adopts Public Act 222 of 1943, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.51 et seq., M.S.A. §§ 5.3007(I) et seq., known as the Mapped
Improvement Act.



(Prior Code, § 21-3)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate land use, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 et seq.;
M.S.A. §§ 5.2931 et seq.



   Municipal planning, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 et seq.; M.S.A. §§
5.2991et seq.



CHAPTER 152:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 153:  MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS



Section



House Trailers at the Fairgrounds



   153.01   Designation of location



   153.02   Inspections



   153.03   Compliance with all laws



   153.04   No limitation on control of fairgrounds by county’s Fair
Board



   153.05   Permit required; application; fee; term; refusal to renew



HOUSE TRAILERS AT THE FAIRGROUNDS



§ 153.01  DESIGNATION OF LOCATION.



   The Building Inspector shall designate the location of house trailers
permitted under this subchapter, taking into consideration the location of
existing buildings, utilities, drainage, the surrounding neighborhood and the
like.



(Prior Code, § 16-11)



§ 153.02  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Building Inspector, Health Officer or other official
designated by the city may, at any reasonable time, inspect any house trailer
permitted to be used as a residence under this subchapter, or concerning
which an application is pending, and its appurtenant facilities, to ascertain
whether the owner is complying or made provision to comply with the statutes,
ordinances, laws, rules and regulations of the state, county or city.



   (B)   If the owner refuses to permit the inspection or, if upon
inspection, it is found that the owner is not so complying or has not made
provision to so comply:



      (1)   The Building Inspector shall refuse to issue a permit
and may revoke any permit which has been issued and give notice that the
house trailer must be removed or issue the orders as may be appropriate under
the circumstances; and



      (2)   The City Council shall refuse to issue any renewal of a
permit to the owner until the inspection is performed or until compliance
with such statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders is
effected.



(Prior Code, § 16-12)



§ 153.03  COMPLIANCE WITH ALL LAWS.



   The owner shall comply with the B.O.C.A. Basic Property Maintenance
Code and all other pertinent statutes, ordinances, laws, rules and
regulations of the state, county or city, now or hereafter enacted, relating
to house trailers or to the general health, safety, welfare and morals of the
community.



(Prior Code, § 16-13)



§ 153.04  NO LIMITATION ON CONTROL OF FAIRGROUNDS BY COUNTY’S FAIR BOARD.



   The permit under this subchapter shall not deprive the county’s Fair
Board of the right to exclude or remove house trailers from the fair grounds
at any time; nor shall this section be construed as a limitation on the use
of the fairgrounds as determined by the county’s Fair Board during the week
of the county fair.



(Prior Code, § 16-14)



§ 153.05  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; TERM; REFUSAL TO RENEW.



   (A)   The Building Inspector may issue permits for the location of
not to exceed eight house trailers at the county fair grounds to be used as
residences, subject to the restrictions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-21)



   (B)   Written application for a permit under this subchapter shall
be submitted by the owner of the house trailer, accompanied by a statement
from the county’s Fair Board or its designated officer stating that it has
no objection to the issuance of a permit.



(Prior Code, § 16-22)



   (C)   The owner shall pay a fee of $5 as presently established or as
hereafter adopted by resolution, for each permit under this subchapter and
renewal thereof, which fee shall not be in lieu of any taxes which may
legally be assessed.



(Prior Code, § 16-23)



   (D)   Permits under this subchapter shall not be valid for more than
90 days, provided, however, the City Council may by resolution authorize
renewals of the permits for additional 90-day periods.



(Prior Code, § 16-24)



   (E)   The City Council may for any reason refuse to renew a permit,
it being expressly intended hereby not to create a trailer park nor any
vested rights in the owner beyond the duration of a permit or renewal thereof.



(Prior Code, § 16-25)



CHAPTER 154:  FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Definitions



   154.02   Agency designation



   154.03   Code appendix enforced



Permit Requirements



   154.15   Required



   154.16   Application; fee



   154.17   Review of application



   154.18   Approvals



Standards



   154.30   Flood-safe building sites



   154.31   Subdivision proposals



   154.32   Water supply systems



   154.33   Sewer systems



   154.34   Flood elevation data



   154.35   Level of structures



   154.36   Flood insurance rates



   154.37   Alteration of watercourse



   154.38   Flood carrying capacity



   154.39   Mobile homes



   154.40   Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood leaving a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD PLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   HABITABLE FLOOR.  Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or a combination thereof. 
A floor used only for storage purposes is not a HABITABLE FLOOR.



   MOBILE HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  It does
not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.  The term includes,
but it is not limited to the definition of MOBILE HOME, as set forth in
regulations governing the Mobile Home Safety and Construction Standards
Program (24 C.F.R. § 3282.7(a)).



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   STRUCTURE.  For flood plain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a mobile home.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure either, before the improvement or repair is started or if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.  For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.  The term does
not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or
any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a flood
plain management regulation.



(Prior Code, § 11-1) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.02  AGENCY DESIGNATION.



   Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in
accordance with section 8b(6) of Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, the
office of the Building Inspector of the City of Marshall is hereby designated
as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of
Marshall under Public Act 203 of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The
City of Marshall assumes the responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the Act throughout the corporate limits of the community
adopting this section.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.03  CODE APPENDIX ENFORCED.



   Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in
accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, Michigan
Building Code, and Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced
by the enforcing agency within the City of Marshall.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



PERMIT REQUIREMENTS



§ 154.15  REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, move or, demolish any building or structure without first obtaining
a separate permit for each building or structure from the Building Inspector.



   (B)   No man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, shall
be commenced until a separate permit has been obtained from the building
inspector for each change.



   (C)   No mobile home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real
estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home from
the Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 11-16) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.16  APPLICATION; FEE.



   To obtain a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall first file a
permit application on a form furnished for that purpose.  The form must be
completed and submitted to the Building Inspector with a fee as presently
established or as hereafter adopted by resolution before the issuance of a
permit will be considered.



(Prior Code, § 11-17) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.17  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   The Building Inspector is appointed as the person responsible for
receiving applications and examining the plans and specifications for the
proposed construction or development.  After reviewing the application, the
Building Inspector shall require any additional measures which are necessary
to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-18) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.18  APPROVALS.



   The Building Inspector shall review proposed development to assure that
all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law, including § 464 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.



(Prior Code, § 11-19) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



STANDARDS



§ 154.30  FLOOD-SAFE BUILDING SITES.



   (A)   The applicant shall provide a survey from a licensed
professional showing the flood plain limits with the location of all proposed
structure(s) (i.e. houses, sheds, garages and the like) for review. The
Building Inspector shall review all permit applications to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.



   (B)   If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements (including the placement of
prefabricated buildings and mobile homes) shall:



      (1)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



      (2)   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage; and



      (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.



(Prior Code, § 11-31) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.31  SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   The Building Inspector shall review subdivision proposals and
other proposed new development to determine whether the proposals will be
reasonably safe from flooding.



   (B)   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is
in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:



      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area;



      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and



      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.



(Prior Code, § 11-32) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.32  WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.



   The Building Inspector shall require within flood-prone areas new and
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems.



(Prior Code, § 11-33) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.33  SEWER SYSTEMS.



   The Building Inspector shall require within flood-prone areas:



   (A)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters; and



   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Prior Code, § 11-34) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.34  FLOOD ELEVATION DATA.



   The Building Inspector shall require that all subdivision proposals and
other proposed new developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is the lesser, include within the proposals base flood elevation data.



(Prior Code, § 11-35) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.35  LEVEL OF STRUCTURES.



   The Building Inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source,
until the other data has been provided by the Administrator, as criteria for
requiring that:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
or above the base flood level; and



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
or floodproofed to or above the base flood level.



(Prior Code, § 11-36) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.36  FLOOD INSURANCE RATES.



   For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk
premium rates within zone A on a community’s FHBM, the Building Inspector
shall:



   (A)   Obtain, or require the applicant to furnish, the elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not
such structures contain a basement;



   (B)   Obtain, or require the applicant to furnish, if the structure
has been floodproofed, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the structure was floodproofed; and



   (C)   Maintain a record of all such information.



(Prior Code, § 11-37) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.37  ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSE.



   The Building Inspector shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the state coordinating office prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of the notifications to the
federal insurance administration.



(Prior Code, § 11-38) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.38  FLOOD CARRYING CAPACITY.



   The Building Inspector shall assure that the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.



(Prior Code, § 11-39) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.39  MOBILE HOMES.



   (A)   The Building Inspector shall require that all mobile homes to
be placed within zone A on the community’s flood hazard boundary map shall
be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing
over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors.



   (B)   Specific requirements shall be that:



      (1)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four
corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional
tie per side;



      (2)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with
five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less
than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;



      (3)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and



      (4)   Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.



(Prior Code, § 11-40) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



§ 154.40  DESIGNATION OF REGULATED FLOOD PRONE HAZARD AREAS.



   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) entitled Calhoun County, Michigan and dated 4/4/2011 and the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and panel numbers 26025C; 0236C; 0238C; 0239C;
0243C; 0380C and 0385C dated 4/4/2011 are adopted by reference for the
purposes of administration of the Michigan Building Code, and declared to be
a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the
content of the “Flood Hazards” section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan
Residential Code.



(Prior Code, § 11-41) (Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-7-2011)



CHAPTER 155:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Purposes



   155.02   Definitions



   155.03   Compliance standards



   155.04   Fees



   155.05   Variance for hardship



   155.06   Interpretation



Subdivision Procedure



   155.20   Generally



   155.21   Initial plat investigation



   155.22   Preliminary plat (Stage One)



   155.23   Preliminary plat (Stage Two)



   155.24   Final plat



Design Layout Standards



   155.35   Generally



   155.36   Streets



   155.37   Public walkways, easements, and other improvements



   155.38   Lots



   155.39   Natural features



   155.40   Flood plains



   155.41   Subdivision open space



Improvements



   155.55   Generally



   155.56   Public improvements



   155.57   Utilities



   155.58   Land divisions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the orderly growth and
harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic
circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major
thoroughfares, adjoining



subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of
maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water
supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage and other health requirements; to
secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other
public facilities; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of
these purposes.



(Prior Code, § 25-1)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
in addition to those provided for in the Subdivision Control/Land Division
Act or any other chapters in the city code of ordinances, or Michigan
Department of Transportation Specification and Guidelines, American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public or private way shown on a plat which provides
secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land.



   AASHTO.  American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   CITY.  Shall have the same meaning as City Council, City Staff, and
City Engineer within the context of the written language and statute
governing the same.



   FINAL PLAT.   A map of all or part of a subdivision providing
substantial conformance to the preliminary plat (Stage Two) of the
subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision
act and this chapter and suitable for recording by the county's Register of
Deeds.



   IMPROVEMENTS.  Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, culverts, bridges and other additions to the natural state of land
which increase its value, utility or habitability.



   LOT.  A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is
described and fixed in a recorded plat.



   MAJOR STREETS or THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The part of the master plan which
sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed
streets and thoroughfares.



   MDOT.  Michigan Department of Transportation Specification and
Guidelines.



   MUNICIPAL ENGINEER or ENGINEER.  The staff engineer, consulting
engineer or person designated as such by the city.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE ONE).  A map indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and
to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter and zoning
regulations for lot size.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE TWO).  A map showing all requisite details of
a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of
preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance with the Subdivision
Control/Land Division Act and zoning ordinance.



   PROPRIETOR.  A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or combination of any of them, which may hold any ownership
interest in land, whether recorded or not.



   PUBLIC RESERVATION.  A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for
public use and made available for public use and acquisition.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.   Any person, municipal department, board or
commission, duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under governmental
regulations to the public:  gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
communication, telegraph, transportation or water.



   STREET.  Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat filed and recorded
in the office of the county's Register of Deeds.  A STREET includes the land
between the street right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.



   SUBDIVISION.  The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of
land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose
of sale or lease of more than one year or of building development, where the
act of division creates five or more parcels of land each of which is ten
acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land each of which is ten
acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of
ten years.



   SUBDIVISION CONTROL/LAND DIVISION ACT.  The Subdivision Control/Land
Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967 as amended.



(Prior Code, § 25-2)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.03  COMPLIANCE STANDARDS.



   The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements
within the city, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way and
public easements, or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the city.  All
subdivision or project improvements within the city installed in public
streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, or under
the ultimate jurisdiction of the city, shall comply with all of the
provisions and requirements of this chapter or any other related ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 25-3)



§ 155.04  FEES.



   Preliminary and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering
fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other
applicable development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as presently
established or as hereafter adopted by resolution.



(Prior Code, § 25-4)



§ 155.05  VARIANCE FOR HARDSHIP.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council or Planning Commission may authorize
a variance from this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result
from strict compliance and provided the variance does not pertain to
requirements of the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   In granting any variance, the City Council or Planning
Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or
desirable for the public interest.



      (3)   In making its findings, as required herein below, the
City Council or Planning Commission shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number
of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable
effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.



   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the City Council or
Planning Commission finds:



      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting
the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;



      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; and/or



      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which
the property is situated.



(Prior Code, § 25-5)



§ 155.06  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and general welfare of the city.



   (B)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the city, nor
conflict with any statutes of the state or the county, except that this
chapter shall prevail in cases where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations.



(Prior Code, § 25-6)



SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE



§ 155.20  GENERALLY.



   The preparation of a subdivision for platting may be preceded by an
initial investigation and shall go through two phases:  preliminary plat
(Stages One and Two) and final plat, all in accordance with the procedure as
set out in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 25-16)



§ 155.21  INITIAL PLAT INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is
suggested that the proprietor meet informally with the city departments
concerned to investigate the procedures and standards of the city with
reference to this chapter and with the proposals of the master plan as they
affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located.



   (B)   The proprietor should concern himself or herself with the
following factors.



      (1)   The proprietor should secure a copy of the zoning
ordinance, this chapter, engineering specifications and other similar
ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so
as to make himself aware of the requirements of the city.



      (2)   The area for the proposed subdivision should be properly
zoned for the intended use.



      (3)   An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the
adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the
proposed subdivision should be made by the proprietor.



      (4)   The relationship of the proposed subdivision with
respect to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares,
should be investigated by the proprietor.



      (5)   Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage
of the city should be investigated by the proprietor.



(Prior Code, § 25-17)



§ 155.22  PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE ONE).



   The procedure, under Stage 1, for preparation and submittal of a
preliminary plat of the land area to be subdivided shall be as follows:



   (A)   Filing.



      (1)   When filing a preliminary plat Stage 1 for tentative
approval, the title block shall read as follows:  Preliminary Plat Stage 1.



      (2)   Ten copies of the preliminary plat Stage 1 of the
proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate, shall
be submitted to the Clerk for the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Submittal with the Clerk shall be at least ten days
prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting (which meeting shall be
considered as the date of filing) at which the proprietor will be scheduled
to appear.  Should any of the data required in this section be omitted, the
Clerk shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required and
Planning Commission action shall be delayed until the required data is
received.  The Planning Commission shall act on the preliminary plat (Stage
1) within 30 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an
extension of time in writing.



   (B)   Identification and description.  The preliminary plat (Stage
1) shall include:



      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision;



      (2)   Location by section, town and range or by other legal
description;



      (3)   Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner proprietor
and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision
layout; (The proprietor shall also indicate his or her interest in the land.)



      (4)   Scale of plat, one inch equals 100 feet as minimum
acceptable scale; and



      (5)   Date, north point, and in the title block shall be the
words; Preliminary Plat Stage -1.



      (6)   Street names as approved by the City Council



   (C)   Preparation.  The preliminary plat (Stage 1) should be drawn
to scale and show the arrangement of lots, blocks and streets.  Dimensions
of all lots shall be shown, but may be approximated.  It is the intent of
this chapter that the preliminary plat (Stage One) need not be done in
precisely engineered plans, but be only in sufficient detail to permit
planning review.  At this stage, the proprietor should expect that the
Planning Commission may require major alterations to be made in the plat if
it is found necessary. It is not necessary that the preliminary plat (Stage
One) be prepared by and sealed by a surveyor; provided, however, that the
outside dimensions of the plat shall be based upon an accurate boundary
survey prepared by a surveyor.



   (D)   Existing conditions. The preliminary plat (Stage 1) shall
include:



      (1)   An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 1,000 feet showing the relationship of the subdivision to its
surroundings within one-half mile such as section lines or major streets or
collector streets shall be provided;



      (2)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or
corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property
dimensions;



      (3)   Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and
unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for
subdivision, including those of areas across abutting roads;



      (4)   Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted
streets and private streets and public easements within or adjacent to the
tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting
roads;



      (5)   Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains
and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being
proposed for subdivision; and



      (6)   Topography drawn as contours with an interval of not
less than two feet.  Topography is to be based on U.S.G.S. datum.



   (E)   Proposed conditions.  The preliminary plat (Stage 1) shall
include:



      (1)   Layout of streets indicating proposed street names,
right-of-way widths and connections with adjoining platted streets and also
the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways;



      (2)   Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots,
including front building setback lines showing dimensions;



      (3)   Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated
or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the
subdivision;



      (4)   An indication of the ownership, and existing and
proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary
plat;  (If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified
as "excepted," the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be
developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district
in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of
the proposed preliminary plat.)



      (5)   An indication of the system proposed for sewage disposal
by a method previously accepted by the city;



      (6)   An indication of the system proposed for water supply by
a method previously accepted by the city;



      (7)   An indication of the storm drainage proposed by a method
previously accepted by the city and, if involving county drains, the proposed
method of drainage shall be acceptable to the county's Drain Commissioner; and



      (8)   In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a
given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the
preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire
area.  The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly
superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method
of development which the proprietor intends to follow.  Each subsequent plat
shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the
proprietor is subdivided.



   (F)   Review by Planning Commission.



      (1)   The clerk shall receive and check for completeness the
preliminary plat as required under divisions (A) through (E) above.  If
complete and basically in conformance with applicable city requirements, the
Clerk shall place the proposal on the agenda of the next regular Planning
Commission meeting.



      (2)   The Clerk shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat
to the municipal engineer for his or her technical review and recommendation
and transmit a copy to the School Board.



      (3)   The Planning Commission shall review all details of the
proposed subdivision within the framework of the zoning ordinance, within the
various elements of the master plan and within the standards of this chapter.



      (4)   The Planning Commission shall approve conditionally,
disapprove, or approve the preliminary plat.



         (a)   Should the approval be a conditioned approval,
such conditions shall be satisfied by the proprietor within a time set by the
Planning Commission or the plat shall be rejected.  A copy of the minutes
shall be sent to the City Council and proprietor.



         (b)   Should the Planning Commission disapprove the
preliminary plat (Stage One), it shall record the reasons in the minutes of
the regular meeting.  The Planning Commission shall notify the proprietor of
its determination personally or by notice sent by ordinary mail to the
proprietor's last known address filed with the Planning Commission.  A copy
of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor and the City Council.



         (c)   Should the Planning Commission find that all
conditions have been satisfactorily met, it may give approval to the
preliminary plat.  The Chairperson shall make a notation to that effect on
each copy of the preliminary plat and distribute copies of same as follows:



            1.   Return one copy to the proprietor;



            2.   Retain one copy which shall become a matter
of permanent record in the Planning Commission files;



            3.   Forward one copy to the School Board; and



            4.   File the remaining copies with the Clerk's
office.



   (G)   Action.  The action of the Planning Commission shall become
the action of the City Council unless the City Council shall decide upon a
hearing or unless, within ten days after approval or from the date the
proprietor is notified of rejection of the preliminary plat, the proprietor
shall file with the Clerk a written request for hearing before the City
Council.



   (H)   Hearing.  The hearing, if requested, shall be held by the
City Council at its next regular meeting occurring not less than ten days
after filing of the request.  Following the hearing, the City Council shall
approve or reject the preliminary plat.



   (I)   Approval effective. Approval of the preliminary plat (Stage
One) shall be effective for a period of nine months.  Should a preliminary
plat (Stage Two) not be submitted for tentative approval within this time
limit, the preliminary plat (Stage One) must again be submitted for approval
unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor and the request is
granted in writing by the Planning Commission or City Council, whichever body
gave approval to the preliminary plat (Stage One).



(Prior Code, § 25-18)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.23  PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE TWO).



   The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat
(Stage 2) requires tentative and final approval as follows:



   (A)   Filing.



      (1)   When filing a preliminary plat stage 2 for tentative
approval, the title block shall read as follows:  Preliminary Plat Stage-2
Tentative Approval and for a final submittal the title block shall read;
Preliminary Plat Stage 2 Final Approval.



      (2)   The preliminary plat (Stage 2) shall comply with the
provisions of the Subdivision Control/Land Division Act, including § 111
thereof.



      (3)   The preliminary plat (Stage 2) shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat (Stage One) as approved and it may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however,
that the portion conforms to this chapter.



      (4)   Ten copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, together with written application in triplicate, shall be
submitted to the Clerk at least ten days prior to the regular Planning
Commission meeting (which meeting shall be considered as the date of filing).



      (5)   The Clerk shall check the proposed plat for
completeness.  Should any of the data required in the Subdivision Act or §
155.22(A) through (E) be omitted, the Clerk shall be directed to inform the
proprietor of the data required, and that the application will be delayed
until the required data is received.



      (6)   The Clerk shall transmit a copy of the valid and
complete preliminary plat to the municipal engineer for technical review and
recommendation.



   (B)   Planning Commission review; tentative approval.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall place the preliminary plat on the
next regular Planning Commission agenda, at which meeting the proprietor will
be scheduled to appear.  The Planning Commission shall act on the
preliminary plat within 30 days after the date of filing unless the
proprietor agrees to an extension, in writing, of the time required for
approval by the City Council and Planning Commission.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to send a notice
by registered or certified mail to the owners of land immediately adjoining
the property to be platted of the presentment of the preliminary plat and the
time and place of the meeting of the Planning Commission to consider the
preliminary plat; the notice shall be sent not less than five days before the
date fixed therefore.



      (3)   The preliminary plat (Stage 2) shall be reviewed by the
municipal engineer as to conformity with the approved preliminary plat (Stage
One) and plans for utilities and other improvements.



      (4)   The municipal engineer shall notify the Planning
Commission of his or her recommendation for either approval or rejection of
the preliminary plat.



      (5)   The preliminary plat (Stage 2) documents shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission as to conformity with the approved
preliminary plat (Stage 1) and compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



      (6)   Should the Planning Commission find that the preliminary
plat (Stage 2) is in satisfactory conformance with the preliminary plat
(Stage 1) and with the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve same
and notify the City Council of this action in its official minutes and
forward the same, together with all accompanying data, to the City Council
for its review.



      (7)   Should the Planning Commission find that the preliminary
plat (Stage 2) does not conform satisfactorily to the previously approved
preliminary plat (Stage 1) or with the requirements of this chapter, and that
it is not acceptable, they shall record the reason in their official minutes
and forward same together with all accompanying data to the City Council; and
recommend that the City Council disapprove the preliminary plat (Stage 2)
until the objections causing disapproval have been changed to meet the
approval of the Planning Commission.



   (C)   City Council tentative approval.



      (1)   The City Council will not review a preliminary plat
(Stage 2) until it has received the review and recommendations of the
Planning Commission.  The City Council shall take action on the preliminary
plat (Stage 2) within 60 days of the date of initial filing of the plat with
the City Clerk, as required in division (B)(1) above.



      (2)   Should the City Council tentatively approve the
preliminary plat (Stage 2), they shall record their approval on the plat and
return one copy to the proprietor.



      (3)   Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval
of the preliminary plat (Stage 2).  Tentative approval of the City Council
shall be effective for a period of 12 months.



      (4)   Should the preliminary plat (Stage 2) in whole or in
part not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the
preliminary plat, (Stage 2) must again be submitted to the Planning
Commission and City Council for approval unless an extension is applied for
by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the City Council.



   (D)   Review by City Council; final approval.



      (1)   The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat
(Stage 2) with the City Clerk together with a certified list of all
authorities required for approval in §§ 112 to 119 of the Subdivision
Control Act.  The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of
preliminary plats (Stage 2) from each of the required authorities.



      (2)   The City Council shall take action on the preliminary
plat (Stage 2) within 20 days of the submission of all necessary approved
plats.



      (3)   If the preliminary plat (Stage 2) conforms substantially
to the plat tentatively approved by the City Council and meets all conditions
laid down for tentative approval, the City Council shall give final approval
to the preliminary plat (Stage 2).



      (4)   The City Clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of
approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given.



      (5)   Final approval shall be effective for a period of two
years from the date of final approval.  The two-year period may be extended
if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the City Council in writing.



      (6)   No installation or construction of any improvements
shall be made before the preliminary plat (Stage2) has received final
approval of the City Council, engineering plans have been approved by the
municipal engineer and any deposits required under § 155.55 have been
received by the city.



(Prior Code, § 25-19)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.24  FINAL PLAT.



   The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Preparation.



      (1)   The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the
Subdivision Act.



      (2)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the
preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop
at the time; provided, however, that, the portion conforms to this chapter.



      (3)   (a)   The proprietor shall furnish to the City
Council an abstract of title certified to date of the proprietor’s
certificate to establish recorded ownership interests and any other
information deemed necessary for the purpose of ascertaining whether the
proper parties have signed the plat, or a policy of title insurance currently
in force, covering all the land included within the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision.



         (b)   The City Council, in lieu of an abstract of title,
may accept, on its own responsibility, an attorney’s opinion based on the
abstract of title as to ownership and marketability of title of the land.



      (4)   The proprietor shall submit for review, any covenants or
agreements which are proposed to be recorded with the plat.



   (B)   Final plat review.



      (1)   The original copies of the plat as required by the state
department of treasury and three paper prints of the final plat shall be
filed by the proprietor with the City Clerk and shall deposit such sums of
money as the City Council may require herein or by other ordinances.



      (2)   The final plat shall be reviewed by the municipal
engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat (Stage Two) and
plans for utilities and other improvements.



      (3)   The municipal engineer shall notify the City Council of
his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the final plat.



      (4)   The City Council shall review all recommendations and
take action on the final plat within 20 days of its date of filing.



      (5)   (a)   Upon the approval of the final plat by the City
Council, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the
Subdivision Act.



         (b)   The three prints of the final plat shall be
forwarded; one to the City Clerk, one to the Planning Commission and one to
the Building Department.



         (c)   The original copies shall be forwarded to the City
Clerk of the county’s Plat Board.



(Prior Code, § 25-20)



DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS



§ 155.35  GENERALLY.



   The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this subchapter
are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor.  All final
plans shall be reviewed by city staff prior to City Council approval.  Staff
will forward a report to the City Council to either accept or reject the
proposed layout.



(Prior Code, § 25-31)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.36  STREETS.



   Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the
general specifications and typical cross-sections as set forth in this
subchapter and other conditions or regulations set forth by the city.



   (A)   Location and arrangement.



      (1)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various
elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to the
existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets and the part
shall be platted in the location and width indicated on the plan.



      (2)   The street layout shall provide for continuation of
existing streets in the adjoining subdivisions or the proper projection of
streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a
neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the Planning Commission.



      (3)   The street layout shall include minor streets so laid
out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged.



      (4)   Should a proposed subdivision border on an existing
proposed major thoroughfare, the Planning Commission may require reverse
frontage or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection
of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic
hazards.



      (5)   Should a proposed subdivision border on a railroad,
expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning
Commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and
on each side of the right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development
of any use of the intervening land.  The distances shall be determined with
due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to
future grade separation.



      (6)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where
absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in
conformity with the other requirements of this chapter, and where the
Planning Commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of
the other half when the adjoining property is developed.  Wherever there
exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a dedicated or platted and
recorded half street, the other half shall be platted.



   (B)   Street designs -  such as but not limited to right-of-way
widths, geometrics, intersections, jogs, and acceleration-deceleration lanes,
shall conform to the MDoT and AASHTO guidelines and specifications as amended
from time to time and those standards and regulation specified by the city as
amended from time to time in which case the city standards and regulations
shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 25-32)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.37  PUBLIC WALKWAYS, EASEMENTS, AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.



   Public walkways, easements, and other improvements within subdivisions
shall conform to the following standards:



   (A)   Public walkways.



      (1)   The location of public walkways or crosswalks shall be
designed to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to public or private
facilities as may be explain in the city and recreational master plans.



      (2)   Public walkways shall be dedicated for this purpose.



      (3)   Sidewalks shall be required in all residential
subdivisions and commercial developments on those streets that are dedicated
for public purposes.  The City Council may require sidewalks in industrial
parks.



   (B)   Easements for utility installation.  It shall be the
responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plat
(Stage 2) to all appropriate utility agencies be they public or private for
review and acceptance with their standards and regulations.  Prior to the
approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be
obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements have
been provided along specific lots.



(Prior Code, § 25-33)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.38  LOTS.



   Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:



   (A)   Sizes and shapes.



      (1)   Lot areas and widths and building setback lines shall
conform to at least the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted
at least ten feet wider than the minimum width permitted by the zoning
ordinance.



      (3)   Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be
avoided.  A depth-to-width ratio of three to one shall normally be
considered a maximum.



      (4)   Lots intended for purposes other than residential use
shall be specifically designed for such purposes and shall have adequate
provision for off-street parking, setbacks, and other requirements in
accordance with the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Arrangement.



      (1)   Every lot shall front or abut a street.



      (2)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the
street lines.



      (3)   Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or
secondary thoroughfares, where marginal access streets are not desirable or
possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side
lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with
extra depth to permit greater distances between building and the traffic way.



      (4)   Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all
streets where possible.



(Prior Code, § 25-34)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.39  NATURAL FEATURES.



   The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever
possible.  Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large
trees, natural groves and similar community assets that will add
attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved.  The preservation of
drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and
the dedication and provision of adequate barriers where appropriate shall be
required.



(Prior Code, § 25-35)



§ 155.40  FLOOD PLAINS.



   Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either
wholly or in part within the flood plain of a river, stream, creek or lake or
any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by storm water
shall require specific compliance with the Subdivision Act and its review by
the Water Resources Commission of the Department of Natural Resources.



(Prior Code, § 25-36)



§ 155.41  SUBDIVISION OPEN SPACE.



   (A)   The following requirements apply in addition to all other
requirements of this chapter where a preliminary plat is filed for approval
under the subdivision open space plan section of the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   The following provisions are only applicable if provided for
in the zoning ordinance:



      (1)   Consideration by the Planning Commission and the City
Council of proposed optional use of subdivision open space plan shall reflect
the following basic principles.



         (a)   The subdivision open space plan section of the
zoning ordinance provides an optional method of subdividing property and
approval of any subdivision open space plan is subject to the discretion of
the city.



         (b)   Particular attention shall be given to the effect
of a subdivision open space plan upon the immediate area, where the character
of that area has been established by previous development.  Major attention
shall be given by the Planning Commission and the City Council to the
benefits to be derived by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the
pity because of the subdivision open space plan with minor consideration to
be given to the proprietor.  The following objectives shall govern the
approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision open space plan:



            1.   Provide a more desirable living environment
by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks,
hills and similar natural assets;



            2.   Encourage developers to use a more creative
approach in the development of residential areas;



            3.   Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and
desirable use of the land while recognizing a reduction in development costs
and by allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site; and



            4.   Encourage the provision of open space within
reasonable distance of all lot development so benefits may accrue to the
subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational
facilities and areas.



      (2)   The application for approval of the subdivision open
space plan shall contain the following, in addition to the information
required by other sections of this chapter:



         (a)   A complete description of the land proposed to be
dedicated to common use (herein called open land) shall be provided,
including the following as a minimum:



            1.   Legal description of open land;



            2.   Topographical survey of open land;



            3.   Type of soil in open land (include a minimum
of one soil boring and percolation test per acre);



            4.   Description of natural features on open land
(stands of trees or other vegetation, streams or other bodies of water and
the like); and



            5.   Other relevant factors.



         (b)   The proposed plan of development of the open land
shall be contained in the application and shall include the following as a
minimum:



            1.   How legal title is to be held;



            2.   How the property shall be regulated;



            3.   Provisions for the payment of taxes;



            4.   Persons or corporations to be responsible for
maintenance;



            5.   How maintenance is to be guaranteed;



            6.   How maintenance and development are to be
financed;



            7.   Proposed uses of open land;



            8.   What improvements are to be constructed by
the developer and an estimate of the cost thereof prepared by a landscape
architect or civil engineer, licensed to practice in the state; and



            9.   Other relevant facts related to the proposed
uses of open land.



         (c)   The application shall contain a statement of the
benefits to be realized by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the
city by approval of the proposed subdivision open space plan with particular
reference to the objectives of this section.



      (3)   Before any action is taken upon any subdivision open
space plan filing, copies of the preliminary plat, application and supporting
data shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the Planning Commission and to
the City Attorney for review and recommendation.



         (a)   The Planning Commission shall review and render an
opinion upon the proposed subdivision open space plan from the materials
furnished and from visits to the site or such other information as they may
deem necessary and render their opinion with respect to the following:



            1.   The suitability of the proposed open land for
purposes proposed;



            2.   The need for the proposed uses in the general
area;



            3.   The location and layout of the open spaces
with relation to the lots within the subdivision;



            4.   The effect upon neighboring areas which would
result by the subdivision open space plan and the appropriateness of the
development of the lot sizes proposed under the subdivision open space plan
in the particular area involved; and



            5.   Any other factor related to the development
and proper design of the proposed subdivision.



         (b)   The City Attorney shall review the proposed
subdivision open space plan and render his or her opinion with respect to the
following:



            1.   The proposed manner of holding title to the
open land;



            2.   The proposed manner of payment of taxes;



            3.   The proposed method of regulating the use of
the open land;



            4.   The proposed method of maintenance of
property and financing thereof; and



            5.   Any other factor related to the legal or
practical problems of ownership, use and maintenance of the open land.



      (4)   If the Planning Commission is satisfied that the
proposed subdivision open space plan meets the letter and spirit of this
section and the zoning ordinance and should be approved, it shall give
tentative approval to the plat with the conditions upon which the approval
should be based.  Thereafter, the City Council shall take action upon the
application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (5)   If the Planning Commission is not satisfied that the
proposed subdivision open space plan meets the letter and spirit of the
zoning ordinance or finds that the approval of the subdivision open space
plan will be detrimental to existing development in the general area and
should not be approved, it shall communicate the disapproval to the city with
the reasons therefor.  The proprietor shall be entitled to a hearing upon
the proposal before the City Clerk upon written request therefor filed with
the City Clerk.



      (6)   If the City Council gives preliminary approval of the
proposed subdivision open space plan, it shall instruct the City Attorney to
prepare a contract setting forth the conditions upon which the approval is
based, which contract, after approval thereof by the City Council shall be
entered into between the city and the proprietor prior to the approval of any
final plat based upon the approved preliminary plat.



      (7)   At the time of application for final approval, the
proprietor shall deposit a cash or corporate surety bond in the amount of the
estimated cost of the proposed improvements to the open land guaranteeing the
completion of the improvements within a time to be set by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 25-37)



IMPROVEMENTS



§ 155.55  GENERALLY.



   (A)   The improvements set forth under this subchapter are to be
considered as the minimum acceptable standard.  All those improvements for
which standards are not specifically set forth shall be reviewed and accepted
by the City Engineer based on good engineering practice.  In addition, all
data for the subdivision layout and utilities such as but not limited to
water and sewer lines, manhole and catch basins, curb lines, and street
lights shall be provided in an electronic format acceptable to the City
Engineer for incorporation into the city's geographical information system.



   (B)   Prior to the undertaking of any improvements and information
integration to the city's geographical information system, the proprietor
shall sign a development agreement. 



   (C)   Prior to final approval of a subdivision, the developer shall
deposit with the City Clerk cash, a certified check, or irrevocable bank
letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, to insure faithful
completion of all improvements under § 155.56 and within the time specified
in the development agreement.  The amount of the deposit shall be based on
an estimate by the engineer and acceptable to the city.  The city shall
release funds for the payment of work as it is completed and accepted.  Upon
submittal of the "as built" plans and their acceptance, the final release
will be made.



   (D)   Prior to the acceptance by the city of improvements, a
two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the city shall be posted by the
proprietor.



   (E)   Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance
with the standards and requirements established by the city as amended from
time to time.



(Prior Code, § 25-46)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.56  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   All streets, curb and gutter, sidewalks, roadway pavements, street
signage (such as street names or directional signs), trees, street lights,
and appurtenances thereto shall comply with and installed per the policies,
standards, and regulations specified by the city and contained in the
chapters of the city code of ordinances governing the same.



(Prior Code, § 25-47)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.57  UTILITIES.



   (A)   Requirements for underground wiring.



      (1)   The proprietor shall make arrangements for all lines for
telephone, electric, television and other similar services distributed by
wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area,
unless approved otherwise by the city.



      (2)   The conduits or cables may be placed within a ten foot
private easement to service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated
public ways.  All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
standards of construction as approved and under the jurisdiction of the
Michigan Public Service Commission.



      (3)   All drainage and underground utility installations which
traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by
the proprietor.



   (B)   Storm drainage system and other drainage improvements. The
storm drainage system and other drainage improvements shall be per plans
reviewed and accepted by the city.  Where county drains are involved, a
letter or document of acceptance from the County Drain Commissioner must be
submitted by the proprietor.



   (C)   Sewerage and water system.  The sewerage and water systems
shall be installed per plans reviewed and accepted by the city as well as any
other approval required from any other governmental unit having jurisdiction
over the system.



(Prior Code, § 25-48)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 155.58  LAND DIVISIONS.



   Lot splits or combinations as well as any other division of land
allowed under the Subdivision Control/Land Division Act shall be made in
conformance with this Act, zoning ordinance, and any other standards and
regulations pertaining thereto.  A property owner requesting a lot split or
combination shall do so on the forms provided by the Assessing Department and
include all documentation requested prior to filing any deed or land
contract.  A building or zoning permit shall not be issued for a division of
land that does not meet the requirements of this section and the city zoning
ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 25-49)  (Ord. 06-06, passed 6-5-2006)



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING



Section



   156.01   Zoning Ordinance adopted



§ 156.01  ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED.



   The Zoning Ordinance for Marshall, Michigan, as adopted by Ord.
2016-07, passed 9-6-2016,  is now hosted on the city's official website, and
can be accessed through the following link:



   http://www.cityofmarshall.com/system/res/1737/original/9-15-2017_Clearzon
ing.pdf. 



Paper copies of the Zoning Ordinance are also available for review in the
Office of the City Clerk during normal business hours.



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED



 

M.C.L.A. Cites
 
Code Section




15.231—15.246
 
117.15, 119.08


24.201—24.326
 
70.001


28.451 et seq.
 
134.30


37.2101 et seq.
 
94.09


37.2103
 
94.02


37.2501
 
94.02


37.2502
 
94.03


37.2503
 
94.04


37.2504
 
94.05


37.2505
 
94.06


37.2506
 
94.07


37.2507
 
94.08


38.1501
 
30.02


117.3(k)
 
95.01, 150.085


117.4i (10)
 
10.99


117.5b
 
10.01


123.361 et seq.
 
50.02


125.1501 et seq.
 
150.002


125.1651—125.1680
 
31.55, 31.57, 31.59


125.1651—125.1681
 
31.56


125.31 et seq.
 
151.01—151.03


125.51 et seq.
 
151.03


125.581 et seq.
 
151.03


125.651 et seq.
 
31.35


125.653
 
31.35


128.1
 
96.05


141.2101
 
Chapter 32


215.231
 
117.21


215.246
 
117.21


247.183
 
113.02


252.301 et seq.
 
116.02


252.318
 
116.01


257.1—257.923
 
70.001


257.7
 
70.008


257.7a
 
70.008


257.625(1)(c)
 
70.001


257.717
 
70.005


257.719
 
70.005


257.722
 
70.005


257.725
 
70.005


287.261 et seq.
 
97.20


287.388
 
97.02


289.1101 - 289.8111
 
119.03


324.40101 - 324.40119
 
134.25


324.40111
 
134.25


324.43501 - 324.43561
 
134.25


324.82101 et seq.
 
70.003


333.2850
 
96.07


333.7106
 
119.03


333.26421 et seq.
 
137.20 , 137.21, 137.22, 119.01


333.24623(e)
 
137.20


333.24624(e)
 
137.20


333.27101 et seq.
 
119.01


397.201 et seq.
 
93.01


433.11 et seq.
 
97.02


434.21 et seq.
 
34.20


436.1101 et seq.
 
136.01


436.1703
 
136.01


436.1703(b)
 
136.01


445.111 et seq.
 
112.04


480.11 et seq.
 
70.002


484.2102
 
117.03


484.2251
 
117.15


560.101 et seq.
 
155.02


600.8395
 
70.010


600.8396
 
35.04


600.8396 et seq.
 
35.01


722.51 et seq.
 
118.06


722.111 et seq.
 
118.04


722.751 et seq.
 
136.02


750.33
 
116.02


750.57
 
97.06


750.103
 
135.02


750.167
 
134.01, 134.10, 135.02


750.169
 
134.06


750.215
 
131.06


750.222 et seq.
 
134.25


750.234b
 
134.25


750.234f
 
134.25, 134.31


750.240
 
131.02


750.301 et seq.
 
135.32


750.303
 
135.30


750.309
 
135.32


750.314
 
135.31


750.335a
 
135.01


750.337
 
135.02


750.356 et seq.
 
133.02


750.356d
 
133.04


750.377a et seq.
 
133.01


750.411a
 
131.03


750.448 et seq.
 
135.15


750.479
 
131.04


750.493b
 
134.29


750.493d
 
134.28


750.540e
 
132.02


750.546 et seq.
 
133.03


752.361 et seq.
 
118.06


752.525
 
134.06


752.541
 
134.09


752.542
 
134.09


752.543
 
134.08


764.9(f)(1)
 
137.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code
 
2004 Code




1-1
 
10.01


1-2
 
10.02


1-3
 
10.03


1-4
 
10.04


1-5
 
10.05


1-6
 
10.06


1-7
 
10.07


1-8
 
10.08


1-9
 
10.09


1-10
 
10.99


1-11
 
10.10


1-12
 
10.11


2-21
 
30.01


2-36
 
31.01


2-37
 
31.02


2-38
 
31.03


2-56
 
31.15


2-57
 
31.16


2-58
 
31.17


2-59
 
31.18


2-60
 
31.19


2-61
 
31.20


2-62
 
31.21


2-71
 
31.35


2-76
 
31.45


2-77
 
31.55


2-78
 
31.56


2-79
 
31.57


2-80
 
31.58


2-81
 
31.59


2-82
 
30.02


2-140
 
32.01


2-141
 
32.02


2-142
 
32.03


2-143
 
32.04


2-144
 
32.05


2-145
 
32.06


2-146
 
32.07


2-147
 
32.08


2-148
 
32.09


2-149
 
32.10


2-161
 
34.20


2-165
 
35.01


2-166
 
35.02


2-167
 
35.03


2-168
 
35.04


2-169
 
35.05


2-170
 
35.06


2-171
 
35.07


2-172
 
35.08


2-173
 
35.09


2-174
 
35.10


2-175
 
35.11


2-176
 
35.12


3-1
 
116.01


3-2
 
116.02


3-3
 
116.03


3-16
 
116.15


3-17
 
116.16


3-18
 
116.17


3-19
 
116.18


3-20
 
116.19


3-21
 
116.20


3-22
 
116.21


3-23
 
116.22


3-24
 
116.23


3-25
 
116.24


3-30
 
116.35


3-31
 
116.36


3-32
 
116.37


3-33
 
116.38


3-34
 
116.39


3-35
 
116.40


3-36
 
116.41


4-11
 
98.01


4-12
 
98.02


4-13
 
98.03


4-14
 
98.04


4-15
 
98.05


4-16
 
98.06


4-17
 
98.07


4-18
 
98.08


4-19
 
98.09


4-20
 
98.10


4-21
 
98.11


4-22
 
98.12


4-31
 
98.25


4-32
 
98.26


4-33
 
98.27


4-34
 
98.28


4.5-1
 
115.01


4.5-2
 
115.02


4.5-3
 
115.03


4.5-4
 
115.04


4.5-5
 
115.05


5-11
 
114.01


5-21
 
114.02


5-22
 
114.03


5-23
 
114.04


5-24
 
114.05


5-25
 
114.06


5-26
 
114.07


6-1
 
97.01


6-2
 
97.02


6-3
 
97.03


6-4
 
97.04


6-5
 
97.05


6-6
 
97.06


6-7
 
97.99


6-16
 
97.20


6-17
 
97.21


7-11
 
150.001


7-12
 
150.002


7-15
 
150.004


7-17
 
150.005


7-75
 
150.068


7-101
 
150.095


7-102
 
150.096


7-103
 
150.097


7-104
 
150.098


7-106
 
150.099


7-107
 
150.099


7-108
 
150.099


7-109
 
150.099


7-110
 
150.099


7-111
 
150.099


8-1
 
96.01


8-2
 
96.02


8-3
 
96.03


8-4
 
96.04


8-5
 
96.05


8-6
 
96.06


8-7
 
96.07


8-8
 
96.08


8-9
 
96.09


8-10
 
96.10


8-11
 
96.11


8-12
 
96.12


8-13
 
96.13


8-14
 
96.14


9-1
 
113.01


9-2
 
113.02


9-3
 
113.03


9-11
 
113.15


9-12
 
113.16


9-13
 
113.17


9-14
 
113.18


9-15
 
113.19


9-16
 
113.20


9-17
 
113.21


9-18
 
113.22


9-19
 
113.23


9-20
 
113.24


9-21
 
113.25


9-22
 
113.26


9-23
 
113.27


9-25
 
113.28


9-26
 
113.29


9-27
 
113.30


9-28
 
113.04


10-11
 
95.01


10-12
 
95.02


10-13
 
95.03


10-14
 
95.04


10-15
 
95.05


10-16
 
95.06


10-17
 
95.99


10-21
 
95.15


10-22
 
95.16


10-23
 
95.17


10-24
 
95.18


10-25
 
95.19


11-1
 
154.01


11-16
 
154.15


11-17
 
154.16


11-18
 
154.17


11-19
 
154.18


11-31
 
154.30


11-32
 
154.31


11-33
 
154.32


11-34
 
154.33


11-35
 
154.34


11-36
 
154.35


11-37
 
154.36


11-38
 
154.37


11-39
 
154.38


11-40
 
154.39


11-41
 
154.40


12-1
 
50.01


12-2
 
50.02


12-3
 
50.03


12-4
 
50.04


12-5
 
50.05


12-6
 
50.06


12-7
 
50.07


12-8
 
50.08


12-9
 
50.09


12-10
 
50.10


12-21
 
50.20


12-22
 
50.21


12-23
 
50.22


12-24
 
50.23


12-25
 
50.24


12-26
 
50.25


13-11
 
94.01


13-12
 
94.02


13-13
 
94.03


13-14
 
94.04


13-15
 
94.05


13-16
 
94.06


13-17
 
94.07


13-18
 
94.08


13-19
 
94.09


13-20
 
94.10


14-1
 
93.01


15-1
 
110.01


15-2
 
110.02


15-3
 
110.03


15-4
 
110.04


15-5
 
110.05


15-6
 
110.06


15-7
 
110.20


15-8
 
110.21


15-9
 
110.22


15-10
 
110.23


15-11
 
110.24


15-12
 
110.35


15-13
 
110.36


15-14
 
110.37


15-15
 
110.38


15-16
 
110.39


15-17
 
110.50


15-18
 
110.51


15-19
 
110.52


15-20
 
110.53


15-21
 
110.54


15-22
 
110.65


15-23
 
110.66


15-24
 
110.67


15-25
 
110.68


15-26
 
110.69


15-27
 
110.69


15-28
 
110.69


15-29
 
110.69


16-11
 
153.01


16-12
 
153.02


16-13
 
153.03


16-14
 
153.04


16-21
 
153.05


16-22
 
153.05


16-23
 
153.05


16-24
 
153.05


16-25
 
153.05


17-14
 
92.04


17-15
 
92.05


17-16
 
92.06


17-17
 
92.07


17-18
 
92.08


17-19
 
92.09


17-20
 
92.10


17-21
 
92.11


17.5-1
 
34.01


17.5-2
 
34.02


17.5-3
 
34.03


17.5-4
 
34.99


17.5-7
 
34.04


17.5-8
 
34.05


17.5-9
 
34.06


17.5-10
 
34.07


17.5-11
 
34.08


17.5-12
 
34.09


17.5-13
 
34.10


18-2
 
130.02


18-3
 
130.03


18-4
 
130.04


18-16
 
131.01


18-17
 
131.02


18-18
 
131.03


18-19
 
131.04


18-20
 
131.05


18-21
 
131.06


18-31
 
132.01


18-32
 
132.02


18-41
 
133.01


18-42
 
133.02


18-43
 
133.03, 133.99


18-45
 
133.04, 133.99


18-51
 
134.01


18-52
 
134.02


18-53
 
134.03


18-54
 
134.04


18-55
 
134.05


18-56
 
134.06


18-57
 
134.06


18-58
 
134.08


18-59
 
134.09


18-60
 
134.09


18-61
 
134.10


18-71
 
134.25


18-72
 
134.26


18-73
 
134.27


18-74
 
134.28


18-75
 
134.29


18-76
 
134.30


18-77
 
134.31, 134.99


18-86
 
135.01


18-87
 
135.02


18-96
 
135.15


18-97
 
135.16


18-98
 
135.17


18-99
 
135.18


18-100
 
135.19


18-106
 
135.30


18-107
 
135.31


18-108
 
135.32


18-117
 
136.01


18-118
 
136.02


18-119
 
136.03


18-120
 
137.01


18-121
 
137.02


18-122
 
137.03


18-123
 
137.04


18-124
 
137.99


18-128
 
138.01


18-129
 
138.02


18-130
 
138.03


18-131
 
138.04


18-132
 
138.05


18-133
 
138.06


19-1
 
91.01


19-2
 
91.02


20-1
 
112.01


20-2
 
112.02


20-3
 
112.03


20-4
 
112.04


20-5
 
112.05


20-6
 
112.06


20-7
 
112.07


20-8
 
112.08


20-9
 
112.09


20-10
 
112.10


20-11
 
112.11


20-13
 
112.12


20-14
 
112.13


20-15
 
112.14


20-16
 
112.15


21-1
 
151.01


21-2
 
151.02


21-3
 
151.03


22-1
 
33.01


22-2
 
33.15


22-3
 
33.16


22-4
 
33.17


22-5
 
33.18


22-6
 
33.19


22-7
 
33.20


22-8
 
33.21


22-9
 
33.22


22-10
 
33.23


22-11
 
33.24


22-12
 
33.25


22-13
 
33.26


22-14
 
33.27


22-15
 
33.28


22-16
 
33.29


22-17
 
33.45


22-18
 
33.46


22-19
 
33.47


22-20
 
33.48


22-22
 
33.49


22-23
 
33.30


24-1
 
90.01


24-2
 
90.02


24-3
 
90.03


24-4
 
90.06


24-16
 
90.15


24-17
 
90.16


24-18
 
90.17


24-19
 
90.18


24-20
 
90.19


24-21
 
90.20


24-22
 
90.21


24-31
 
90.35


24-32
 
90.36


24-33
 
90.37


24-34
 
90.38


24-35
 
90.39


24-36
 
90.40


25-1
 
155.01


25-2
 
155.02


25-3
 
155.03


25-4
 
155.04


25-5
 
155.05


25-6
 
155.06


25-16
 
155.20


25-17
 
155.21


25-18
 
155.22


25-19
 
155.23


25-20
 
155.24


25-31
 
155.35


25-32
 
155.36


25-33
 
155.37


25-34
 
155.38


25-35
 
155.39


25-36
 
155.40


25-37
 
155.41


25-46
 
155.55


25-47
 
155.56


25-48
 
155.57


25-49
 
155.58


27-11
 
51.01


27-12
 
51.02


27-13
 
51.03


27-14
 
51.04


27-17
 
52.01


27-18
 
52.02


27-19
 
52.03


27-20
 
52.04


27-21
 
52.05


27-22
 
52.15


27-23
 
52.16


27-24
 
52.17


27-25
 
52.18


27-26
 
52.19


27-27
 
52.20


27-28
 
52.21


27-29
 
52.35


27-30
 
52.36


27-31
 
52.37


27-32
 
52.38


27-34
 
52.06


27-46
 
52.50


27-47
 
52.51


27-48
 
52.52


27-49
 
52.53


27.5-11
 
99.01


27.5-12
 
99.02


27.5-13
 
99.03


27.5-14
 
99.04


27.5-15
 
99.05


27.5-16
 
99.06


27.5-17
 
99.07


27.5-18
 
99.08


27.5-19
 
99.09


27.5-20
 
99.10


27.5-21
 
99.11


27.5-22
 
99.99


27.5-23
 
99.12


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




—
 
8-21-1978
 
136.01


—
 
9-5-1978
 
95.01


—
 
3-5-1979
 
98.06


—
 
4-2-1979
 
31.45


—
 
7-16-1979
 
91.02


—
 
9-17-1979
 
136.01


—
 
4-21-1980
 
97.21


—
 
5-12-1980
 
90.36—90.40


—
 
12-2-1980
 
10.10


—
 
8-3-1981
 
31.55—31.59


—
 
5-3-1982
 
137.01—137.04, 137.99


—
 
10-18-1982
 
95.01, 96.14, 138.01—138.06


—
 
3-21-1983
 
112.01—112.15


—
 
9-19-1983
 
132.01


—
 
11-7-1983
 
134.30


—
 
12-5-1983
 
31.57


—
 
2-21-1984
 
95.01


—
 
9-17-1984
 
91.02


—
 
10-15-1984
 
95.03—95.06, 95.99


—
 
2-19-1985
 
134.31, 134.99


—
 
5-20-1985
 
50.09


—
 
7-1-1985
 
136.01, 137.04


—
 
11-17-1986
 
97.01—97.06, 97.99


—
 
3-16-1987
 
150.085


—
 
5-16-1988
 
136.01


—
 
11-7-1988
 
134.31, 134.99


—
 
4-16-1990
 
34.20, 133.04, 133.99


—
 
9-17-1990
 
31.57


—
 
6-17-1991
 
30.02


—
 
9-16-1991
 
91.02


—
 
10-21-1991
 
90.16


—
 
8-17-1992
 
110.69


—
 
11-16-1992
 
70.005, 70.006, 70.008—70.014


—
 
2-1-1993
 
70.009, 70.010


—
 
6-7-1993
 
91.01, 91.02, 115.01—115.05, 137.03


93-7
 
8-16-1993
 
90.16


93-9
 
9-20-1993
 
113.04, 113.15—113.30


93-10
 
11-1-1993
 
95.02


94-1
 
3-7-1994
 
52.01—52.06, 52.15—52.21, 52.35—52.38


94-4
 
7-5-1994
 
113.23


94-7
 
10-3-1994
 
113.21


95-1
 
5-1-1995
 
131.04


96-2
 
3-18-1996
 
99.01—99.12, 99.99


96-7
 
9-3-1996
 
51.04, 52.04


96-10
 
12-17-1996
 
34.01—34.10, 34.99


97-4
 
9-15-1997
 
95.15—95.19


98-2
 
2-2-1998
 
10.02, 10.99, 35.01—35.12, 97.99, 136.02, 137.99


98-3
 
3-10-1998
 
35.10


98-4
 
4-6-1998
 
10.02, 136.02, 136.03


98-9
 
8-3-1998
 
10.99


98-10
 
9-21-1998
 
150.002


98-11
 
10-19-1998
 
150.095—150.099


98-12
 
12-21-1998
 
32.01—32.10


99-1
 
1-4-1999
 
136.01


99-2
 
1-4-1999
 
92.05, 92.08


99-9
 
10-4-1999
 
136.01


00-06
 
6-5-2000
 
150.002


00-09
 
11- -2000
 
134.04


00-10
 
12-4-2000
 
150.068


01-10
 
6-18-2001
 
97.07, 97.08


01-11
 
7-16-2001
 
70.010


01-12
 
9-17-2001
 
131.07


01-13
 
9-17-2001
 
131.04


01-14
 
11-5-2001
 
95.01


01-15
 
12-17-2001
 
98.02


02-01
 
3-4-2002
 
118.01—118.13


02-07
 
10-7-2002
 
117.01—117.07, 117.15—117.21, 117.35—117.39


02-11
 
12-23-2002
 
31.57


03-01
 
3-17-2003
 
70.010


04-02
 
2-17-2004
 
52.02, 52.05


04-07
 
8-2-2004
 
51.04, 52.04


05-02
 
3-8-2005
 
150.001—150.005, 150.067—150.069, 150.084—150.088, 150.110, 150.134


05-03
 
3-21-2005
 
90.16—90.18, 90.20, 90.22, 90.23


06-05
 
4-17-2006
 
91.01


06-06
 
6-5-2006
 
155.02, 155.22, 155.23, 155.35, 155.36, 155.37, 155.38, 155.55—155.58


07-02
 
5-7-2007
 
91.01 - 91.08


07-03
 
5-7-2007
 
99.02, 99.06, 99.09 - 99.12


07-05
 
7-2-2007
 
112.04


08-01
 
1-22-2008
 
150.120 - 150.124


08-02
 
5-19-2008
 
134.31


08-03
 
5-19-2008
 
134.25


08-04
 
5-19-2008
 
150.086


08-05
 
5-19-2008
 
133.02


08-06
 
5-19-2008
 
137.05


08-08
 
6-2-2008
 
91.01, 91.02


08-09
 
6-2-2008
 
50.01 - 50.09, 50.20 - 50.25, 50.99


08-11
 
8-4-2008
 
90.03 - 90.06


09-01
 
5-4-2009
 
92.01—92.11


2010-03
 
7-19-2010
 
51.04, 51.05


2010-07
 
11-17-2010
 
130.05


2010-08
 
11-17-2010
 
131.04, 131.07


2010-09
 
11-17-2010
 
132.02


2010-10
 
12-6-2010
 
134.03


2010-11
 
12-6-2010
 
134.10


2011-01
 
1-3-2011
 
112.01—112.04, 112.06—112.15


2011-03
 
1-18-2011
 
120.01—120.14


2011-04
 
2-7-2011
 
154.01—154.03, 154.15—154.18, 154.30—154.40


2011-05
 
2-22-2011
 
70.005


2011-11
 
6-6-2011
 
137.06


2011-12
 
9-6-2011
 
137.20—137.25


2012-02
 
5-21-2012
 
53.01, 53.02


2012-03
 
6-18-2012
 
92.01


2012-04
 
6-18-2012
 
134.30


2013-06
 
- -2013
 
91.01—91.08


2013-07
 
6-17-2013
 
70.001—70.014


2013-13
 
12-3-2013
 
91.05


2013-14
 
12-3-2013
 
53.01, 53.02


2013-15
 
12-3-2013
 
50.02


2014-01
 
5-1-2014
 
53.03


2014-06
 
12-15-2014
 
98.02, 98.03, 98.05, 98.07, 98.12, 98.28


2015-01
 
8-17-2015
 
97.04


2016-01
 
1-4-2016
 
70.008


2016-02
 
1-4-2016
 
70.010


2016-04
 
4-4-2016
 
54.01-54.22, 54.99


2016-05
 
6-20-2016
 
31.01-31.03, 31.17, 31.20, 31.21


2016-07
 
9-6-2016
 
156.01


2016-08
 
10-3-2016
 
120.06


2016-09
 
12-5-2016
 
150.121, 150.122


2016-10
 
12-5-2016
 
53.01, 53.02


2017-05
 
6-5-2017
 
119.01-119.10


2017-06
 
8-21-2017
 
119.04, 119.05


Ci ty of Mar shal l
Zoning Ordinance
Amended through March 1, 2019
Amended through
March 1, 2019
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning®
(Intentionally Blank)
Formatting, organization, graphics & design © 2016 Clearzoning, Inc. All rights re-
Amended through
March 1, 2019
i City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Table of Contents with Sections ii
How to Use this Ordinance vi
Article 1.0 Purpose and Introduction 1-1
Article 2.0 Definitions 2-1
Article 3.0 Zoning Districts 3-1
Article 4.0 Use Standards 4-1
Article 5.0 Site Standards 5-1
Article 6.0 Development Procedures 6-1
Article 7.0 Administration, Appeals and
Enforcement 7-1
Table of Contents
Amended through
March 1, 2019
ii City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Table of Contents with Sections
How to Use this Ordinance vi
1. Content Organization and Page Layout vi
2. Symbols and User Notes vii
3. Reading the Ordinance xiii
4. Use Matrix ix
5. District Summary Table xv
Zoning Map xvii
Article 1.0 Purpose and Introduction 1-1
Sec. 1.1 Title 1-3
Sec. 1.2 Interpretation and Conflict 1-3
Sec. 1.3 Application 1-3
Sec. 1.4 Severability 1-3
Article 2.0 Definitions 2-1
Sec. 2.1 Construction of Language 2-4
Sec. 2.2 Definitions 2-4
Article 3.0 Zoning Districts 3-1
Sec. 3.1 Districts Established 3-3
Sec. 3.2 Zoning Map 3-52
Sec. 3.3 District Boundaries 3-52
Sec. 3.4 Design and Development Requirements 3-52
Sec. 3.5 Street Alley and Railroad Rights-of-Way 3-52
Sec. 3.6 Zoning of Annexed Areas 3-52
Sec. 3.7 Zoning of Vacated Areas 3-52
Sec. 3.8 Prohibited Uses 3-52
Sec. 3.9 Principal Permitted Uses in Districts 3-53
Sec. 3.10 Land Uses Subject to Special Conditions 3-53
Sec. 3.11 Notes to District Standards 3-53
Sec. 3.12 R-3 Development Requirements 3-54
Sec. 3.13 MFRD Development Requirements 3-55
Sec. 3.14 MHPD Development Requirements 3-56
Sec. 3.15 HCHSD Development Requirements 3-59
Sec. 3.16 B-2 Development Requirements 3-59
Sec. 3.17 B-3 Guidelines to Consider for Development 3-59
Sec. 3.18 B-4 and FS Development Requirements 3-60
Sec. 3.19 I-1 Development Requirements 3-60
Amended through
March 1, 2019
iii City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Table of Contents with Sections
Article 3.0 Zoning Districts (continued)
Sec. 3.20 I-2 Development Requirements 3-61
Sec. 3.21 PSP Development Requirements 3-61
Sec. 3.22 Exceptions to Height Limitations 3-62
Sec. 3.23 Exceptions to Lot Area or Width Requirements 3-62
Sec. 3.24 Other Projections Into Yards 3-62
Sec. 3.25 Access Through Yards 3-62
Sec. 3.26 Rubbish and Waste Material 3-63
Sec. 3.27 Buildings Under Construction 3-63
Sec. 3.28 Restoration of Unsafe Buildings 3-63
Sec. 3.29 Essential Services 3-63
Article 4.0 Use Standards 4-1
Sec. 4.1 Single-Family Dwellings, Detached 4-4
Sec. 4.2 Home Occupations 4-4
Sec. 4.3 Private Recreation Facilities 4-4
Sec. 4.4 Accessory Apartments 4-5
Sec. 4.5 Cemeteries 4-5
Sec. 4.6 Institutional Uses 4-5
Sec. 4.7 Group Child Care Homes 4-6
Sec. 4.8 Permanent or Temporary Structure Solely for the Sale of Produce 4-6
Sec. 4.9 Farms 4-6
Sec. 4.10 Golf Courses 4-7
Sec .4.11 Two-Family and Boarding Houses 4-7
Sec. 4.12 Bed and Breakfast Inns 4-7
Sec. 4.13 Massage Therapy 4-8
Sec. 4.14 Drive-in and Drive-Through Facilities 4-8
Sec. 4.15 Accessory Structures and Uses 4-8
Sec. 4.16 Commercial Greenhouses, Nurseries and Garden Centers 4-8
Sec. 4.17 Gas Stations, Repair Centers, and Public Garages 4-9
Sec. 4.18 Personal Service Establishments 4-10
Sec. 4.19 Restaurants 4-10
Sec. 4.20 Retail Establishments 4-10
Sec. 4.21 Business Service Establishments 4-10
Sec. 4.22 Veterinary Hospitals and Clinics 4-10
Sec. 4.23 Mixed-Use Development 4-11
Sec. 4.24 Open Air Businesses, Outdoor Display Areas, and Dealership Sales Lots 4-11
Sec. 4.25 Plant Materials Nursery 4-11
Sec. 4.26 Adult- and Sexually- Oriented Businesses 4-12
Amended through
March 1, 2019
iv City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 4.0 Use Standards (continued)
Sec. 4.27 Other Similar Uses 4-12
Sec. 4.28 Microbreweries 4-12
Sec. 4.29 Open Air Market 4-12
Sec. 4.30 Outdoor Display of Merchandise in the Public Right-of-Way 4-13
Sec. 4.31 Single-Family Homes in the B-3 District 4-13
Sec. 4.32 Laundromats (Self Service of Coin Operated) 4-13
Sec. 4.33 Adult and Child Care Centers 4-13
Sec. 4.34 Hotels and Motels 4-14
Sec. 4.35 Laboratories for Research and Testing and Experimental Product
Development Facilities 4-14
Sec. 4.36 Packaging of Previously Prepared Goods and Materials 4-14
Sec. 4.37 Indoor Storage and Warehousing of Finished Products 4-14
Sec. 4.38 Machine Shops 4-14
Sec. 4.39 Printing, Lithographic, Blueprinting, and Similar Processes 4-14
Sec. 4.40 Restaurants, Cafeteria Facilities, Medical Facilities, Health Clubs,
Recreational Facilities, and Child Care Centers 4-14
Sec. 4.41 Electroplating, Heat-Treating, Metal Plating, Stamping, Pressing
Casing, Buffing, and Polishing 4-15
Sec. 4.42 Self-Storage Warehouses 4-15
Sec. 4.43 Outdoor Storage Yards, General 4-15
Sec. 4.44 Accessory Residential Dwellings 4-15
Sec. 4.45 Compounding, Manufacturing, Packaging, or Treatment
of Goods 4-16
Sec. 4.46 Assembly, Fabrication, Manufacturing, Packaging, or Treatment of
Products from Previously Prepared Materials 4-16
Sec. 4.47 Wireless Communication Facilities and Services 4-16
Sec. 4.48 Storage and Repair of Vehicles 4-21
Sec. 4.49 Storage and Parking of Commercial Vehicles and Recreational
Equipment 4-21
Sec. 4.50 Electric Vehicle Infrastructure 4-22
Sec. 4.51 Mobile Food Vending 4-23
Sec. 4.52 Recycling and Related Uses 4-25
Sec. 4.53 Solar Energy Systems 4-26
Sec. 4.54 Wind Energy Systems 4-29
Sec. 4.55 Special Events 4-30
Table of Contents with Sections
Amended through
March 1, 2019
v City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Table of Contents with Sections
Article 4.0 Use Standards (continued)
Sec. 4.56 Donation Collection Bins 4-31
Article 5.0 Site Standards 5-1
Sec. 5.1 Signs 5-3
Sec. 5.2 Accessory Structures and Uses 5-25
Sec. 5.3 Temporary Construction Structures and Uses 5-27
Sec. 5.4 Swimming Pools, Private or Public 5-27
Sec. 5.5 Frontage on Streets Required 5-27
Sec. 5.6 Location and Number of Permitted Dwellings on a Lot 5-27
Sec. 5.7 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the Side Street Line 5-28
Sec. 5.8 Unlawful Dwellings 5-28
Sec. 5.9 Compliance with Yard Requirements 5-28
Sec. 5.10 Corner Clearance Area 5-28
Sec. 5.11 Building Grades and Grading of Land 5-28
Sec. 5.12 Protection of Excavations 5-29
Sec. 5.13 Fences, Walls, Hedges or Similar Plantings or Structures 5-29
Sec. 5.14 Parking, Loading, and Access Management 5-30
Sec. 5.15 Landscaping and Screening Standards 5-42
Sec. 5.16 Sidewalks 5-53
Sec. 5.17 Exterior lighting 5-55
Article 6.0 Development Procedures 6-1
Sec. 6.1 Condominium Development Standards 6-3
Sec. 6.2 Special Land Uses 6-5
Sec. 6.3 Site Plan Review 6-8
Article 7.0 Administration, Appeals and Enforcement 7-1
Sec. 7.1 Amendments 7-3
Sec. 7.2 Use of Buildings and Land 7-5
Sec. 7.3 Permits Required for Excavations; Bonds 7-5
Sec. 7.4 Moving of Buildings 7-5
Sec. 7.5 Ownership of Two-Family Residential Buildings 7-5
Sec. 7.6 Withholding of Approval 7-5
Sec. 7.7 Nonconforming Uses, Lots, and Structures 7-5
Sec. 7.8 Zoning Board of Appeals 7-10
Sec. 7.9 Administration and Enforcement 7-15
Sec. 7.10 Performance Guarantee 7-17
Amended through
March 1, 2019
vi City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
How to Use This Ordinance
1. CONTENT ORGANIZATION AND PAGE LAYOUT
The Zoning Ordinance is organized into seven Articles, which are further divided using standard outline
hierarchy. The content and page layout are designed to promote a clear understanding of requirements, as
well as quick retrieval of relevant standards, procedures and other information. The following key assists with
navigating through this document.
Pages are
numbered
sequentially
within each
Article.
Link to How
to Use This
Ordinance.
Link to
Table of
Contents.
Link to
Zoning Map.
Notes provide relevant
district information
recommended for
review.
Selected References list
other sections or
Ordinances that may
pertain to a development
in the district.
Article Tabs link to the first
page of each Article. Red
tab indicates the Article in
which the current page is
located.
Sections and
Subsections contain
the Ordinance
regulations in a
hierarchical manner.
Blue bold font
links to
standards in
other sections of
the Ordinance.
Graphics, figures,
and tables
illustrate concepts
or clarify
regulations.
User Notes provide helpful
information for digital and
hard copy formats. User
Notes are always
highlighted in blue.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
vii City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
CL
PL
2. SYMBOLS AND USER NOTES
The following symbols are used throughout the Zoning Ordinance:
 indicates the term is defined in Article 2, Definitions. (Note: Not every defined term is designated
with a  symbol. Consult Article 2, Definitions, for a list of all defined terms.)
 indicates there is a graphic that illustrates the standard or requirement.
identifies a property line.
identifies the right-of-way centerline.
R/W identifies the right-of-way.
 identifies a User Note that provides helpful information for all users.
 identifies a Digital User Note that provides helpful information for users with a digital version of the
Zoning Ordinance.
How to Use This Ordinance
Amended through
March 1, 2019
viii City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
How to Use This Ordinance
3. READING THE ORDINANCE
Rules have been established to assist with
interpreting the ordinance. Below are some rules to
keep in mind when reading this document:
Sometimes there may be general and specific
regulations that pertain to one particular
aspect of site design. In such instances, the
specific regulations must be followed.
Discrepancies between text and an illustration
(including its caption) may occur. In the case of
such discrepancies, the text is considered the
accurate source of information.
The use of the word shall carries significant
meaning. Shall regulations must be followed.
Requirements that use the word may are
discretionary, meaning that the requirement is
at the discretion of the Planning Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals.
Article 2, Definitions, contains over 80 terms. If
a term is not listed in this section, it will carry
the meaning customarily assigned to it.
Conjunctions are often used and must be read
accurately:
 AND indicates that all connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
 OR indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events may apply
singly or in any combination. (OR may also
be read “and/or”)
 EITHER … OR indicates that the connected
items, conditions, provisions or events shall
apply singly, but not in combination.
For more rules, see Section 2.1 Construction of
Language.
 Digital User Note:
What is a link?
A link allows for quick reference to a relevant
section. By ‘clicking’ a link, the user is taken
directly to a page in the Ordinance or another
reference document. The user may return to the
original page by clicking the ‘previous view’
button in Adobe Acrobat Reader.
If you do not see the ‘previous view’ button
on your Adobe Acrobat Reader screen, you
can add it by turning on your ‘page navigation
toolbar’. For assistance, refer to the ‘Help’ menu
in your version of Acrobat Reader.
What information is linked?
All blue text is linked to either another page
within the Zoning Ordinance, a separate City
ordinance or document, or an external website.
In addition, several other features of the
document are linked to allow users to navigate
through the ordinance. Click on any of the
following features to quickly locate another
section:
Article tabs located on the side
of each page are linked to the
Contents page of each Article.
Icons located at the bottom of
each page are linked to the
‘How to Use This Ordinance’
section, the main Table of
Contents, and the Zoning Map
Use Matrix district headings are
linked to the corresponding
district regulations page in
Article 3.
‘How do I calculate height’
button located on each district
regulations page is linked to the
definition of building height in
Article 2.
Zoning Map Legend headings
are linked to the corresponding
district regulations page in
Article 3.
i
B-2 B-3 B-4
Amended through
March 1, 2019
HCO D*
4. USE MATRIX
Below is a reference table that summarizes the uses listed in the Ordinance. Uses below are generalized. Consult Section 3.1 as certain conditions and standards may apply. If there are any
conflicts between this table and the uses listed in Section 3.1, the latter will control.
P = Principal Permitted Use S = Special Land Use
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
i clearzoning®
How to Use This Ordinance
 Digital User Note:
Click on a district heading below to go directly to the corresponding
district regulations.
ix
* In addition to the uses listed in the Use Matrix, the HCOD (Hospital Campus Overlay District) and RD (River Overlay District) district permits the permitted uses, special land uses, and accessory land uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
R-1 R-2 R-3 MFRD MHPD POSD HCHSD B-2 B-3 B-4 FS I-1 I-2 PSP RD *
Accessory apartments, attached or detached S
Accessory off-street, off-site parking facilities P
Accessory outdoor sales and display P P
Accessory residential dwelling S S
Accessory restaurants, cafeteria facilities,
medical centers, health clubs, recreational
facilities, adult day care and child care centers
P P
Accessory structures and uses  P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Adult and sexually oriented businesses S S
Adult day care S P S S
Adult foster care family homes P P P
Adult foster care large group homes and
congregate facilities S P
Adult foster care small group home S S S P
Airports and heliports, public or privately
owned or operated S
Assembly and packaging of products P P
Automobile salesroom, showroom or office,
new or used, indoor only
P
Automobile wash facilities P
Banks and financial institutions with accessory
drive-through facilities
S P P
Barber shops, beauty shops, and hair stylists P P P P P
Bed and breakfast inns S S S P
Big box retail P
Boarding houses S
Breweries, distilleries, wineries, bottling works,
and microbreweries
S
Brewpubs, retail wine stores and tasting
outlets P P
Bus passenger stations S P
Canning factories and chemical plants S
Carports and community garages S
Cemeteries  S S S
Child care centers S S S
Clubhouses S
Clubs P
Assembly hall P
Continued on next page
Amended through
March 1, 2019
HCHSD HCO D*
4. USE MATRIX
Below is a reference table that summarizes the uses listed in the Ordinance. Uses below are generalized. Consult Section 3.1 as certain conditions and standards may apply. If there are any
conflicts between this table and the uses listed in Section 3.1, the latter will control.
P = Principal Permitted Use S = Special Land
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning®
How to Use This Ordinance
 Digital User Note:
Click on a district heading below to go directly to the corresponding
district regulations.
Continued on next page
* In addition to the uses listed in the Use Matrix, the HCOD (Hospital Campus Overlay District) and RD (River Overlay District) district permits the permitted uses, special land uses, and accessory land uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
R-1 R-2 R-3 MFRD MHPD POSD B-2 B-3 B-4 FS I-1 I-2 PSP RD *
Compounding, manufacturing, and processing
or treatment of materials or products, when
adjacent to a residential district
S S
Compounding, manufacturing, and processing
or treatment of materials or products, when
not adjacent to a residential district
P P
Convenience stores P P P P P
Crematoriums S S
Dispensaries, ambulance facilities, and
restaurants as well as those other uses
typically associated with an inpatient acute
care hospital
P
Dry cleaners, pick-up/drop-off P P P
Dry cleaning plants (central) and industrial
laundries S
Dwellings, multiple-family P
Dwellings, single-family attached P P P
Dwellings, single-family detached  P P P P
Dwellings, single-family detached
manufactured  P
Dwellings, Two-family  P P P P
Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 & 2 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Electric vehicle charging stations, level 3 P P P P P P P P P P
Electroplating, heat-treating, metal plating,
stamping, pressing, casing, buffing and
polishing
S S
Experimental product development facilities P P
Family adult day care and child care homes. P P P
Farms  S
Funeral homes, not including crematoriums S S S P S S
Gas station (excluding service stations) P
Gas station and repair center P P
Golf courses S S
Group adult day care and child care homes S S S S
Health clubs P P P
Amended througxh i
March 1, 2019
HCOD*
4. USE MATRIX
Below is a reference table that summarizes the uses listed in the Ordinance. Uses below are generalized. Consult Section 3.1 as certain conditions and standards may apply. If there are any
conflicts between this table and the uses listed in Section 3.1, the latter will control.
P = Principal Permitted Use S = Special Land Use
How to Use This Ordinance
 Digital User Note:
Click on a district heading below to go directly to the corresponding
district regulations.
Continued on next page
* In addition to the uses listed in the Use Matrix, the HCOD (Hospital Campus Overlay District) and RD (River Overlay District) district permits the permitted uses, special land uses, and accessory land uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
R-1 R-2 R-3 MFRD MHPD POSD HCHSD B-2 B-3 B-4 FS I-1 I-2 PSP RD*
Home occupations P/S P/S P/S P/S
Hotels S S P P
Housing for the elderly P P P P P
Ice manufacturing and storage, including cold
storage plants
S S
Institutional uses  S S S P S P P
Junk yards S
Laboratories for research and testing P P
Laundromats (self-service or coin-operated) P S P
Laundry and on and off-premise dry cleaning P P
Light manufacturing and equipment servicing P P
Live/work studios for artist and creative
businesses
P P
Lumber and planing mill S
Machine shops P P
Manufacture or treatment of goods P
Medical and dental offices and clinics P P P P P
Medical equipment facilities, home S
Medical facilities P
Medical health services, home S
Mixed-use development P P P P P P P
Mobile food vending P P P P P P P
Motels P
Municipal or publicly owned and operated
parks, and playgrounds
P P P P
Newspaper offices and publishers, and copy
centers
P P P
Nurseries, plant material S S
Nurseries, garden centers, and commercial
greenhouses, up to 10,000 sq ft
P P
Nurseries, garden centers, and commercial
greenhouses, over 10,000 sq ft
S
Nursing homes, retirement homes, and
licensed daycare facilities
P P
Medical Marihuana Uses, per the City’s Medical
Marihuana Ordiance
P P
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i Amended through xi
March 1, 2019
HCOD*
4. USE MATRIX
Below is a reference table that summarizes the uses listed in the Ordinance. Uses below are generalized. Consult Section 3.1 as certain conditions and standards may apply. If there are any
conflicts between this table and the uses listed in Section 3.1, the latter will control.
P = Principal Permitted Use S = Special Land Use
How to Use This Ordinance
 Digital User Note:
Click on a district heading below to go directly to the corresponding
district regulations.
Continued on next page
* In addition to the uses listed in the Use Matrix, the HCOD (Hospital Campus Overlay District) and RD (River Overlay District) district permits the permitted uses, special land uses, and accessory land uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
R-1 R-2 R-3 MFRD MHPD POSD HCHSD B-2 B-3 B-4 FS I-1 I-2 PSP RD*
Office, general P P P P P
One permanent or temporary structure solely
for the sale of produce grown on the land used
for agricultural purposes
S
Open-air business uses, other S
Open-air market P P P
Open space, wetlands, woodlands, drains,
and greenbelt areas dedicated to the public,
and publicly owned or operated pedestrian
malls, parks, trails, playgrounds, and playfields
P
Outdoor display areas S
Outdoor display of merchandise in the public
right-of-way
P
Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of used
automobiles, mobile homes, and campers
S
Outdoor storage yard for principal use S S S
Packaging of previously prepared goods and
materials
P P
Packaging, treatment or processing of food
products, slaughterhouses, and rendering
plants
S
Parking facilities, off-street and off-site P
Parking lots S S S P
Parking structures S S P
Parks P P
Pawnshops S
Pharmacies, retail S
Plant nurseries and greenhouses S
Pool/video arcade P P P P
Power plants or central stations S S
Printing, lithographic, blueprinting and similar
processes
P P
Private stables for the keeping of horses and
ponies for private use.
S
Public and municipal uses P
i City of Marshall Ordinance
xii clearzoning® Amended through
March 1, 2019
HCO D*
4. USE MATRIX
Below is a reference table that summarizes the uses listed in the Ordinance. Uses below are generalized. Consult Section 3.1 as certain conditions and standards may apply. If there are any
conflicts between this table and the uses listed in Section 3.1, the latter will control.
P = Principal Permitted Use S = Special Land Use
How to Use This Ordinance
 Digital User Note:
Click on a district heading below to go directly to the corresponding
district regulations.
Continued on next page
* In addition to the uses listed in the Use Matrix, the HCOD (Hospital Campus Overlay District) and RD (River Overlay District) district permits the permitted uses, special land uses, and accessory land uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
R-1 R-2 R-3 MFRD MHPD POSD HCHSD B-2 B-3 B-4 FS I-1 I-2 PSP RD *
Pubs, taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and
nightclubs P P P
Recreation areas or centers, private noncommercial
S S S S S
Recreation centers S S S P
Recreation centers, indoor S
Recreation facilities P P
Recycling collection facilities P P
Recycling processing facilities P P
Rental establishments whose principal activity
is the rental of automobiles
P
Residential cluster housing developments P P
Restaurants (excluding drive-ins and those
with drive-through facilities)
P P P
Restaurants with accessory drive-through
facilities S S P
Retail establishments P P P P P P P
Self-storage or mini-storage warehouses S S
Service establishments, business P P P
Service establishments, personal P P P
Single-family homes within existing residential
structures S
Solar energy systems, large S S
Solar energy systems, medium P P P P P P P
Solar energy systems (non-residential uses
only), medium P P P P
Solar energy systems (rooftop systems only),
medium P P
Solar energy systems, small  P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Steel fabrication plants S
Studios or schools for arts and crafts,
photography, music or dancing P P P P P P
Temporary model units S
Therapeutic massage P P P P
Trade schools, regional educational facilities,
vocational education facilities, intermediate
career centers, and similar technological or
vocational training facilities
S S S
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
i Amended through clearzoning® xiii
March 1, 2019
HCO D*
i City of Marshall Ordinance
clearzoning®
4. USE MATRIX
Below is a reference table that summarizes the uses listed in the Ordinance. Uses below are generalized. Consult Section 3.1 as certain conditions and standards may apply. If there are any
conflicts between this table and the uses listed in Section 3.1, the latter will control.
P = Principal Permitted Use S = Special Land Use
How to Use This Ordinance
 Digital User Note:
Click on a district heading below to go directly to the corresponding
district regulations.
xiv
* In addition to the uses listed in the Use Matrix, the HCOD (Hospital Campus Overlay District) and RD (River Overlay District) district permits the permitted uses, special land uses, and accessory land uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
R-1 R-2 R-3 MFRD MHPD POSD HCHSD B-2 B-3 B-4 FS I-1 I-2 PSP RD *
Utility services and municipal uses P P
Veterinary clinic, indoor only P
Veterinary hospitals and clinics S P
Wholesale stores up to 60,000 sq ft of usable
floor space S
Wholesale stores, home improvement centers,
lumberyards, and building supply businesses,
which may include accessory outdoor sales
and display areas
S
Wind energy conversion systems S S S S
Wireless communication facilities S P P
Warehousing (Indoor) P P
Truck and bus terminals S S
Truck repair and maintenance facilities S S
Amended through
March 1, 2019
xv City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
How to Use This Ordinance
5. DISTRICT SUMMARY TABLE
Below is a quick reference table that summarizes district regulations. Consult Article 3 Zoning Districts for
additional requirements and exceptions to the information below.
District Summary Table
District Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Setbacks
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yards
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
R-1 Residential Estate District 12,000 sq ft 80 35 10 40
R-2 Suburban Residential District 9,000 sq ft 65 30 8 25
R-3 Tradition Residential District 4,000 sq ft 50 25 5 one
15 two 15
MFRD Multiple Family Residential
District None specified 100 40 10 one
30 two 30
MHPD Manufactured Housing Park
District
15 acres - park
5,500 sq ft - lot See Section 3.14
POSD Professional Office Service
District None specified 65 25 15 20
HCHSD Health Care and Human
Services District None specified 65 25 15 15
B-2 Local Business District None specified 50 10 5 one
15 two 15
B-3 Neighborhood Business District None specified None specified None
specified
None
specified
None
specified
B-4 Regional Commercial District None specified 100 20 10 one
25 two 25
FS Freeway Service District None specified None specified 75 75 75
I-1 Research and Technical District None specified 100 50 20 one
50 two 25
I-2 General Industrial District None specified 200 60 30 30
PSP Public/Semi-Public Services
District None specified None specified 25 15 20
Amended through
March 1, 2019
xvi City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019

(Intentionally Blank)
i
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning®
Amended through
March 1, 2019
1-1
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 1.0
Purpose and Introduction
Amended through
March 1, 2019
1-2 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 1.0 Purpose and Introduction
1.1 Title
1.2 Interpretation and Conflict
1.3 Application
1.4 Severability
Amended through
March 1, 2019
1-3
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
1.0 Purpose and Introduction
1.1 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance for the City of Marshall” and shall
be referred to herein as “this Ordinance.”
1.2 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Chapter, the provisions shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity and
general welfare. It is not intended by this Chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants or other agreements between parties. Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of a structure or land than existing easements, covenants or other agreements, the provisions of this
Chapter shall govern or control. Whenever the requirements of this Chapter differ from the requirements of
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive or higher standards shall govern.
1.3 APPLICATION.
General requirements and standards apply to all districts except as noted herein. Where requirements of a
general regulation and a district regulation differ, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail.
1.4 SEVERABILITY
If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or provision of this Chapter or application thereof is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portion or application, or validity of
this Chapter as a whole. It is hereby declared that the legislative intent would have been to adopt this
Chapter as if the invalid provision had not been included.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
1-4 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-1
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 2.0
Definitions
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-2 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 2.0 Definitions
2.1 Construction of Language
2.2 Definitions
Access Management
Access to Property, Reasonable
Access Drive
Accessory Structure and
Accessory Use
Adult Day Care Facility
Adult Foster Care Facility*
Adult Uses or Sexually Oriented
Businesses
Alley
Alterations
Alternative Tower Structure
Animal, Wild or Exotic
Antenna
Apartment*
Appeal
Architectural Feature
Assembly Hall
Automotive Fueling Station
Automotive Repair Station
Automotive Service Center/
Station
Automobile Wash
Bar, Cocktail Lounge, or Night
Club
Basement
Bed and Breakfast Inn
Bedroom
Berm
Block
Board of Appeals
Boarding House (Tourist House)
Brewpub
Buffer
Building*
Building Area
Building Height
Building Line (Setback Line)
Built-To Line
Cemetery
Child Care Organization*
Church, Temple, Place of
Worship or Religious
Institution
City
Clinic
Club
Condominium
Condominium Unit Site
Conservation Easement
Convalescent of Nursing Home
Density
Detention Basin
Development
Development Plan of Site Plan
District
Drainage Ways and Streams
Drive-In Establishment
Drive-Through Establishment
Driveway
Driveway Approach
Dwelling*
Easement
Electric Vehicle (EV), Plug-In
Electric Vehicle Charging
Electric Vehicle Charging Space
Electric Vehicle Charging
Station*
Erected
Essential Services
Essential Public Service Building
Essential Public Service Building
Storage Yard
Excavation
Exception
Façade
Family
Farm
Fence
Filling
Flood or Flooding
Floodplain
Floor Area*
Food
Footcandle
Fully Shielded Fixture
Garage, Private
Garden Center
Glare
Golf Course
Grade*
Greenbelt
Health Club
Home Occupation
Hospital
Hotel
Housing for the Elderly*
Housekeeping Unit
Improvements
Institutional Uses
Junk
Junkyard
Kennel
Kennel, Commercial
Laboratory
Land, Common
Landfill
Light Fixture
Loading Space
Lodging House
Lot
Lot, Corner
Lot, Interior
Lot, Nonconforming
Lot, Through (Double Frontage)
Lot of Record
Lot, Zoning
Lot Area, Gross
Lot Area, Net
Lot Coverage
*Multiple terms are defined in
this ordinance.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-3
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Lot Depth
Lot Frontage
Lot Lines*
Lot Width
Massage Therapist
Master Plan
Microbrewery
Mixed-Use Development
Mobile Food Vending Unit
Mobile Food Vendor
Movie Theater
Municipal
New Construction
Nonconformities*
Nuisance
Nursery
Occupancy
Occupancy Load
Offset
Open Air Business
Open Space*
Outlot
Parking Lot, Off-Street*
Park, Municipal
Park, Public
Party Store
Pavement or Hard Surface
Pet
Planned Office Park
Plat
Pool, Swimming
Porch
Pub or Tavern
Public Notice
Public Service
Radioactive Materials
Real Property
Recreation Area
Recreation Land
Recreation Establishment,
Indoor
Recreation Establishment,
Outdoor
Recreation Equipment*
Variance
Vehicle, Commercial*
Veterinary Clinic or Hospital
Waiting Space
Wall, Obscuring
Wall, Parapet
Wall, Retaining
Warehouse, Miniature or Self-
Storage
Wetland
Wetland, Regulated
Wind Energy Conversion
System*
Wine Shop
Wireless Communication
Facilities*
Yards*
Zoning District
Zoning Permit
Recyclable Material
Recycling Collection Facility
Recycling Processing Facility
Restaurant, Carry-Out
Restaurant, Drive-In
Restaurant, Fast-Food
Restaurant, Standard
Retail Establishments
Right-of-Way
Room
Satellite Dish Antenna
School, Nursery
Screening
Separate Ownership
Service Drive
Setback
Sexually-Oriented Businesses
Sign*
Solar Energy System, Large
Solar Energy System, Medium
Solar Energy System, Small
Stable, Private
State Licensed Residential
Facility
Steep Slopes
Store, Retail*
Story*
Street*
Street Right-of-Way Line
Structure
Subdivision
Substantial Improvement
Telecommunication Towers and
Facilities or Tower
Temporary Use of Building
Seasonal Events
Tent
Tourist Home
Truck Storage
Truck Terminal
Use*
Utility, Public
Utility Room
*Multiple terms are defined in
this ordinance.
Article 2.0 Definitions (continued)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-4 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
2.0 Definitions
2.1 CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words herein shall be interpreted as follows.
1. Words used in the present include the future tense, unless context clearly indicates otherwise.
2. The singular includes the plural, unless context clearly indicates otherwise.
3. The word “person” includes an individual, a firm, an association, an organization, a corporation (public or
private), a partnership or co-partnership, a limited liability company, an incorporated or unincorporated
association, a trust, or any other entity recognizable as a “person” under the laws of the State of
Michigan.
4. The words “plot” or “parcel” are intended to have the same meaning as the word “lot.”
5. The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words
“intended,” “arranged or designed to be used or occupied.”
6. The word “dwelling” includes “residence.”
7. The terms “abutting” or “adjacent to” include land “across from,” such as across a street, alley, or an
easement. This term shall also apply to adjacent zoning districts in an adjacent community.
8. The term “act” or “doing of an act” includes “omission to act.”
9. The term “occupied” shall include “arranged,” “designed,” “built,” “altered,” “converted to,” “rented,”
“leased” or “intended to be inhabited,” not necessarily for dwelling purposes.
10. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items,
conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction “and,” “or,” or “either ... or,” the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows.
A. “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
B. “Or” indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly or in
any combination (i.e., “or” also means “or”).
C. “Either ... or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly.
11. The particular shall control the general.
12. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption or
illustration, the text shall.
13. The word “shall” is also mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.
14. The word “building” includes the word “structure.” A “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof,
attached to the building or structure.
15. For the purpose of this Ordinance, terms not defined in this Article shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
2.2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms or words shall be defined as follows.
Access Management. A technique to improve traffic operations along a major roadway and decrease the
potential for accidents through the control of driveway locations and design; consideration of the relationship
of traffic activity for lots adjacent to, and across from, one another; and the promotion of alternatives to direct
access.
Access to Property, Reasonable. A landowner’s legal right, incident to land ownership, to access a public
road right-of-way. Reasonable access to land may be indirect and certain turning movements may be
prohibited for improved safety and traffic operations.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-5
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Access Drive. A private roadway which connects to a public road and provides interior circulation of vehicles
to a planned development, such as a shopping center, office park, industrial park, or multiple family
development.
Accessory Structure and Accessory Use. See Building, Structure, and Use.
Adult Day Care Facility. A facility which provides daytime care for any part of a day but less than 24 hours for
functionally impaired and/or elderly persons through a structured program of social and rehabilitative or
maintenance services in a supportive group setting other than the client’s home.
Adult Foster Care Facility. A facility that provides room and board, supervision, personal care, and protection
for adults over 18 years of age 24 hours a day, five (5) or more days a week for two (2) or more consecutive
weeks in exchange for compensation. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged,
mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require ongoing supervision, but do not
require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing homes, housing for the
elderly, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, or residential center for persons
released from or assigned to a correctional facility. These facilities are licensed and regulated by the state
under Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended, and rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of
Consumer and Industry Services. Such facilities are classified as follows.:
1. Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive
more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care.
2. Adult Foster Care Small Group Home. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive
twelve (12) or fewer adults to be provided with foster care.
3. Adult Foster Care Large Group Home. An adult foster care facility with approved capacity to receive at
least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care.
4. Adult Foster Care Family Home. A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six (6) or fewer
adults to be provided with foster care for 24 hours a day for five (5) or more days a week for two (2) or
more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household
and an occupant of the residence.
Adult Uses or Sexually-Oriented Businesses. See Ordinance 118 (Adult- and Sexually-Oriented Businesses) of
the City of Marshall Code of Ordinances.
Alley. A public or legally established thoroughfare, other than a street, which affords only a secondary means
of vehicular access to land abutting thereon.
Alterations. As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the
means of egress; a change, addition, enlargement, or modification in construction or type of occupancy,
whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the moving from one location or position to
another. The consummated act of which may be referred to herein as “altered” or “reconstructed.”
Alternative Tower Structure. Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and other similar
alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Animal, Wild or Exotic. Any animal not domesticated by humans or any animal that a person is prohibited
from possessing by law. Wild or exotic animals shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following.
alligator and crocodile (family); deer (family); opossum (family); badger; wild dog or wolf (family); primate
excluding humans (family); bear; raccoon; ferret; skunk; wild cat (family); lemur; spider (poisonous); coyote;
lizard, snake, and other reptile (poisonous); weasel (family); wild boar or swine (family, not including pot belly
pigs); and marten.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-6 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Antenna. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in
communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
Apartment. A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family, commercial, or other building arranged and
intended for a place of residence of a single family or a group of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
1. Apartment, Accessory. A dwelling for one (1) family located within a principal building occupied by a
permitted use in the district, with separate and individual kitchen, bath and toilet facilities, and a
separate and distinct private entrance (i.e. “mother-in-law” apartment).
2. Apartment, Accessory Detached. A dwelling for one family located within a detached structure,
accessory to a principal residential use, with a separate and individual kitchen, bath and toilet facilities,
and a separate and distinct private entrance (i.e. “mother-in-law” apartment).
Appeal. An entreaty or demand for a hearing or review of facts or actions in connection with the enforcement
of Zoning Ordinance.
Architectural Feature. Any structure or significant portion thereof that is sufficiently distinctive or unusual in
design or construction as to warrant the preservation and minimal alteration of its original form, including but
not limited to cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative
ornaments.
Assembly Hall. A structure for groups of people to gather for an event or regularly scheduled program.
Places of assembly include but are not limited to arenas, religious institutions, lecture halls, banquet
facilities, and conference facilities.
Automotive Fueling Station. A place where engine fuels are offered for sale (stored only in underground
tanks) excluding facilities for automotive repair or serving, and with or without accessory space for the retail
sale of automotive or general merchandise.
Automotive Repair Station. A place where, along with or without the sale of engine fuels, the following
services may be carried out in a completely enclosed building. general repair, engine and transmission
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening
and repair, steam cleaning, undercoating and rust proofing; overall painting and undercoating of
automobiles; clutch, differential, axle and spring repairs; repairs of the radiator that require removal;
recapping or re-treading of tires; and similar servicing, rebuilding or repairs that normally require significant
disassembly or storing the automobiles on the premises overnight.
Automotive Service Center / Station. A use primarily for the retail sale of fuel, lubricants, air, water and other
operating commodities for motor vehicles, aircraft or boats, and includes the customary space and facilities
for the installation of such commodities on or in vehicles
Automobile Wash. A building or portion thereof where automobiles or other vehicles are washed or
vacuumed with self-service mechanisms or the use of a chain conveyor and blower.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-7
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Bar, Cocktail Lounge, or Night Club. An establishment licensed by the State of Michigan to sell at retail and
serve alcoholic beverages on the premises where more than thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area is
made up of a bar, being a barrier or counter at which any alcoholic beverages are sold or served to and
consumed by customers, and also including areas dedicated for the use of stages, dance floors, standingroom
areas, pool tables and similar mechanical amusement devices.
Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or
wholly below grade but so located that the vertical
distance from mean grade to the floor is greater that the
vertical distance from the mean grade to the ceiling. A
basement shall not be counted as a story unless over
50% of its height is above the level from which the
height of the building is measured.
Bed and Breakfast Inn. A residential structure operated
by an owner or employee who lives on site, offering as
an accessory use, overnight sleeping accommodations
to transient tenants for compensation, and serves
breakfast at no extra cost to the transient tenants.
Bedroom. A room in a dwelling unit used for or intended
to be used for sleeping purposes by human beings.
Berm. A mound of soil graded, shaped and improved with grass or landscaping in such a fashion so as to be
utilized for screening purposes.
Block. Unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad right-of-way, un
-subdivided acreage, river or stream, and any other barrier to the continuity of development.
Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Marshall.
Boarding House . A building, other than a hotel, motel, or bed-and-breakfast inn, where lodging and meals for
more than five but no more than 20 persons are served for compensation for a length of stay not to exceed
ten days.
Brewpub. A restaurant or tavern (as defined within this Chapter) licensed by the State of Michigan to produce
and manufacture not more than 5,000 barrels of beer per calendar year in Michigan, and sell at retail on the
premises the beer produced and manufactured for consumption on or off the premises in the manner
provided for in M.C.L.A. §§ 436.31b and 436.31c.
Buffer. An open space, landscaped area, fences, walls, berm, or combination thereof used to physically
separate one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-8 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Building. A structure that encloses space intended for
the occupancy of persons or animals or the storage of
goods and chattels for purposes of residence,
recreation, services and economic enterprises, which
structure shall have a roof supported by columns or
walls, or some other support mechanism.
1. Principal Building. A building in which is conducted
the primary or main use of the lot upon which it is
situated.
2. Accessory Building. A subordinate building, the use
of which is clearly incidental to that of the main
building or to the use of the land.
Building Area. The space remaining on a lot after
compliance with the minimum required setbacks and
open space requirements of this Chapter.
Building Height. The vertical distance measured from
the finished grade of the building to the top of the
highest roof beams of a flat roof, to the deck line for
mansard roofs and to the mean height level (between
eaves and ridges) for gable, hip and gambrel roofs
1. Where a building is located upon a terrace, the
height may be measured from the average grade of
the terrace at the building wall.
2. When a building faces on more than one road, the
height shall be measured from the average of the
grades at the center of each road front.
Building Line (Setback Line). The line which pertains to
and defines those minimum (building) setback lines
which are established parallel to the front street or rightof-
way line and within which setback area no part of a
building shall project or be located, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter. Such line, when adjacent to a
building, is normally formed by the junction of the line
formed by drip edge of home with the finish grade or
surface of the adjoining ground. 
Build-To Line. An alignment that dictates the maximum
front yard setback from a street right-of-way, to be
followed by buildings or structures fronting thereon. The
build-to line does not apply to building projections or
recesses.
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for burial
of the human remains and dedicated for such purpose.
MANSARD
FLAT
HIP
GABLE
BUILDING HEIGHT
GAMBREL
©clearzoning
Building
height
½
½
Building
height
½
½
Building
height
½
½
Building
height
Building
height
Deck line
Front view
Front view
Front view
Front view
Front view
Building Line
(Front Setback)
Notes:
Building line is minimum setback line
“x” = Minimum front yard setback
“y” = Front yard in excess of minimum front yard
required
“z” = Court yard in excess of minimum front yard
BUILDING LINE
z
y
Public
Right‐ofway
x
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-9
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Child Care Organization. A governmental or nongovernmental organization having as its principal function
the receiving of minor children for care, maintenance, training, and supervision, notwithstanding that
educational instruction may be given. These facilities care for children under the age of 18 years of age.
Such care organizations are classified below:
1. Child Care Center. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school
age children for group day care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or
guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility that provides care for not less
than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. This facility is also
described as a childcare center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative
preschool, play group, early childhood program, child development center, early learning center, or drop
in center. Child care center or day care does not include a Sunday school conducted by a religious
institution or a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for during short
periods of time while persons responsible for such children are attending religious services.
2. Child Caring Institution. A child care facility which is organized for the purpose of receiving minor children
for care, maintenance, and supervision, usually on a 24-hour basis, in a building maintained for that
propose, and operates throughout the year. It includes a maternity home for the care of unmarried
mothers who are minors, an agency group home, and institutions for mentally retarded or emotionally
disturbed minor children. It does not include hospitals, nursing homes, boarding schools or an adult
foster care facility in which a child has been placed.
3. Family Child Care Home A private home, as licensed by the State of Michigan, in which up to six minor
children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a
parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or
adoption.
4. Group Child Care Home. A private home, as licensed by the State of Michigan, in which up to 12 children
are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal
guardian except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption.
5. Foster Family Home. A private home in which one but not more than four minor children, who are not
related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage or adoption, are given care and
supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
6. Foster Family Group Home. A private home in which more than four but less than seven children, who
are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage or adoption, are provided care
for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a
parent or legal guardian.
Church, Temple, Place of Worship or Religious Institution. A type of institutional use or site used for the
regular assembly of persons, for the conducting of religious services, and for related accessory uses,
including offices and living quarters for church ministry and other members of the religious order who carry
out their duties primarily on the site, religious education classes, day care and limited recreation facilities.
Rescue missions, tent revivals and other temporary assemblies are not included in this definition.
City. The City of Marshall, Michigan.
Clinic. An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination
and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists or similar professionals on an outpatient basis only. A clinic
may incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies incidental or necessary to its operation or to the
service of its patients, but may not include facilities for inpatient care or major surgery.
Club. An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences,
literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-10 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Condominium. A condominium is a system of separate ownership of individual units or multiple-unit projects
according to Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. In addition to the interest acquired in a particular unit, each
unit owner is also a tenant in common in the underlying fee and in the spaces and building parts used in
common by all the unit owners.
Condominium Unit Site (i.e., Site Condominium Lot). The area designating the perimeter within which the
condominium unit must be built. After construction of the condominium unit, the balance of the condominium
unit site shall become a limited common element. The term “condominium unit site” shall be equivalent to
the term “lot” for purposes of determining compliance of a site condominium subdivision with the provisions
of this Chapter pertaining to minimum lot size, minimum lot width, minimum lot coverage and maximum floor
area ratio.
Conservation Easement. A legal agreement in which the landowner retains ownership of private land, but
conveys certain specifically identified rights to a land conservation organization or a public body.
Convalescent or Nursing Home. A home for the care of children, the aged or the infirm, or a place of rest for
persons suffering serious bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are cared for. Such home shall also
conform to and qualify for a license under applicable state laws (Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended).
Density. The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed per net acre of land.
Detention Basin. A facility designed for holding stormwater runoff for a short period of time and then
releasing it to the natural watercourse where it returns to the hydrologic cycle.
Development. The construction of a new building or other structures on a zoning lot, the relocation of an
existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use.
Development Plan or Site Plan. A scaled drawing which shows the existing conditions, the location and
dimensions of improvements upon a parcel of land, including, but not limited to, location and size of
buildings, driveways, parking areas, landscaping, sidewalks, signs, sewage systems, and drainage facilities,
environmental features, and other elements required herein as applicable to the proposed development to
ensure compliance with this Chapter.
District. A section or sections of the City for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and
premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. A portion of the City
within which certain uses of land or buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and
requirements apply under this zoning ordinance. This term is synonymous with the term “zone” or “zoning
district.”
Donation Collection Bin. A receptacle or container designed with a door, slot or other opening which is
intended to receive items donated from the public such as clothing, household items, or other salvageable
personal property. This term does not include recycle bins for the collection of recyclable material, any
rubbish or garbage receptacle.
Donation Collection Bin Operator. A person who owns, operates or otherwise is in control of donation
collection bins to solicit collections of salvageable personal property.
Drainage Ways and Streams. Permanent or intermittent watercourses.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-11
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Drive-In Establishment. A business establishment so deve loped that its principal retail or service character is
dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while
in or momentarily stepped away from their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, so that
consumption within motor vehicles may be facilitated.
Drive-Through Establishment. A business establishment so developed that its principal retail or service
character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles to service
patrons from a window or booth while in their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, so that
consumption off the premises may be facilitated. This is distinguished from a retail establishment whose
primary function is service to customers inside a building, but which has a supplementary drive-through
facility.
Driveway. A driveway shall be defined as the access from the roadway to a garage, carport, or required
parking space.
Driveway Approach. A driveway approach shall be the portion of the driveway from the edge of the traveled
surface of the roadway to the property line.
Dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof, on-site built, prefabricated, pre-assembled, or pre-built, having
cooking facilities and which is designed, used, and occupied wholly as the home, residence or sleeping place
for complete living accommodations of one family, either permanently or transiently. In no case shall a travel
trailer, motor home, automobile chassis, tent or other portable building be considered a dwelling.
1. Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling unit attached to one or more dwelling units by common major structural
elements.
2. Dwelling, Detached. A dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means.
3. Dwelling, Efficiency Unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one room, exclusive of a bathroom, kitchen,
hallway, closet or dining alcove directly off the principal room.
4. Dwelling, Manufactured. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built upon a chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in
the structure. Recreational vehicles as described and regulated herein shall not be considered “mobile
homes” for the purposes of this Chapter.
5. Dwelling, Modular. A building or portion of a building designed for long-term residential use and
characterized by having a wood undercarriage.
6. Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units and
designed for, and occupied as, the home of three or more families living independently of each other.
7. Dwelling, Single-Family. A building containing one dwelling unit and designed for, or occupied by, only one
family.
8. Dwelling, Site Built. A dwelling unit that is substantially built, constructed, assembled, and finished on the
premises, which are intended to serve as its final location. Site-built dwelling units shall include dwelling
units constructed of pre-cut materials, and paneled wall, roof and floor sections when such sections
require substantial assembly and finishing on the premises which are intended to serve as its final
location.
9. Dwelling, Townhouse. Attached dwelling units divided by party walls extending the full height of the
building. Each townhouse dwelling is capable of individual use and maintenance; and access, utilities,
and service facilities shall be independent for each dwelling. For the purposes of this ordinance,
townhouses shall be considered multi-family dwellings.
10. Dwelling, Two-Family. A building containing two dwelling units and designed for, and occupied as, the
home of two families living independently of each other. This includes duplexes.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-12 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by a landowner to, or for use by, the public or
another person or entity.
Electric Vehicle (EV), Plug-In. Any vehicle that operates on electrical energy derived from an off-board source
that is stored in the vehicle’s batteries. For the purposes of this ordinance, this term includes fully electric
vehicles as well as hybrid vehicles that run on both batteries and fossil fuels but can be charged by plugging
in to a compatible electrical outlet.
Electric Vehicle Charging. When an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is
connected to the charging station equipment, it is considered to be charging.
Electric Vehicle Charging Space. A parking space located adjacent to an electric vehicle charging station and
reserved for the charging of electric vehicles.
Electric Vehicle Charging Station. Equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy by
conductive or inductive means to a battery or other storage device located onboard an electric vehicle.
Charging stations shall be either for public use (accessible to all vehicle users during posted hours), or for
restricted use (for certain specified users such as residents, fleet vehicles, or employees). Typical electric
vehicle charging levels and specifications are:
1. Level 1. Alternating current slow battery charging. Voltage is 120 volts.
2. Level 2. Alternating current medium battery charging. Voltage is between 120 and 240 volts.
3. Level 3. Direct current fast or quick battery charging. Voltage is greater than 240 volts.
Erected. Built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any physical operation on the premises required
for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
Essential Services. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal
departments, commissions, or boards of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, telephone,
fiberoptic, internet, community antenna television (CATV), water, sewer, or other transmission, distribution,
collection, supply or disposal systems including poles, wires, mains, pipes, conduits, cables, hydrants, and
other similar equipment and appurtenances necessary for such systems to furnish an adequate level of
service. Telecommunication towers or facilities, alternative tower structures, and wireless communication
facilities antenna are specifically excluded from this definition. Essential services does not include buildings
associated with such services.
Essential Public Service Building. A building or structure principal or accessory to an essential public service.
Essential Public Service Building Storage Yard. An outdoor storage area principal or accessory to an
essential public service.
Excavation. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care.
Exception. A limited exclusion from applicable zoning ordinance regulations allowed by the Zoning Board of
Appeals under certain conditions.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-13
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Facade. The vertical plane of the exterior surface of a building, including all visible architectural, decorative,
and structural features.
Family. Means either of the following:
1. A domestic family, that is, one or more persons living together and related by the bonds of consanguinity
(blood), marriage, or adoption, together with servants of the principal occupants and not more than one
additional unrelated person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single, domestic,
housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
2. The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living together in a dwelling unit whose
relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family
with a demonstrable and recognizable bond that constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds that
render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic
family must be cooking and otherwise housekeeping as a single, nonprofit unit. This definition shall not
include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization or group where the
common living arrangement or the basis for the establishment of the functional equivalency of the
domestic family is likely or contemplated to exist for a limited or temporary duration. There shall be a
rebuttable presumption enforceable by the Zoning Administrator in the first instance that the number of
persons who may reside as a functional equivalent family shall be limited to six. Such presumption may
be rebutted by appeal of the Zoning Administrator’s determination to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
subject to the standards of this Chapter for such appeals.
Farm. The carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as a source of
income.
Fence. An accessory structure of definite height and location intended to serve as a decorative site feature;
a physical barrier to ingress or egress; a screen from objectionable vista or noise; a marker; or an enclosure
carrying out the requirements of this Chapter.
Filling. The depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into the ground, except common household
gardening and general farm care.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry areas
from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any source.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Floor Area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of several stories of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of party walls, but not including porches (enclosed
or unenclosed), breeze ways, garages (attached or unattached), basements, utility rooms, unfinished attics, or
any space devoted to off-street parking or loading. The “floor area” of a building, which is what this normally
is referred to as, includes the basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above
the established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever is higher.
1. Gross Leasable Area (GLA). The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use,
including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from
the centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. It is all the floor area on which tenants pay
rent.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-14 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
2. Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the horizontal areas
of the several floors of the building measured from
the exterior walls, including basements or
mezzanines. Unfinished attics, attached garages,
breezeways and areas included in structures or
buildings providing parking for motor vehicles shall
not be included.
3. Floor Area, Usable Nonresidential. The sum of the
horizontal areas of each floor, measured from the
interior face of exterior walls, including all areas
used for, intended to be used for, and accessible for
the sale of merchandise, provision of services, or
service to patrons, clients or customers, Floor area
which is used for or intended to be used for the
storage or processing of merchandise, or for utilities
shall be excluded from the computations of usable
nonresidential floor area. For the purposes of
computing required parking eighty percent (80%) of
the sum gross floor area may be used.
Food. As used in connection with restaurant facilities,
this term includes frozen desserts and nonalcoholic
beverages.
Footcandle. Illuminance produced on a surface one foot from a uniform point source of one candela, or when
one lumen is distributed into an area of one square foot.
Fully Shielded Fixture. An outdoor lighting fixture
shielded or constructed so that all light emitted is
projected onto the site and away from adjoining
properties. Light from a fully shielded fixture is not
visible from adjoining properties, and does not cause
glare or interfere with the vision of motorists.
Garage, Private. A garage for four or fewer motor
vehicles, without provision for repairing or servicing such
vehicles for profit.
Garden Center. An establishment with retail sales of
trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seeds,
topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture,
playground equipment and other home garden supplies,
landscaping materials, and equipment.
Glare. The effect produced by brightness or a source of illumination sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
©clearzoning
FULLY SHIELDED FIXTURE
Office
Sales & service
area
Lavatory
Lavatory
Utility
Accessory
building/
garage
D
C
Usable floor area
B
A
(A x B) + (C x D) =
Gross Floor
Area
FLOOR AREA, USABLE NONRESIDENTIAL
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-15
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Golf Course. A tract of land laid out for playing the game of golf, consisting of at least nine holes and
improved with tees, greens, fairways and hazards. A clubhouse and shelters are considered to be accessory
uses.
Grade. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the
wall adjoining the street. For the buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the
elevation of the sidewalks at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets. For buildings having no wall
adjoining the sidewalks or street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building.
1. Grade, Average. The arithmetic average of the lowest and highest grade elevations in an area within five
feet of the foundation line of a building or structure.
2. Grade, Finished. The lowest point of elevation between the exterior wall of the structure and a line five
feet from the exterior wall of the structure.
3. Grade, Natural. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before construction begins.
Greenbelt. A strip of land planted with trees or shrubs acceptable in species and caliber to the Planning
Commission and in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
Health Club. A place or building where active exercise and related activities are performed utilizing weight
control or muscle building equipment or apparatus for the purpose of physical fitness.
Home Occupation. Any use customarily conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the
inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
Hospital. A building, structure or institution in which sick or injured persons, primarily inpatients, are given
medical or surgical treatment, and operating under a license by the State Department of Public Health.
Hotel. Any building containing six or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used,
rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. A building or part of
a building with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used
primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: 1) maid
service; 2) furnishing of linen; 3) telephone, secretarial, or desk service; 4) bellboy service. A hotel may
include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms as accessory uses.
Housing for the Elderly. An institution other than a hospital or hotel, which provides room and board to nontransient
persons primarily 55 years of age or older. Housing for the elderly may include:
1. Senior Housing. Multiple-family dwelling units occupied by persons 55 years of age or older.
2. Elderly Housing Complex. A building or group of buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy is
restricted to persons 55 years of age or older or couples where either the husband or wife is 55 years of
age or older.
3. Congregate or Interim Care Housing. A semi-independent housing facility containing congregate kitchen,
dining, and living areas, but with separate sleeping rooms. Such facilities typically provide special support
services, such as transportation and limited medical care.
4. Dependent Housing Facilities. Facilities such as convalescent homes and nursing homes that are
designed for older persons who need a wide range of health and support services, including personal
nursing care.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-16 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Housekeeping Unit. A dwelling unit organized as a single entity in which the members share common kitchen
facilities and have access to all parts of the dwelling.
Improvements. Those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary to
protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City, and future users or
inhabitants of the proposed project or project area; including parking areas, landscaping, roadways, lighting,
utilities, screening, and drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project subject to zoning approval.
Institutional Uses. The following specific uses of an educational, social, or religious character, as defined or
used in this Chapter.
1. Public and private elementary and secondary schools, business schools or private schools operated for
profit, and institutions for higher education.
2. Auditoriums, theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, and similar places of assembly.
3. Libraries, museums, and similar centers for cultural activities.
4. Fairgrounds.
5. Churches, temples, and other places of worship.
6. Post offices.
7. Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
Junk. Any motor vehicle, machinery, appliance, product, merchandise with parts missing, scrap metal or
other scrap material that is damaged, deteriorated or in a condition which cannot be used for the purpose for
which the product was manufactured.
Junkyard. An open area licensed by the state of Michigan where waste, used or secondhand material is
bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including but not limited to
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, tires, and bottles. A “junk yard” includes automobile wrecking yards
and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk but does
not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. The term “junk yard” does not include
collection stations for residential recyclables.
Kennel. A structure used for the harboring of more than two dogs that are more than six months old.
Kennel, Commercial. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets, six
months old or older, are either permanently or temporarily boarded for sale, breeding, boarding, or training
purposes. Kennels shall also include any lot or premises where household pets are bred or sold.
Laboratory. A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing, but not devoted to the
manufacturing of a product or products.
Land, Common. A parcel or parcels of land with the improvements thereon, the use, maintenance and
enjoyment of which are intended to be shared by the owners or occupants of individual building units in a
subdivision or a planned unit development.
Landfill. A parcel of land or part thereof licensed by the state of Michigan used primarily for the disposal by
abandonment, burial, dumping, burning or any other means and for whatever purpose, of garbage sewage,
trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.
Light Fixture. The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. The fixture includes the elements
designed to give light output control, such as a reflector, lens, ballast, housing, and attachments.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-17
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Loading Space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
Lodging House. A building or portion thereof containing not more than five guestrooms which are used by not
more than five guests where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. A lodging house shall comply
with all the requirements for dwellings.
Lot. A platted lot of a recorded subdivision or a parcel of contiguous land in the same ownership which is not
divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose
other than a public highway or alley, excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance
creates any nonconformity of use or structure.
1. Non-Residentially Used Lot. A lot with a land use other than residential.
2. Residentially Used Lot. A lot with a land use where one or more persons resides in a building containing
one room or a combination of rooms that are used for living, cooking, and sleeping purposes. If a building
is vacant, but the residential use has not been abandoned, the lot shall continue to be classified as a
Residentially Used Lot.
Lot, Corner. A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than
135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this
Chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the
lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

Lot, Interior. Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Nonconforming. A lot of record that does not meet
the dimensional requirements of this Chapter.
Lot, Through (Double Frontage). Any interior lot having
frontage on two more or less parallel streets as
distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of
double frontage lots, all sides of said lots adjacent to
streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards
shall be provided as required.
Lot of Record. A lot, the dimension and configuration of
which are shown on a map recorded in the office of the
County Register of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by
metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is attested to
by a professional engineer or land surveyor (registered
and licensed in the state and likewise recorded on a file
with the county.)
LOTS: CORNER, DOUBLE FRONTAGE, INTERIOR
Double frontage lot
Interior
lot
Corner
lot
Less than 135° Less than 135°
Corner
lot
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-18 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Lot, Zoning. A single tract of land, located within a single block, under one zoning designation, under single
ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this Chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions, and
frontage as required in the schedule of regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning
lot therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the County Register of Deeds office, but may
include one or more lots of record all of which have the same zoning designation and located adjacent to
each other.
Lot Area, Gross. The net lot area plus any portion of adjoining public lands deemed proper to be included by
the Planning Commission.
Lot Area, Net. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
Lot Coverage. The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory
buildings or structures, and permanent swimming pools.
Lot Depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median
between the side lot lines.
Lot Frontage. The horizontal distance measured along that portion of the front lot line that abuts a street
right-of-way, or an approved and dedicated private road easement.
Lot Lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
1. Front Lot Line. The boundary separating an interior lot from the street; or the boundary separating a
corner lot or double frontage lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat or in
the request for the zoning permit.
2. Rear Lot Line. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear the rear lot
line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front line, not less than ten feet long, lying farthest from the
front lot line and wholly within the lot.
3. Side Lot Line. Any lot lines other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot
from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where the building
line, or front, intersects the side lot lines.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-19
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
LOT LINES
Side lot line
Side lot line
Rear lot line
Front lot line
©clearzoning
Front lot line
Rear lot line
10’ long
LOT LINES,
LOTS POINTED AT THE REAR
©clearzoning
Massage Therapist. An individual specifically trained and certified in massage therapy and the healing arts
by the American Massage Therapy Association or similar organization.
Master Plan. A comprehensive document, including but not limited to written text, maps, illustrations, and
any sub-unit, portion, part or amendment of such plan. At a minimum, such plan(s) shall indicate the
development goals and objectives; planned future use of all land within the City of Marshall; general locations
for existing and planned streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the City of
Marshall. Such plan(s) shall be adopted by the Planning Commission, and may be adopted by City Council.
Microbrewery. A brewer licensed by the State of Michigan that produces and manufactures in total less than
60,000 barrels of beer per year, and who may sell at the licensed brewery premises the beer produced and
manufactured to consumers for consumption on or off the licensed brewery premises.
Mixed-Use Development. Any combination of two or more uses permitted in the district on a single zoning lot.
Mobile food vending unit: a self-contained mobile unit, independent with respect to water, sewer and power
utilities, capable of moving or being moved, consisting of an enclosed truck, enclosed trailer or similar vehicle
mounted unit that contains equipment used for the preparation and/or sale of food products and is closed
up when not in operation.
Mobile food vendor: Person(s) selling foods from a mobile vendor unit. This definition shall not include
peddlers and transient merchants.
Movie Theater. A structure used for motion pictures for admission to which entrance money is received and
no audience participation or meal service is allowed.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-20 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Municipal. Owned, operated or used by the City.
New Construction. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date
of this Chapter.
Nonconformities.
1. Effective Date. Whenever this Chapter refers to the “effective date,” the reference shall be deemed to
include the effective date of any amendments to this Chapter if the amendments created a
nonconforming situation.
2. Nonconforming Lot. A platted or unplatted parcel of land lawfully existing at the effective date of this
Chapter or amendments thereto that does not conform to Chapter provisions for the district in which it is
located.
3. Nonconforming Structure. A structure or portion
thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this
Chapter or amendments thereto that does not
conform to Chapter provisions for the district in
which it is located, but is otherwise in compliance
with all other applicable federal, state, county and
city laws ordinances, regulations and codes.
4. Nonconforming Use. A use that lawfully occupied
a parcel of land or structure and land in
combination at the effective date of this Chapter or
amendments thereto that does not conform to the
use regulations of the district in which it is located
or does not have special use approval, where
provisions of this Chapter require such approval,
but is otherwise in compliance with all other
applicable federal, state, county and city laws
ordinances, and regulations.
5. Unlawful Structure. A structure or portion thereof, which is not a conforming or a nonconforming
structure or is not in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws ordinances,
regulations and codes.
6. Unlawful Use. A use that occupies one or more contiguous parcels of land or structures and land in
combination, which is not a conforming or a nonconforming use or is not in compliance with all
applicable federal, state, county and city laws ordinances, regulations and codes.
Nuisance. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of
annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of an activity or use
across a lot line which can be perceived by or affect a human being, or the generation of an excessive or
concentrated movement of people or things such as noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes,
vibration, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable effluent, noise of congregation of
people, particularly at night, or passenger traffic.
Nursery. A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants
offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of
nursery within the meaning of this zoning ordinance does not include any space, building or structure used
for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used.
NONCONFORMING USE
©clearzoning
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-21
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Occupancy Load. The number of individuals normally occupying a building or part thereof or for which the
exitway facilities have been designed.
Offset. The distance between the center lines of driveways or streets across the street from one another.
Open Air Business.
1. The retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seeds, topsoil, humus, fertilizers, trellises, lawn
furniture, playground equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment;
2. The retail sale of fruit and vegetables;
3. Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard courts, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving ranges,
children’s amusement parks or similar recreation uses;
4. Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicle, boat or home equipment sale, rental or repair services;
5. The outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, motor homes, mobile homes, snowmobiles,
farm implements and similar products.
Open Space. Lands open from ground to sky and devoted to outdoor recreation space, greenery, and
resource protection. Developed open space may include, but is not limited to playground fixtures, shelters,
and tennis courts.
1. Open Space, Common. An unoccupied area within a planned unit development which is reserved
primarily for the leisure and recreational use by the development’s residents, owners and occupants, and
generally owned and maintained in common by them, often through a homeowners association.
2. Open Space, Public. Any primarily undeveloped land, intended for passive recreational pursuits, within
the jurisdiction and control of a government agency.
Outlot. A parcel of land which must be designated on a recorded plat as an outlot before it may be legally
considered as such.
Overlay District. An overlay zoning district applies to a specific geographic area of the City, as designated on
the City’s Zoning Map. The requirements of an Overlay district, as set forth by the Zoning Ordinance, apply as
additional standards for those parcels within an overlay district’s boundaries. Where there is a conflict
between the standards in the Overlay district and the underlying Zoning district, the standards in the Overlay
district shall be applied. The intent is to address particular issues that span a large geographical area and
includes more than one underlying zoning district.
Parking Lot, Off-Street. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles,
for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than two vehicles.
1. Parking Space. An area for each automobile or motor vehicle, such space being exclusive of necessary
drives, aisles, entrances or exits, and being fully accessible for the storage or parking of self-propelled
vehicles.
2. Parking Structure. A structure of two or more stories, either privately or publicly owned, used for parking
more than four automobiles.
Park, Municipal. A parcel of land that is used as a park and is operated under the supervision of the City.
Park, Public. Any developed or undeveloped park, playground, beach, outdoor swimming pool, golf course,
tennis courts, or otherwise intended for active recreational pursuits, within the jurisdiction and control of a
government agency.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-22 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Party Store. A retail establishment licensed by the State of Michigan where more than 10% of the gross floor
area is utilized for the storage, display, and sale of alcoholic liquor, wine, beer, and other alcoholic beverages
in the original package for consumption off the premises.
Pavement or Hard Surface. Plant-mixed bituminous material, concrete, and brick or masonry pavers meeting
the construction specifications of the City.
Pet. Any animal that has been bred or raised to live about the habitation of humans and is dependent on
people for food and shelter.
Planned Office Park. A development that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses,
and open space designed, planned, constructed, and managed on an integral and coordinated basis.
Plat. A map of a subdivision of land.
Pool, Swimming. Any structure or container as defined by the Michigan Building Code that is located above or
below grade designed to hold water and intended for swimming or bathing by people. A swimming pool shall
be considered an accessory structure for the purpose of determining required yard spaces and maximum lot
coverage.
Porch. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed, except for columns supporting the
porch roof, which projects from the main wall of such building or structure and which has a separate roof or
an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached. Porches may not be enclosed
with materials other than screening. Porches enclosed with materials other than screening shall be
considered an integral part of the principal building for purposes of this Chapter.
Pub or Tavern. A restaurant licensed by the State of Michigan to sell at retail and serve alcoholic beverages
on the premises where less than 30% of the gross floor area is made up of a bar, being a barrier or counter at
which any alcoholic beverages are sold or served to and consumed by customers, and also including areas
dedicated for the use of stages, dance floors, standing-room areas, pool tables and other mechanical
amusement devices.
Public Notice. A notice of the time, date, place and purpose of a public hearing in accordance with the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006).
Public Service. Public service facilities within the context of this Chapter shall include such uses and services
as voting booths, pumping stations, fire halls, police stations, public health activities and similar uses
including essential public services.
Radioactive Materials. Materials defined as radioactive under State of Michigan regulations for
transportation of radioactive materials or under County Health Department regulations, whichever is
determined to be applicable.
Real Property. A lot of record located in the City of Marshall.
Recreation Area. A recreational land use conducted outside of a building, characterized by potentially
moderate impacts on traffic, the natural environment, and the surrounding neighborhood(s), including
athletic fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, bathing, wading and other therapeutic
facilities, skateboard parks, and miniature golf. A recreation area may also contain a recreation center.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-23
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Recreation Land. Any public or private owned lot or parcel that is utilized for recreation activities such as,
but not limited to camping, swimming, picnicking, hiking, nature study, hunting, boating, and fishing.
Recreation Establishment, Indoor. A privately owned facility designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, amusement or leisure time activities and other customary recreational activities indoors (within an
enclosed building) and operated as a business and open for use by the public for a fee, such as gymnasiums
and fitness centers, bowling alleys, indoor soccer facilities, racquetball and tennis clubs, ice and roller
skating rinks, curling centers, and firearms ranges.
Recreation Establishment, Outdoor. A privately owned facility designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, amusement or leisure time activities and other customary recreational activities outdoors (outside of
an enclosed building) and operated as a business and open for use by the public for a fee such as tennis
clubs, archery ranges, golf courses, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, water slides, batting cages
and machines, skateboarding parks, and children’s amusement parks.
Recreational Equipment. Recreational equipment shall include the following.
1. Boats and Boat Trailers. Boats and boat trailers shall include boats, floats, rafts, water skis, canoes,
plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway.
2. Pickup tops. A structure used to cover the bed of a pickup or a single unit designed to store or haul
equipment or materials to and from job sites.
3. Folding Tent Trailer. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use.
4. Motor Home (Trailer Coach). A self-propelled motorized recreational vehicle intended, designed, used,
or constructed and duly licensable for travel or recreational usage, and for temporary human habitation,
sleeping, or cooking and eating for one or more persons, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and
capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. Motor homes generally contain
sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
5. Pickup Camper. A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient
equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel,
recreational, and vacation uses.
6. Snowmobile. Any motorized vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice, steered by means of
wheels, skis or runners.
7. Travel Trailer. A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling
during travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and which may be identified as a travel trailer by the
manufacturer. Travel trailers generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
8. Other Recreational Equipment. Other recreational equipment includes but is not limited to, all terrain or
special terrain vehicles (i.e. quads, dirt bikes, mini bikes, dune buggies, go carts, or similar equipment),
utility trailers, plus normal equipment to transport them on the highway.
Recyclable Material. Any type of discarded material offered for collection separate from garbage or waste
material which is intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered
form. The term "recyclable material" does not include refuse or hazardous material.
Recycling Collection Facility. An establishment to be used by the public as a place to drop off recyclable
material for temporary storage, manual sorting, and eventual transport to a recycling processing facility. A
recycling collection facility does not include processing of recyclable materials.
Recycling Processing Facility. An establishment for the collection, sorting, bundling, and/or temporary
storage of recyclable materials for efficient transport or processing of materials to an end-user's
specifications. A recycling processing facility may include collection of recyclable materials or a recycling
collection facility.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-24 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Restaurant, Carry-Out. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or
beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or method of operation includes
both of the following characteristics.
1. Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible containers, or in paper, plastic or other
disposable containers.
2. The consumption of foods, frozen desserts or beverages within the restaurant building, within a motor
vehicle parked upon the premises or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building is
posted as being prohibited, and such prohibition is strictly enforced by the restaurateur.
Restaurant, Drive-In. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or
beverages to the consumer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or method of operation, or any
portion of whose business, includes one or both of the following characteristics.
1. Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle either by a
car-hop or by other means that eliminates the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle.
2. The consumption of foods, frozen desserts or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the
premises or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building is allowed, encouraged or
permitted.
Restaurant, Fast-Food. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or
beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building
or for carry-out with consumption off the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation
includes both the following characteristics.
1. Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in edible containers, or in paper, plastic or other
disposable containers.
2. The consumption of foods, frozen desserts or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the
premises or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building is posted as being
prohibited, and such prohibition is strictly enforced by the restaurateur.
Restaurant, Standard. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food, frozen desserts or
beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or principal method of operation
includes one or both of the following characteristics.
1. Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods, frozen desserts or
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which such items are consumed; or
2. A cafeteria-type operation where foods, frozen desserts or beverages generally are consumed within the
restaurant building.
Retail Establishments. A business having as its primary function the supply of merchandise or wares to the
end consumer. Includes but is not limited to general merchandise and specialty shops, pharmacies, and
stores selling furniture, electronics, appliances, home improvement products, and other consumer goods.
Right-of-Way. A street, alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of
persons or vehicles or placement of public and semi-public utilities and under the legal authority of the
agency having jurisdiction over the right-of-way.
Room. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a living
room, dining room and bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area
in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways, and storage. Plans presented showing
one, two, or three bedroom units and including a den, library, or other extra room shall count such extra
room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-25
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Satellite Dish Antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured,
and is in the shape of a shallow dish, parabola, cone or horn used to transmit or receive television, radio, or
other electromagnetic communication signals between terrestrially or extra-terrestrially based sources. This
definition includes, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, television
reception only satellite antennas (TVRO), and satellite microwave antennas.
School, Nursery. An establishment wherein three or more children, not related by bonds of consanguinity or
fostership to the family living on the premises, are, for remuneration, cared for. Such schools or centers need
not have a resident family on the premises. (See CHILD CARE.)
Screening. A visual barrier between adjacent areas or uses consisting of structures, such as a wall or fence,
or living plant material.
Separate Ownership. Ownership of a parcel of land wherein the owner does not own adjoining vacant land.
Ownership of land may include dual or multiple ownership by a partnership, corporation or other group,
provided that any number of contiguous lots of record may be considered as a single lot of record, for the
purpose of this zoning ordinance, as the owner thereof so elects, and in such case the outside perimeter of
such group of lots of record shall constitute the front, rear and side lot lines thereof.
Service Drive. A drive that generally parallels the public right-of-way but runs along the back of a land use
which fronts on the public street. A service drive may provide access to properties on both sides, and vary in
width and design.
Setback. The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a public right-ofway
or lot line.
1. Setback, Parking Lot. The minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way or lot line and
the near edge of a parking lot, excluding necessary or approved driveways, frontage roads and
landscaping areas.
Sexually-Oriented Businesses. See Chapter 118 of the City Code of Ordinances.
Sign. Any surface, device, letter, word, model, balloon, pennant, insignia, emblem, logo, icon, painting,
placard, poster, flag or representation, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from a public place,
including, but not limited to highways, streets, alleys or publicly-owned property, or is located on private
property and exposed to the public, which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person,
institution, business or constitutes a solicitation.
For the purpose of Section 5.1, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
1. Abandoned Sign. A permanent sign which was erected on a property in conjunction with a particular use
which has been discontinued for a period of 180 days or longer or a sign the content of which pertains to
a time, event or purpose which no longer applies.
2. Animated Sign. A changeable copy sign where the information conveyed changes more than once per
minute.
3. Awning. A roof like cover, typically constructed of canvas, vinyl or similar fabric stretched over a
framework, that projects from the wall of the building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, a window,
or pedestrians from the elements.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-26 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4. Awning Sign. A permanent sign painted on, printed
on, or attached flat against the surface of an
awning.
5. Balloon Sign. A type of portable sign filled with air
or gas.
6. Banner Sign. A temporary sign constructed of cloth,
fabric or other similar material with or without a
structural frame. A national flag of the United State
of America, the State of Michigan flag, the City of
Marshall municipal flag, the official flag of any religious, institutional or business establishment, or
displays for holidays or public events shall not be considered banner signs.
7. Barber Pole Sign. A permanent sign attached to the building in a vertical cylinder shape with moving
and/or alternating colors.
8. Billboard Sign. A permanent sign which identifies a use or advertises products and services not available
on the site or parcel on which the sign is located.
9. Changeable Copy Sign. A permanent sign, electrical or non-electrical, on which the copy changes
automatically or is designed to allow the copy to be changed manually while the surface of the sign
remains unchanged, such as electronic time and temperature units or reader boards with changeable
letters. A sign on which the copy changes more than once per minute shall be considered an animated
sign.
10. Construction Sign. A temporary sign that identifies the owner, developer, financier, contractor,
subcontractor, architect, engineer and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property
on which the sign is located.
11. Directional Sign. A temporary or permanent sign that
displays a message related to a product, activity,
event or service and commonly includes an arrow or
other directional means to assist in determining a
correct route to an entrance, event or parking area.

12. Double Faced Sign. Signs with two parallel or nonparallel
sign surfaces not more than 24 inches apart
at any point on the opposite face.
13. Feather (or Flutter) Sign. Any sign that is comprised
of material that is suspended or attached in such a
manner to a pole or stake as to attract attention by
waving, moving or fluttering from natural wind
currents. It also includes similar signs that do not
move or flutter.
14. Flag Sign. A temporary sign made of a rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design used as a symbol
or signaling device. The national flag of the United State of America, the State of Michigan flag and the
City of Marshall municipal flag are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter. The official flag of any
religious, institutional or business establishment is considered a sign.
15. Freestanding Sign. A permanent sign attached to or supported by a post(s), pole(s), base or the like, and
not attached to a building. Freestanding signs include pylon and ground signs.
©clearzoning
©clearzoning
DIRECTIONAL SIGN
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-27
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
16. Ground Sign. A sign extending upward from grade
that is attached to a permanent foundation for a
distance of not less than 50 percent of its length,
and which may be attached or dependent for
support from any pole, posts, or similar uprights
provided such supports are concealed within the
sign structure. 
17. Historical Marker. A sign, monument, or marker
designating a location or structure of historical
significance, on a site approved by the city, state,
or federal government is exempt from regulation by
this Chapter.
18. Incidental Sign. A temporary or permanent on-premises sign that is intended to provide information or
direction for the convenience and necessity of the public and whose purpose is secondary to the use of
the lot on which it is located. Such signs include but are not limited to open/closed signs, hours of
operation, warning or caution signs, no trespassing signs, dangerous animal signs, and similar signs.
19. Maintenance. The cleaning, painting, repair or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a
manner that does not alter the basic copy, design
or structure of the sign.
20. Marquee. Any permanent roof like structure
projecting from a building or extending along and
projecting beyond the wall of the building generally
designed and constructed to provide protection
from weather.
21. Marquee Sign. A permanent sign attached to any
part of a marquee other than the roof. 
22. Mural. A permanent design or representation
painted or drawn on a wall that does not advertise
a business, product, service, or activity.
23. Nameplate Sign. A permanent sign affixed to the wall of a building or incorporated into the façade of the
building. Examples include, but are not limited to, name of building and date of construction or opening.
24. Nonconforming Sign. A temporary sign or permanent sign which lawfully existed at the effective date of
this Chapter, or any amendment thereto, that does not conform to all of the current requirements of this
Chapter.
25. On-Premises Sign. A temporary sign or permanent sign which pertains to the use of the premises on
which it is located.
26. Pennant Sign. A sign, with or without a printed design or text, made of flexible materials suspended from
one or two corners, used in combination or on a cable or other similar support with other such signs to
create the impression of a line.
27. Permanent Sign. Any sign of durable material permanently anchored or secured to a building, accessory
structure or the ground.
28. Portable Sign. A temporary sign designed to be moved from place to place, whether or not it is attached
to the ground or a structure.
©clearzoning
GROUND SIGN
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-28 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
29. Projecting Architectural Feature. Elements such as
cornices, eaves and overhangs, canopies, porches,
bay windows, and chimneys that are attached to or
project out from the main building walls below the
roof.
30. Projecting Sign. A permanent sign attached to a
building which extends from the building toward
the street. 
31. Pylon Sign. A sign supported by one (1) or more
poles, posts, braces, or pylons located in or upon
the ground and not attached to a building. Also
referred to as a pole sign.
32. Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign placed on a
property during the time that the property and/or
structures or portions of structures located on the
property are advertised for sale, rent, or lease.
33. Roof Sign. A temporary sign or permanent sign
erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or
on top of or above the parapet of a building, or
signs where any portion of the sign extends above
the roof of the building where the sign is located.
Projecting architectural features, as defined in this
Chapter, shall not be considered part of the roof.
34. Sandwich Board Sign. A temporary sign containing
two separate faces which are attached to one
another at the top by one or more hinges or
fasteners and which when placed upon the ground
will stand upright without any additional
support. 
35. Sign Copy. Any written characters, emblems, logos,
images, or projections meant to promote, advertise,
or otherwise call attention to a business, cause,
location, organization, or event.
36. Snipe Sign. An off-premises sign that is tacked,
nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise
attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other
objects.
37. Temporary Sign. Any sign erected for a specific
purpose or event and which is not intended to be
permanent.
©clearzoning
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN
©clearzoning
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-29
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
38. Wall Sign. A permanent sign painted on,
incorporated in, or attached directly to a
building wall, window, or projecting
architectural feature with the exposed face of
the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall,
window, or projecting architectural feature. A
mural shall not be considered a wall sign.
39. Warning Sign. See incidental sign.
40. Water Tower Sign. A permanent sign attached
to a water tower.
41. Window Sign. A temporary sign or permanent sign; picture, symbol or combination thereof that is placed
inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
Solar Energy System, Large. A utility-scale solar energy conversion system consisting of many groundmounted
solar arrays in rows, and associated control or conversion electronics, occupying more than 1 halfacre
of land, and that will be used to produce utility power to off-site customers.
Solar Energy System, Medium. A private on-site or utility-scale solar energy conversion system consisting of
many ground-mounted solar arrays in rows or roof panels, and associated control or conversion electronics,
occupying no more than 1 half-acre of land, and that will be used to produce utility power to on-site users and
off-site customers.
Solar Energy System, Small. A single residential or small business-scale solar energy conversion system
consisting of roof panels, ground-mounted solar arrays, or other solar energy fixtures, and associated control
or conversion electronics, occupying no more than 3,500 square feet of land, and that will be used to produce
utility power primarily to on-site users or customers.
Stable, Private. A stable for the keeping of horses for the use of the residents of the principal use and shall
not include the keeping of horses for others, or for commercial boarding, and with a capacity for not more
than two horses; provided, however, that the capacity of a private stable may be increased if the lot whereon
such stable is located contains at least one acre of land for each additional horse stabled thereon.
State Licensed Residential Facility. A structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the
state pursuant to Act 218 of the Public Acts of 1979, as amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 et seq.), or Act 116
of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 et seq.), which facility provides resident
services and 24-hour supervision or care for six or fewer persons in need of supervision or care.
Steep Slopes. Slopes with a grade of 12% or more.
Store, Retail. Any building or structure in which goods, wares, or merchandise are sold to the consumer for
direct consumption and not for resale.
1. Big Box Store. A warehouse style retail establishment within an enclosed building greater than 60,000
square feet in size.
2. Supermarket. A retail store offering groceries, meats, poultry, seafood, dairy products, produce, bakery
products, other food products, and other associated merchandise, and may have facilities for a butcher
shop, fresh seafood, a delicatessen, a bakery, a party store, a restaurant, an ice cream parlor, a florist, a
pharmacy, a financial institution, or other services.
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-30 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Story. A portion of a building, other than a mezzanine, included between the surface of a floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor and the top of
the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to
the top of the roof rafters.
1. Basement. That portion of a building which is
partly or wholly below grade but so located that
the vertical distance from mean grade to the
floor is greater than the vertical distance from
the mean grade to the ceiling. A basement shall
not be counted as a story unless over 50% of its
height is above the level from which the height of
the building is measured.
2. Mezzanine. An intermediate or fractional story
between the floor and ceiling of any story
occupying not more than one-third of the floor
area of such story. A mezzanine shall be a full
story when it covers more than 50% of the area
of the story underneath such mezzanine or if the
vertical distance from the floor next below it to
the floor next above it is 24 feet or more.
3. Story, Half. A part of a building between a
pitched roof and the uppermost full story, such
part having a floor area that does not exceed
one-half of the floor area of such full story,
provided the area contains at least 200 square
feet, with a clear height of at least seven feet six
inches.
Street A public or private way established or dedicated by duly recorded plat, deed, grant, governmental
authority or by operation of law that affords principal means of access to adjacent land.
1. Local Street. A street designed to provide access and serve residential neighborhoods is characterized
by low traffic volumes.
2. Collector Street. A street designed to moderate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets.
3. Major (Arterial) Street. A street defined in the master plan or by county or state road authorities as a
major traffic route or as an arterial or major street, where the movement of through traffic is the primary
function, with service to adjacent land uses a secondary function.
4. Thoroughfare, Major. An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic way for both
the immediate city area and the region beyond, and may be designated as a major thoroughfare,
parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term.
Street Right-of-Way Line. The dividing line between the street and a lot.
Structure. Any constructed or erected material or combination of materials in or upon the ground, including,
but not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, aboveground swimming pools, radio towers, sheds, signs and
storage bins, but excluding sidewalks and paving on streets, driveways, parking areas and patios.
1. Accessory Structure. A supplementary building or a portion of a main building, the use of which is
incidental to, customarily found in connection with, devoted exclusively to, and subordinate to that of the
main building and which is located on the same lot as the main building.
Subdivision. A land division as defined in Chapter 155 of the City Code of Ordinances.
STORY AND MEZZANINE
Basement
Unfinished
2nd Story
1st Story
Mezzanine*
* Floor area not to exceed 50% of floor below. ©clearzoning
Grade
Level
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-31
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Substantial Improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either, (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or
(2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes
of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Telecommunication Towers and Facilities or Tower. All structures and accessory facilities, including
alternative tower structures, relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving radio signals; including, but not limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone
devices and exchanges, microwave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment buildings, private and
commercial mobile radio service facilities, personal communication services towers (PCS), and cellular
telephone towers. Not included in this definition are citizen band radio facilities; short wave receiving
facilities; radio and television broadcast reception facilities; satellite dishes; federally licensed amateur (HAM)
radio facilities; and governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which
preempt municipal regulatory authority.
Temporary Use or Building. A use or zoning permitted to exist during periods of construction of the main
building or use, or for seasonal or special events.
1. Seasonal Events. Seasonal outdoor events intended for a limited duration within any zoning district
where such use shall not be interpreted to be a continuance of a nonconforming use. Temporary uses
and seasonal sales events may include carnivals, circuses, farmers markets, art fairs, craft shows,
sidewalk sales, antique sales, Christmas tree sales, flower sales, flea markets and similar events.
Tent. A shelter of canvas or the like supported by poles and fastened by cords or pegs driven into the ground,
and shall not include those types of tents used solely for children’s recreational purposes.
Tourist Home. Any dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests
for compensation, including provision for a morning meal only for the overnight guest.
Truck Storage. An area used for the temporary storage of private trucks or trucks for hire.
Truck Terminal. A structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed agricultural products, natural
minerals, or other resources, are delivered for immediate distribution to other parts of the City or to be
amalgamated for delivery in larger units to other points in the metropolitan area; or for distribution or
amalgamation involving transfer to other modes of transportation.
Use. The purpose for which land or premises, or a building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or for
which it is occupied, maintained, let, or leased.
1. Use, Accessory. A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the
main use of the premises.
2. Use, Commercial. The use of land in connection with the purchase, sale, barter, display or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise or personal services; the maintenance of offices or recreational or
amusement enterprises; or garage or basement sales conducted on residential premises for more than
six calendar days during one year.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-32 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Use, Special Land. A use of land that is permitted within a particular zoning district only if the applicable
standards have been met and a site plan has been approved.
4. Use, Industrial. Any land or building occupied or used for manufacturing or processing purposes.
5. Use, Nonconforming. See Nonconformities.
6. Use, Principal. The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the
premises exist.
7. Use, Principal Permitted. A use permitted in each zoning district by right subject to development plan
review approval.
8. Use, Public and Semi-Public Institutional. Uses of governmental agencies and nonprofit organizations
including, but not limited to, office buildings, churches, municipal parking lots, post offices, libraries, and
community centers.
Utility, Public. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized to furnish and
furnishing, under municipal or state regulations, to the public, transportation, water, gas, electricity,
telephone, steam, telegraph or sewage disposal services.
Utility Room. A room in a dwelling, not located in the basement, the use of which is primarily for storage, for
housing a heating unit or for laundry purposes.
Variance. A modification of the literal provisions of this Chapter granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Vehicle, Commercial. Any one of a class of vehicles and similar vehicles whose characteristics are described
below which have or require commercial license plates and have a gross vehicle weight in excess of 6,500
pounds. Any commercially licensed vehicle that does not possess the characteristics of a commercial
vehicle, as defined below, shall not be subject to the restrictions applying to commercial vehicles.
1. Semi Trailer. A trailer unit which is customarily attached to and propelled by a truck tractor vehicle, but
which can be detached to stand alone. Semi trailer shall include trailers with flat beds, stake beds, rolloff
beds, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures, any of which above units
exceeds 12 feet in height.
2. Truck Tractor. A commercial vehicle which is capable of attaching to and propelling semi-trailers, mobile
homes, modular homes, boat trailers and similar units, and which is not customarily operated without an
attached trailer.
3. Other Commercial Vehicles. Any truck or motor vehicle with a cab and chassis with a stake, rack, dump
body, wrecker body, tanker body or any other body, the mounted height of which exceeds the height of
the cab roof by more then eight inches. This shall include any vehicle which has a commercial license
plate and which is designed to accommodate a body length in excess of nine feet. Commercial vehicles
do not include motor homes or recreational vehicles, but does include construction equipment such as
backhoes, power shovels, bulldozers, earth moving equipment and similar vehicles.
Veterinary Clinic or Hospital. An office of a duly licensed veterinary professional where diagnosis, treatment,
surgery and other veterinary care for domestic animals, horses and livestock, and all other activities and
rooming of animals are conducted within a completely enclosed building. A veterinary hospital may include
outdoor boarding incidental to treatment.
Waiting Space. A defined area for temporary stacking or parking of a vehicle, where the automobile engine is
not turned off, for the purpose of receiving service through a drive-through service window or similar
arrangement.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-33
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Wall, Obscuring. An obscuring structure of definite height and location constructed of wood, masonry,
landscaping, earth, concrete, or similar materials or combination of materials.
Wall, Parapet. An extension of a building wall above the roof that may serve to screen roof-mounted
mechanical equipment.
Wall, Retaining. A permanent solid barrier of brick, stone, or other opaque material intended to enclose an
area. For the purpose of this Chapter, all supporting members, posts, stringers, braces, pilasters or other
construction features of a retaining wall shall be located and placed on the inside of the wall away from
public view. Moreover, all retaining walls shall be constructed or painted, tinted or colored in one color only
for their exterior surface, and no sign or advertising shall be placed, affixed, painted or designed thereon.
Warehouse, Miniature or Self-Storage. A building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and fenced
compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or
lockers for the storage of customer’s goods or wares.
Wetland. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or
near the land surface or the land is saturated with or covered by water. Some wetland areas are more
commonly referred to as bogs, swamps or marshlands. Wetlands shall also have one or more of the
following attributes:
1. At least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes.
2. The substrate is predominantly un-drained hydric soil.
3. The substrate is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing
season of each year.
Wetland, Regulated. Certain wetlands regulated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality under
the provisions of Act 203 of the Public Acts of 1979, as amended, and generally defined as land
characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog,
swamp, or marsh and which is any of the following.
1. Contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream;
2. Not contiguous to an inland lake, pond, river or stream, and more than five acres in size;
3. Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; and five acres or less in size if the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources determines that protection of the area is essential to the
preservation of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or destruction and the
department has so notified the landowner.
Wind Energy Conversion System. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity
through the use of wind turbine generator, including the turbine, blades, and tower as well as related
electrical equipment, but not including wiring to connect the wind energy system to the grid. For purposes of
this Chapter, the term wind energy system shall include an anemometer tower or wind turbine generator
tower. Terms related to wind energy systems are defined as follows:
1. Anemometer. A device to measure wind speed.
2. Blade. The aerodynamic surface that catches the wind.
3. Rotor. The rotating part of a wind turbine, either the blades and blade assembly, or the rotating portion of
a generator.
4. Shadow flicker. The alternating changes in light intensity caused by the moving blade of a wind energy
system casting shadows on the ground and stationary objects, such as a window at a dwelling.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-34 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Wine Shop (Specialty). A retail establishment licensed by the State of Michigan where more than 10% of the
gross floor area is utilized for the storage, display, and sale of wine or beer with an alcohol content under 21%
by volume for consumption off the premises, however no more than 10% of the gross floor area shall be
dedicated for the storage, display, and sale of beer.
Wireless Communication Facilities. All structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio
frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not
be limited to radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay towers,
telephone transmission equipment buildings and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included
within this definition are citizen band radio facilities;
short wave facilities; ham, amateur radio facilities;
satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities that are
subject to state or federal law or regulations that
preempt municipal regulatory authority.
1. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities
(Antennae). Wireless communication facilities that
are affixed to existing structures, such as existing
buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the
like. A wireless communication support structure
proposed to be newly established shall not be
included within this definition.
2. Collocation. The location by two or more wireless
communication providers of wireless
communication facilities on a common structure,
tower, or building, with the view toward reducing
the overall number of structures required to
support wireless communication antennae within
the City.
3. Wireless Communication Support Structures
(Towers). Structures erected or modified to support
wireless communication antennae. Support
structures within this definition include, but shall
not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light
poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other
structures which appear to be something other
than a mere support structure.
Yards. The space on the same lot with a main building,
open, unoccupied, and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter
and as defined herein. 
1. Front Yard. That yard extending the full width of the
lot, the depth of which is the least distance
between the street right-of-way line and the
building line.
2. Rear Yard. That yard extending the full width of the
lot, the depth of which is the least distance
between the rear lot line and the rear of the main
building.
YARDS: FRONT, REAR, SIDE
©clearzoning
Side
yard
Rear yard
Front yard
Side
yard
Side lot line
Side lot line
Rear lot line
Front lot line
CORNER LOT YARDS
Front lot line
Front lot line
Side lot line
Side lot line
Front Yard
Front Yard
Side Yard
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-35
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Side Yard. That yard between a main building and the side lot line extending from the front yard to the
rear yard. The width of the required side yard is measured horizontally at 90 degree angles with the side
lot line, from the nearest point of the side lot line to the drip line of the structure.
4. Waterfront Yard. That yard which has frontage on the water; waterfront yards shall be considered front
yards and subject to all pertinent regulations.
Zoning District. A specifically delineated area with uniform regulations and requirements governing the use,
placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
Zoning Permit. The written authority issued by the Zoning Administrator permitting the construction, removal,
moving, alteration or use of a building in conformity with this Chapter.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
2-36 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-1
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 3.0
Zoning Districts
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-2 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 3.0 Zoning Districts
3.1 Districts Established
3.2 Zoning Map
3.3 District Boundaries
3.4 Design and Development Requirements
3.5 Street, Alley and Railroad Rights-of-Way
3.6 Zoning of Annexed Areas
3.7 Zoning of Vacated Areas
3.8 Prohibited Uses
3.9 Principal Permitted Uses in Districts
3.10 Land Uses Subject to Special Conditions
3.11 Notes to District Standards
3.12 R-3 Development Requirements
3.13 MFRD Development Requirements
3.14 MHPD Development Requirements
3.15 HCHSD Development Requirements
3.16 B-2 Development Requirements
3.17 B-3 Guidelines to Consider for
Development
3.18 B-4 and FS Development Requirements
3.19 I-1 Development Requirements
3.20 I-2 Development Requirements
3.21 PSP Development Requirements
3.22 Exceptions to Height Limitations
3.23 Exceptions to Lot Area of Width
Requirements
3.24 Other Projections Into Yards
3.25 Access Through Yards
3.26 Rubbish and Waste Material
3.27 Buildings Under Construction
3.28 Restoration of Unsafe Buildings
3.29 Essential Services
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-3
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.0 Zoning Districts
3.1 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Marshall is hereby divided
into the following districts:
1. R-1 Residential Estate District
2. R-2 Suburban Residential District
3. R-3 Traditional Residential District
4. MFRD Multiple Family Residential District
5. MHPD Manufacture Housing Park District
6. POSD Professional Office Service District
7. HCHSD Health Care and Human Services District
8 B-2 Local Business District
9. B-3 Neighborhood Commercial District
10. B-4 Regional Commercial District
11. FS Freeway Services District
12. I-1 Research and Technology District
13. I-2 General Industrial District
14. PSP Public/Semi-Public Services District
15. River District Overlay
16. Hospital Campus Overlay District
17. PUD Planned Unit Development
 Digital User Note:
Click on a district
heading to go directly to
the corresponding
district regulations.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-4 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.1 R-1 Residential Estate District
A. PURPOSE
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Private non-commercial recreation areas or
centers § 4.3
ii. Cemeteries § 4.5
iii. Institutional uses § 4.6
iv. Adult foster care small group home
v. Adult foster care large group homes
vi. Group adult day care and child care homes
§ 4.7
vii. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons visit the site for the delivery of goods
or services § 4.2
viii. Recreation centers
ix. Plant nurseries and greenhouses
x. Private stables for the keeping of horses and
ponies for private use.
xi. Farms § 4.9
xii. One permanent or temporary structure solely
for the sale of produce grown on the land
used for agricultural purposes § 4.8
xiii. Golf courses § 4.10
xiv. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The purpose of this residential district is to provide a pleasant and attractive living environment, which is
consistent with the existing development as well as in areas proposed for new residential development,
respects the unique natural environment, and is accessible to public water and sanitary sewer services. The
R-1 district is intended to be a setting for a predominance of low-density and large-lot housing, typically in
transitional locations between more intense suburban residential development and rural or open lands.
i. Single-family detached dwellings § 4.1
ii. Single-family attached dwellings § 4.1
iii. Two-family dwellings § 4.11
iv. Municipal or publicly owned and operated
parks, and playgrounds
v. Residential cluster housing developments
vi. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons do not visit the site for the delivery of
goods or services § 4.2
vii. Adult foster care family homes
viii. Small solar energy systems § 4.53.1
ix. Medium solar energy systems (nonresidential
uses only) § 4.53.2
x. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 & 2
§ 4.50
xi. Family adult day care and child care homes.
xii. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-5
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
R-1 Residential Estate District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: 12,000 sq ft
Minimum lot width: 80 ft
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 30%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 35 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 40 ft
Minimum side yard setback: 10 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 35 feet or 2.5 stories
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit:
First floor: 800 sq ft
More than one-story: 1,200 sq ft
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : C, F, G, H and I.
3. Zoning Districts
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Storage and Repair of Vehicles
§ 4.48
 Storage and Parking of Commercial
Vehicles and Recreational
Equipment § 4.49
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory structures and uses §
5.2
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.1
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required § 5.5
 Location and Number of Permitted
Dwellings on a Lot § 5.6
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
35 ft or
2.5
stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
40’ Min.
35’ Min.
10’
Min.
R/W
CL
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
10’
Min.
80’ Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-6 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.2 R-2 Suburban Residential District
A. PURPOSE
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
The purpose of this residential district is to provide a pleasant and attractive living environment that is
consistent with the existing development as well as in areas proposed for new residential development. The
Suburban Residential district is intended to be a setting for primarily low density, single-family detached
dwellings on moderately sized parcels that are smaller in size than those permitted in the R-1 (Residential
Estate) district, but which will serve as a transition between the higher density of the R-3 (Traditional
Residential) district and the very low density housing development and rural nature of the R-1 (Residential
Estate) district.
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
i. Funeral Homes, not including crematoriums
ii. Recreation centers
iii. Private non-commercial recreation areas or
centers § 4.3
iv. Cemeteries § 4.5
v. Institutional uses § 4.6
vi. Adult foster care small group home
vii. Group adult day care and child care homes
§ 4.7
viii. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons visit the site for the delivery of goods
or services § 4.2
ix. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
i. Single-family detached dwellings § 4.1
ii. Single-family attached dwellings § 4.1
iii. Two-family dwellings § 4.11
iv. Municipal or publicly owned and operated
parks, and playgrounds
v. Residential cluster housing developments
vi. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons do not visit the site for the delivery of
goods or services § 4.2
vii. Adult foster care family homes
viii. Family adult day care and child care homes.
ix. Small solar energy systems § 4.53.1
x. Medium solar energy systems (nonresidential
uses only) § 4.53.2
xi. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 & 2
§ 4.50
xii. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-7
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: 9,000 sq ft
Minimum lot width: 65 ft
Lot Coverage
Minimum lot coverage: 30%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 30 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft
Minimum side yard setback: 8 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 35 ft or 2.5 stories
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit:
First floor: 672 sq ft
More than one-story: 1,000 sq ft
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : C, F, G, H and I.
R-2 Suburban Residential District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.2
The above drawings are not to scale.
35 ft or
2.5
stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
30’ Min.
25’ Min.
8’
Min.
R/W
CL
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
8’
Min.
65’ Min.
3. Zoning Districts
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Storage and Repair of Vehicles
§ 4.48
 Storage and Parking of Commercial
Vehicles and Recreational
Equipment § 4.49
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory structures and uses
§ 5.2
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required § 5.5
 Location and Number of Permitted
Dwellings on a Lot § 5.6
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-8 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.3 R-3 Traditional Residential District
A. PURPOSE
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
The purpose of this district is to provide a pleasant and attractive residential living environment of a medium
density, primarily on previously platted residential lots served with community water and sanitary sewer
facilities characterized by compact, concentrated development patterns. It is the further intent of this
district to provide for such uses as schools, churches, libraries, parks, playgrounds, and other public and
semi-public uses, along with accessory apartments, two-unit dwellings, and other uses to coexist on a limited
and structured basis. This district is further characterized by small parcel size, street oriented dwellings with
front porches, sidewalks, two-story construction and reduced building setback and lot width provisions. The
Traditional Residential district serves as a transitional area within the historic center of the city, located
between more suburban residential land uses and the city’s central business district.
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
i. Funeral Homes, not including crematoriums
ii. Recreation centers
iii. Attached or detached accessory apartments
§ 4.4
iv. Private non-commercial recreation areas or
centers § 4.3
v. Institutional uses § 4.6
vi. Adult foster care small group home
vii. Group adult day care and child care homes
§ 4.7
viii. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons visit the site for the delivery of goods
or services § 4.2
ix. Bed and breakfast inns § 4.12
x. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
i. Single-family detached dwellings  § 4.1
ii. Two-family dwellings § 4.11
iii. Municipal or publicly owned and operated
parks, and playgrounds
iv. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons do not visit the site for the delivery of
goods or services § 4.2
v. Adult foster care family homes
vi. Family adult day care and child care homes.
vii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
viii. Medium solar energy systems (nonresidential
uses only) § 4.53.2
ix. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 & 2
§ 4.50
x. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-9
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
R-3 Traditional Residential District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
3. Zoning Districts
 R-3 Development Requirements §
3.12
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Storage and Repair of Vehicles
§ 4.48
 Storage and Parking of Commercial
Vehicles and Recreational
Equipment § 4.49
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.3
 Accessory structures and uses § 5.2
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required § 5.5
 Location and Number of Permitted
Dwellings on a Lot § 5.6
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
35 ft or
2.5
stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
15’ Min.
25’ Min.
10’
Min.
R/W
CL
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
5’
Min.
50’ Min.
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: 4,000 sq ft
Minimum lot width: 50 ft
Lot Coverage
Minimum lot coverage: 35%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 25 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 15 ft
Minimum side yard setback:
One side: 5 ft
Total of two sides: 15 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 35 ft or 2.5 stories
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit:
First floor: 672 sq ft
More than one-story: 1,000 sq ft
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : C, D, F, G, H and I.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-10 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.4 MFRD Multiple Family Residential District
A. PURPOSE
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Private non-commercial recreation areas or
centers § 4.3
ii. Adult foster care large group homes and
congregate facilities.
iii. Boarding houses § 4.11
iv. Bed and breakfast inns § 4.12
v. Group adult day care and child care homes
§ 4.7
vi. Child care centers § 4.33
vii. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons visit the site for the delivery of goods
or services § 4.2
viii. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The Multiple Family Residential (MFRD) district is designated to provide sites for concentrated multiplefamily
dwellings and related uses, as opposed to sites for individual accessory or upstairs apartments, which
will serve as zones of transition between low density residential and commercial districts. The district is
intended to provide areas for townhouse and apartment style housing adequately serviced by public water
and sewer facilities. This district is also intended to have direct or convenient access to a major
thoroughfare, and not to require traffic to use minor streets for primary access.
i. Single-family detached dwellings  § 4.1
ii. Single-family attached dwellings; and twofamily
dwellings  § 4.11
iii. Multiple-family dwellings, including but not
limited to apartments, apartment houses,
townhouses, and efficiency units
iv. Housing for the elderly
v. Institutional uses § 4.6
vi. Municipal or publicly owned and operated
parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers
vii. Home occupations in which customers or
patrons do not visit the site for the delivery of
goods or services § 4.2
viii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
ix. Medium solar energy systems (nonresidential
uses only)  § 4.53.2
x. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 , 2 &
3  § 4.50
xi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-11
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
MFRD Multiple Family Residential District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS*
3. Zoning Districts
 MFRD Development Requirements
§ 3.13
Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Storage and Repair of Vehicles § 4.48
Storage and Parking of Commercial
Vehicles and Recreational Equipment
§ 4.49
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.4
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory structures and uses § 5.2
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required § 5.5
 Location and Number of Permitted
Dwellings on a Lot § 5.6
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard Requirements
§ 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of Land
§ 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
45 ft or
3 stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Lot Coverage
Minimum lot coverage: 50%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 40 ft**
Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft**
Minimum side yard setback:
One side: 10 ft**
Total of two sides: 30 ft**
Building Height
Maximum building height: 45 ft or 3 stories
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: 500 sq ft
Notes:
* Alterations and additions to a single-family home in the
MFRD district shall follow the requirements in the
schedule of regulations for the nearest single-family
residential district.
**Multiple-family dwellings which have all off-street
parking provided behind the dwelling and have the main
entrance to the building facing a public street may reduce
required minimum yard setbacks as follows:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : C, D, G, H, and I.
30’ Min.
40’ Min.
20’
Min.
R/W
CL
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
10’
Min.
100’ Min.
3.14.D Reduced Minimum Yard Setback
Front
Sides
One Side Total of Two
5 feet 10 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Rear
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-12 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.5 MHPD Manufactured Housing Park District
A. PURPOSE
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Clubhouses and private swimming pools for
the exclusive use of residents and their guests
 § 3.14
ii. Temporary use of one unit as a model § 3.14
iii. Carports, community garages, or parking lots
§ 3.14
1. The Manufactured Housing Park (MHPD) district is intended to provide for the location and regulation of
manufactured housing parks (formerly known as “mobile home parks”), as defined by the Mobile Home
Commission Act, P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 et seq.) and the Manufactured
Housing Commission General Rules. It is intended that manufactured housing parks be provided with
community and recreational facilities that serve the residents in the district in a setting that provides a
high quality of life for residents. In accordance with the purpose of this district, manufactured housing
parks shall be located in areas where they will be compatible with and not adversely impact adjacent
land uses.
2. The regulations and rules established by the State of Michigan Mobile Home Commission Act, P.A. 96 of
1987, as amended and the Manufactured Housing Commission General Rules (M.C.L.A.§§125.1101 et
seq.) govern all manufactured housing parks. Where regulations of this subchapter and Chapter exceed
the state law or general rules, they are intended to promote the health, safety and welfare of the city’s
residents, and to ensure that manufactured housing parks are developed and maintained in a manner
equivalent to the standards established by this Chapter for comparable residential developments in the
city.
3. Further, the district is intended to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the
community, to provide for standards that ensure adequate light and air to windows and for privacy and
open spaces to serve the residents of these districts, to prevent traffic congestion, and to reduce
hazards to life and property.
i. Single-family detached manufactured
dwellings § 3.14
ii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
iii. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 & 2
§ 4.50
C. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-13
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
MHPD Manufactured Housing Park District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Lot Size
Minimum park area: 15 acres, excluding
adjacent parcels
proposed for expansion
Minimum lot size: 5,500 sq ft
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: See Section 3.14
Minimum rear yard setback: See Section 3.14
Minimum side yard setback: See Section 3.14
Building Height
Maximum building height:
Community or similar
Buildings: 35 ft or 2 stories,
whichever is less
Storage or
service buildings 15 ft or 1 story
3. Zoning Districts
 MHPD Development Requirements
§ 3.14
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
Storage and Repair of Vehicles § 4.48
Storage and Parking of Commercial
Vehicles and Recreational Equipment
§ 4.49
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.5
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory Structures and Uses §
5.2
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public §
5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required §
5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard Requirements
§ 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of Land
§ 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
35 ft or
2 stories
whichever
is less
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
See Section 3.14
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-14 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.6 POSD Professional Office Service District
A. PURPOSE
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Banks and financial institutions with
accessory drive-through facilities  § 4.14
ii. Institutional uses § 4.6
iii. Funeral Homes, not including crematoriums
iv. Trade schools, regional educational facilities,
vocational education facilities, intermediate
career centers, and similar technological or
vocational training facilities
v. Wind energy conversion systems  § 4.54
vi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The Professional Office Service district (POSD) is designed to accommodate uses such as offices, financial
institutions and personal services, and is intended to serve as a transitional zone between residential and
commercial districts. Permitted uses are intended to be predominantly non-residential uses of an
administrative or professional nature necessary to the normal conduct of a community’s activities.
i. Medical and dental offices and clinics
ii. General office
iii. Studios or schools for arts and crafts,
photography, music or dancing
iv. Barber shops, beauty shops, and hair stylists
v. Therapeutic massage § 4.13
vi. Mixed-use development  § 4.23
vii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
viii. Medium solar energy systems  § 4.53.2
ix. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 ,2 &
3  § 4.50
x. Mobile food vending § 4.51
xi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-15
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
POSD Professional Office Service District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: 65 ft
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 60%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 25 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft
Minimum side yard setback: 15 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 35 ft or 2.5 stories,
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: 672 sq ft
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : A, B, G and I.
3. Zoning Districts
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory structures and uses
§ 5.2
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.6
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required
§ 5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
35 ft or
2.5
stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
20’ Min.
25’ Min.
15’
Min.
C R/W L
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
15’
Min.
65’ Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-16 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
HCHSD Health Care and Human Services District 3.1.7
A. INTENT
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Bed and breakfast inns § 4.12
ii. Hotels § 4.34
iii. Parking lots and structures
iv. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The Health Care and Human Services (HCHSD) district is designed to accommodate the unique needs and
characteristics of acute care hospitals. The mix of permitted uses and special land uses is intended to
promote an integration of uses, thereby curtailing rising health care costs resulting from the duplication of
equipment in diverse locations; reducing traffic through residential neighborhoods as would be required by
multiple destinations; eliminating multiple parking lots through central parking facilities; and promoting the
viability of the city’s downtown area and B-3 (Neighborhood Commercial) district.
i. Medical, dental and optical offices and clinics

ii. Nursing homes, retirement homes, licensed
daycare facilities
iii. General office
iv. Mixed-use development  § 4.23
v. Housing for the elderly
vi. Studios or schools for arts and crafts,
photography, music or dancing
vii. Barber shops, beauty shops, and hair stylists
viii. Therapeutic massage § 4.13
ix. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
x. Medium solar energy systems (rooftop
systems only)  § 4.53.2
xi. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 , 2 &
3  § 4.50
xii. Accessory structures and usescustomarily
incidental to any principal use permitted by
this Section, including dispensaries,
ambulance facilities, restaurants and health
clubs and other uses typically associated
with an inpatient acute care hospital § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-17
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
HCHSD Health Care and Human Services District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
3. Zoning Districts
HCHSD Development
Requirements§ 3.15
Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory structures and uses §
5.2
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.7
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required
§ 5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
60 ft or
5 stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: 65 ft
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: None specified
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 25 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 15 ft
Minimum side yard setback: 15 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 60 ft or 5 stories
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per
dwelling unit: 672 sq ft
Notes:
-The Health Care and Human Services district observes a
front yard facing west, a rear yard facing east, and two side
yards facing north and south. This district shall be exempt
from other provisions of the ordinance affecting front, side,
rear setbacks and how they pertain to parking.
15’ Min.
25’
Min.
15’
Min.
C R/W L
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
15’
Min.
65’ Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-18 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.8 B-2 Local Business District
A. INTENT
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Restaurant with accessory drive-through
facilities  § 4.14
ii. Plant materials nursery § 4.25
iii. Veterinary hospitals and clinics with outdoor
pens, boarding, or other similar uses § 4.22
iv. Adult- and sexually-oriented businesses § 4.26
v. Wholesale stores up to a maximum of 60,000
square feet usable floor area.
vi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The B-2 (Local Business) district provides for a mix of commercial and office uses potentially in one building.
It provides for a transition between the Professional Office Service and Neighborhood Commercial district.
This is accomplished by limiting the size of the building and type of uses that are allowed in the more intense
business districts and by screening them from the residential uses or districts. These uses are better served
by being located on a secondary or major thoroughfare.
i. General office (up to 5,000 sq ft)
ii. Medical and dental offices and clinics
iii. Business service establishments § 4.21
iv. Commercial greenhouses, nurseries, and
garden centers § 4.16
v. Pick-up/drop-off dry cleaners and coin
laundromats
vi. Gas station, including those combined with
convenience stores, but excluding automobile
service stations § 4.17
vii. Convenience stores
viii. Studios or schools for arts and crafts,
photography, music or dancing
ix. Pubs, taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and
nightclubs
x. Health clubs
xi. Personal service establishments § 4.18
xii. Newspaper offices and publishers, and copy
centers
xiii. Restaurants (excluding drive-in restaurants
and those with drive-through facilities) § 4.19
xiv. Pool/video arcades
xv. Retail establishments § 4.20
xvi. Veterinary clinics, indoor only
xvii. Mixed-use development  § 4.23
xviii.Therapeutic massage§ 4.13
xix. Housing for the elderly 
xx. Funeral homes, not including crematoriums
xxi. Accessory outdoor sales and display, up to 5%
of gross floor area or 2,500 sq ft, whichever is
less
xxii. Barber shops, beauty shops, and hair stylists
xxiii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
xxiv. Medium solar energy systems  § 4.53.2
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES (continued)
xxv. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 ,2 &
3  § 4.50
xxvi. Mobile food vending  § 4.51
xxvii.Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-19
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B-2 Local Business District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
3. Zoning Districts
 B-2 Development Requirements
§ 3.16
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
 Donation Collection Bins § 4.56
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 5.2
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.8
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.14
 Frontage on Streets Required
§ 5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
35 ft or
2.5
stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: 50 ft
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 60%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 10 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 15 ft
Minimum side yard setback:
One side: 5 ft
Total of two sides: 15 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 35 ft or 2.5 stories
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: 672 sq ft
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : A, B and I.
15’ Min.
10’ Min.
10’
Min.
CL R/W
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
5’
Min.
50’ Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-20 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.9 B-3 Neighborhood Business District
A. INTENT
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
1. The B-3 (Neighborhood Commercial) district is established for the purpose of accommodating a
concentration of entertainment, restaurant, retail, and service establishments in the historic center of
the city while allowing existing historical residential homes to remain. Collectively, the uses permitted in
this district are intended to provide a convenient and attractive center of civic and commercial activity
for the city.
2. This district is intended to provide a harmonious relationship between residential uses and variety of
retail businesses, restaurant, or entertainment uses. The B-3 district may also accommodate limited
locations for institutional, office, residential, and service uses and accessory residential uses that
conform to the intended character of the district and do not conflict with existing or planned uses.
3. Neighborhood Commercial district is further designed and intended to encourage a traditional, compact,
and consolidated pattern of commercial and mixed-use developments; maintain a lively social
environment in an economically viable downtown with a wide variety of uses in a pedestrian-oriented
setting; and promote developments where the physical, visual and spatial characteristics that retain and
enhance the visual character of the downtown.
4. Further, it is recognized by the city that the B-3 district includes an irreplaceable collection of
architecturally or historically significant buildings both commercial and residential. The attractiveness
and economic vitality of the city’s downtown area is, in part, a reflection of the shape, placement, and
character of the built environment. Accordingly, it is the further purpose of this subchapter to encourage
preservation of the downtown’s unique heritage and architectural character, and ensure that the city’s
appearance, character, and economic well-being are respected. Uses that create objectionable noise,
glare, odors, or other nuisances shall be prohibited.
i. Business service establishments within a
completely enclosed building
ii. Bed and breakfast inns  § 4.12
iii. Pick-up/drop-off dry cleaners
iv. General office
v. Medical and dental offices and clinics
vi. Therapeutic massage § 4.13
vii. Newspaper offices and publishers, and copy
centers.
viii. Personal service establishments within a
completely enclosed building
ix. Institutional uses § 4.6
x. Open air market  § 4.29
xi. Retail businesses (excluding drive-in or drivethrough
facilities)
xii. Pool/video arcades
xiii. Retail establishments § 4.20 excluding drive-in
or drive-through facilities)
xiv. Restaurants (excluding drive-in restaurants
and those with drive-through facilities)§ 4.19
xv. Mixed-use development  § 4.23
xvi. Outdoor displays of merchandise in the public
right-of-way § 4.30
xvii. Studios or schools for arts and crafts,
photography, music or dancing
xviii.Brewpubs, retail wine stores and tasting
outlets
xix. Pubs, taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and
nightclubs
xx. Live/work studios for artist and creative
businesses
xxi. Barber shops, beauty shops, and hair stylists
xxii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
xxiii. Medium solar energy systems (rooftop
systems only)  § 4.53.2
xxiv. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 , 2 &
3 § 4.50
xxv. Mobile Food Vending  § 4.51
xxvi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES (continued)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-21
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
i. Single-family homes within existing residential
structures § 4.31
ii. Parking lots and structures.
iii. Indoor recreational centers
iv. Bus passenger stations
v. Hotels  § 4.34
vi. Open-air business uses not otherwise
permitted in subsection B
vii. Laundromats (self-service or coin-operated)
§ 4.32
viii. Funeral Homes, not including crematoriums
ix. Adult day care  § 4.33
x. Adult foster care large group homes
xi. Child care centers § 4.33
xii. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
B-3 Neighborhood Business District 3.1.9
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-22 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B-3 Neighborhood Business District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS*
3. Zoning Districts
 B-3 Guidelines to Consider for
Development § 3.17
Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
Signs § 5.1
Accessory Structures and Uses § 5.2
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.9
Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
Frontage on Streets Required § 5.5
Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
Compliance with Yard Requirements
§ 5.9
Corner Clearance § 5.10
Building Grades and Grading of Land
§ 5.11
Protection of Excavations § 5.12
Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
Landscaping and Screening Standards
§ 5.15
Sidewalks § 5.16
Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
Condominium Development Standards
§ 6.1
Special Land Uses § 6.2
Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
45 ft or
3.5
stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None Specified
Minimum lot width: None specified
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 100%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: None specified*
Minimum rear yard setback: None specified
Minimum side yard setback: None specified*
Building Height
Maximum building height: 45 ft or 3.5 stories**
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: None specified
Notes:
* New or infill buildings in the B-3 district shall be set back
from any public street right-of-way a maximum of ten feet.
In no case shall new or infill buildings in this district be set
back further than the established building line of adjacent
buildings in the district, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
**An additional height not to exceed 15 feet shall be
permitted over an area not to exceed 5% of the total roof
surface for mechanical equipment and its covering. Except
that a building that was destroyed by fire or other
catastrophe shall be allowed to rebuild to the same height
and foot print as it was before such catastrophe occurred
unless encroaching into a public right-of-way.
-For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : A, B, and E.
C R/W L
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-23
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-24 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.10 B-4 Regional Commercial District
A. INTENT
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of
automobiles, mobile homes, and campers
§ 4.24
ii. Restaurant with accessory drive-through
facilities § 4.14
iii. Wholesale stores, home improvement centers,
lumberyards, and building supply businesses,
which may include accessory outdoor sales
and display areas § 4.24
iv. Plant materials nursery § 4.25
v. Funeral Homes, not including crematoriums
vi. Outdoor display areas and other open-air
business uses § 4.24
vii. Pawnshops
viii. Child care centers § 4.33
ix. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The B-4 Regional Commercial district is intended to alleviate undue traffic congestion, promote efficient
traffic flow, and provide an appropriate location for commercial and service oriented uses which serve the
needs of persons traveling and to a lesser extent the community’s immediate population.
i. Medical and dental offices and clinics
ii. General office
iii. Newspaper offices and publishers, and copy
centers
iv. Hotels  § 4.34
v. Retail establishments § 4.20
vi. Rental establishments whose principal activity
is the rental of automobiles § 4.24
vii. Gas stations, including those combined with
convenience stores or repair centers § 4.17
viii. Convenience stores
ix. Health clubs and recreation centers
x. Mixed-use development  § 4.23
xi. Commercial greenhouses, nurseries, and
garden centers § 4.16
xii. Personal service establishments § 4.18
xiii. Pool/video arcades
xiv. Automobile wash facilities
xv. Pick-up/drop-off dry cleaners and coin
laundromats
xvi. New and used car salesroom, showroom or
office, indoor only
xvii. Restaurants (not including drive-in or drivethrough
facilities) § 4.19
xviii.Brewpubs, retail wine stores and tasting
outlets
xix. Pubs, taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and
nightclubs
xx. Studios or schools for arts and crafts,
photography, music or dancing
xxi. Housing for the elderly 
xxii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
xxiii. Medium solar energy systems  § 4.53.2
xxiv. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 , 2 &
3  § 4.50
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES (continued)
xxv. Mobile food vending  § 4.51
xxvi. Veterinary hospitals and clinics with
outdoor pens, boarding, or other similar
uses § 4.22
xxvii.Barber shops, beauty shops, and hair
stylists
xxviii.Accessory outdoor sales and display, up to
5% of gross floor area or 2,500 sq ft,
whichever is less
xxix. Business service establishments
xxx. Clubs
xxxi. Assembly hall
xxxii.Adult day care  § 4.33
xxxiii.Accessory structures and uses
customarily incidental to the above
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-25
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B-4 Regional Commercial District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
3. Zoning Districts
 B-4 and FS Development
Requirements § 3.18
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
 Donation Collection Bins § 4.56
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 5.2
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.10
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required
§ 5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
35 ft or
2.5
stories
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 60%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 20 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft
Minimum side yard setback:
One side: 10 ft
Total of two sides: 25 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 35 ft or 2.5 stories
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: None specified
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2 : A, B and I.
25’ Min.
20’ Min.
15’
Min.
C R/W L
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
10’
Min.
100’ Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-26 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.11 FS Freeway Service District
A. INTENT
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Wind energy conversion systems  § 4.54
ii. Wireless communication facilities  § 4.47
iii. Accessory structues and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The FS Freeway Service district is designed to provide for those servicing the needs of automobile highway
traffic at the interchange areas of feeder roads and freeway facilities. The avoidance of undue congestion on
feeder roads, the promotion of smooth traffic flow at the interchange area and on the freeway and the
protection of adjacent properties in other zones from adverse influences of traffic are prime considerations
in the application of this district.
i. Gas stations, including those combined with
convenience stores or repair centers § 4.17
ii. Parking lots and structures
iii. Bus passenger stations
iv. Hotels and motels § 4.34
v. Big box retail
vi. Convenience stores
vii. Retail establishments to serve the needs of
the freeway traveler: including such facilities
as gift shops, retail wine stores and tasting
outlets
viii. Pool/video arcades
ix. Restaurants with or without drive-through
facilities § 4.14
x. Mixed-use development  § 4.23
xi. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
xii. Medium solar energy systems  § 4.53.2
xiii. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 , 2 &
3 § 4.50
xiv. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-27
1 Purpose and
Introduction
2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
FS Freeway Service District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.11
The above drawings are not to scale.
40 ft
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: None specified
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: None specified
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 75 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 75 ft
Minimum side yard setback: 75 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 40 ft
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: None specified
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2: A, B and I.
75’ Min.
75’ Min.
75’Min.
CL R/W
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
75’ Min.
3. Zoning Districts
 B-4 and FS Development
Requirements § 3.18
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 5.2
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required
§ 5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-28
1 Purpose and
Introduction
2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
I-1 Research and Technical District
3.1.12
A. INTENT
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
1. The purpose of the I-1 Research and Technical district is to support economic development that is an
asset to the community, neighborhood, and landowners through creative site design and the protection
of certain areas for research, testing, warehousing, assembly and limited industrial uses. It is further
the intent of this subchapter to ensure that the nature of the industrial uses do not create serious
problems of compatibility or nuisances with adjacent land uses. The I-1 district is not intended for the
processing of raw material in bulk form, nor for intensive industrial or manufacturing processes involving
the storage and shipment of bulk raw materials.
2. Further objectives of this subchapter include:
A. Accommodating select commercial activities that may be appropriate near industrial uses and
which may serve the immediate needs of the industrial uses and those employed therein.
B. Ensuring that the nature, scale, and function of those permitted uses pose no significant or unusual
risk to the public health, safety, and welfare.
C. Ensuring that the nature, scale, and function of uses generate a minimum of noise, heat, glare,
odor, dust, vibration, or other nuisances; and do not emit harmful radiation or pollution into the air,
water, or ground.
i. Light manufacturing and equipment servicing
ii. Assembly and packaging of products
iii. Compounding, manufacturing, and processing
or treatment of materials or products, when
not adjacent to a residential district § 4.45
iv. Packaging of previously prepared goods and
materials § 4.36
v. Laboratories for research and testing, and
experimental product development facilities
§ 4.35
vi. Warehousing (indoor) § 4.37
vii. Machine shops § 4.38
viii. Printing, lithographic, blueprinting, and similar
processes § 4.39
ix. Convenience stores
x. Facilities for on and off-premise dry cleaning,
laundry, and industrial laundry pickup
stations.
xi. Utility services and municipal uses such as
water treatment plants, reservoirs, sewage
treatment plants, public utility structures,
substations, telephone exchange buildings,
electric transformer stations and substations,
gas regulator stations, and public works
maintenance facilities (excluding outdoor
storage)
xii. Recycling collection facilities § 4.52.2
xiii. Recycling processing facilities § 4.52.3
xiv. Wireless communication facilities § 4.47
xv. Small solar energy systems § 4.53.1
xvi. Medium solar energy systems  § 4.53.2
xvii. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1, 2 &
3  § 4.50
xviii.Retail establishments, banks, and
convenience stores meant to serve users of
the industrial park § 4.20.4
xix. Mobile food vending  § 4.51
xx. Parks
xxi. Accessory restaurants, cafeteria facilities,
medical facilities, health clubs, and
recreational facilities § 4.40
xxii. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
xxiii. Any use allowed in such district as provided in
the City Medical Marihuana Ordinance
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES (continued)
? User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-29
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
i. Transportation centers, including truck and
bus terminals and truck repair and
maintenance facilities
ii. Electroplating, heat-treating, metal plating,
stamping, pressing, casing, buffing and
polishing § 4.41
iii. Compounding, manufacturing, and processing
or treatment of materials or products, when
adjacent to a residential district § 4.45
iv. Self-storage or mini-storage warehouses § 4.42
v. Commercial greenhouses, nurseries, and
garden centers § 4.16
vi. Crematoriums
vii. Junk yards § 4.52.1
viii. Large solar energy systems § 4.53.3
ix. Wind energy conversion systems  § 4.54
x. Outdoor storage yards for principal uses
permitted in the district  § 4.43
xi. Adult and child care centers , day use § 4.33
xii. Ice manufacturing and storage, including cold
storage plants
xiii. Trade schools, regional educational facilities,
vocational education facilities, intermediate
career centers, and similar technological or
vocational training facilities
xiv. Child care centers § 4.33
xv. Accessory dwelling units § 4.44
xvi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
3.1.12 I-1 Research and Technical District
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-30 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
I-1 Research and Technical District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
3. Zoning Districts
 I-1 Development Requirements
§ 3.19
Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
Special Events § 4.55
Donation Collection Bins § 4.56
Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
Signs § 5.1
Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 5.2
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.12
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required
§ 5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements§ 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
45 ft
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: 100 ft
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 40%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 50 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 25 ft
Minimum side yard setback:
One side: 20 ft
Total of two sides: 50 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 45 ft
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: None specified
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2: A, B, I and J.
25’ Min.
50’ Min.
30’
Min.
R/W
CL
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
20’
Min.
100’ Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-31
1 Purpose and
Introduction
2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-32
1 Purpose and
Introduction
2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
I-2 General Industrial District
3.1.13
A. INTENT
The I-2 General Industrial district is intended to accommodate the city’s most intensive industrial,
manufacturing, and distribution activities in a manner compatible with surrounding uses. The further intent
of this subchapter is to provide for large scale or specialized industrial operations, and the manufacturing,
processing and compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw or previously prepared
materials. Limitations upon the degree of noise, smoke, glare, waste and other features of industrial
operations have been provided to avoid adverse impacts on the community.
? User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Light manufacturing and equipment servicing
ii. Assembly and packaging of products
iii. Compounding, manufacturing, and processing
or treatment of materials or products, when
not adjacent to a residential district § 4.45
iv. Packaging of previously prepared goods and
materials § 4.36
v. Laboratories for research and testing, and
experimental product development facilities §
4.35
vi. Warehousing and wholesaling (indoor) § 4.37
vii. Machine shops § 4.38
viii. Printing, lithographic, blueprinting, and similar
processes § 4.39
ix. Assembly, fabricat ion, manufacture,
packaging, or treatment of goods § 4.46
x. Convenience stores
xi. Facilities for on and off-premise dry cleaning,
laundry, and industrial laundry pickup
stations.
xii. Utility services and municipal uses such as
water treatment plants, reservoirs, sewage
treatment plants, public utility structures,
substations, telephone exchange buildings,
electric transformer stations and substations,
gas regulator stations, and public works
maintenance facilities (excluding outdoor
storage)
xiii. Recycling collection facilities § 4.52.2
xiv. Recycling processing facilities § 4.52.3
xv. Wireless communication facilities § 4.47
xvi. Small solar energy systems § 4.53.1
xvii. Medium solar energy systems § 4.53.2
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES (continued)
xviii.Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1, 2 & 3
 § 4.50
xix. Retail establishments, banks, and convenience
stores meant to serve users of the industrial
park § 4.20.4
xx. Mobile food vending  § 4.51
xxi. Parks
xxii. Accessory restaurants, cafeteria facilities,
medical facilities, health clubs, and
recreational facilities§ 4.40
xxiii. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
xxiv. Any use allowed in such district as provided in
the City Medical Marihuana
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-33
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
i. Transportation related services including;
truck and bus terminals and truck repair and
maintenance facilities
ii. Electroplating, heat-treating, metal plating,
stamping, pressing, casing, buffing and
polishing § 4.41
iii. Compounding, manufacturing, and processing
or treatment of materials or products, when
adjacent to a residential district § 4.45
iv. Self-storage or mini-storage warehouses § 4.42
v. Power plants or central stations
vi. Steel fabrication plants for large stampings
such as automobile chassis
vii. Lumber and planing mills
viii. Packaging, treatment or processing of food
products, slaughterhouses, and rendering
plants
ix. Canning factories and chemical plants
x. Ice manufacturing and storage, including cold
storage plants
xi. Breweries, distilleries, wineries, bottling works,
and microbreweries § 4.28
xii. Dry cleaning plants (central) and industrial
laundries
xiii. Crematoriums
xiv. Large solar energy systems  § 4.53.3
xv. Wind energy conversion systems  § 4.54
xvi. Outdoor storage yards for principal uses
permitted in the district  § 4.43
xvii. Adult and child care centers ,§ 4.33
xviii.Trade schools, regional educational facilities,
vocational education facilities, intermediate
career centers, and similar technological or
vocational training facilities
xix. Accessory dwelling units § 4.44
xx. Adult- and sexually-oriented businesses § 4.26
xxi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
3.1.13 I-2 General Industrial District
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-34 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
I-2 General Industrial District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
3. Zoning Districts
 I-2 Development Requirements
§ 3.20
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
 Donation Collection Bins § 4.56
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 5.2
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.13
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required § 5.5
 Corner lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
60 ft
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: 200 ft
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 40%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 60 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 30 ft
Minimum side yard setback: 30 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 60 ft
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: None specified
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2: A, B and I.
30’ Min.
60’ Min.
CL R/W
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
30’
Min.
200’ Min.
30’
Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-35
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-36 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.14 PSP Public/Semi-Public Services District
A. INTENT
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
i. Outdoor storage yards for principal uses
permitted in the district  § 4.43
ii. Golf courses, public or privately owned or
operated
iii. Power plants and central stations
iv. Airports and heliports, public or privately
owned or operated
v. Private non-commercial recreation areas or
centers  § 4.3
vi. Cemeteries  § 4.5
vii. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
The PSP (Public/Semi-Public Services) district is hereby established for the purpose of accommodating
public areas and land uses available to the residents and businesses of the city, and to provide areas for offstreet
parking as an accessory use to private land uses in certain adjoining zoning districts. This district is
intended to be reserved for dedicated areas of open space, government buildings and uses, and institutional
and recreational uses.
i. Public and municipal uses
ii. Off-site, off-street parking facilities accessory
to a principal use permitted in an adjoining
zoning district
iii. Institutional uses § 4.6
iv. Open space, wetlands, woodlands, drains, and
greenbelt areas dedicated to the public, and
publicly owned or operated pedestrian malls,
parks, trails, playgrounds, and playfields
v. Open air markets § 4.29
vi. Housing for the elderly
vii. Small solar energy systems  § 4.53.1
viii. Medium solar energy systems  § 4.53.2
ix. Electric vehicle charging stations, level 1 , 2 &
3  § 4.50
x. Mobile food vending  § 4.51
xi. Accessory structures and uses customarily
incidental to the above permitted uses § 4.15
C. SPECIAL LAND USES
 User Note: For uses listed in bold blue, refer to Article 4, or click on use, for use-specific standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-37
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
PSP Public/Semi-Public Services District
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SELECTED REFERENCES
3.1.14
Lot Size
Minimum lot area: None specified
Minimum lot width: None specified
Lot Coverage
Maximum lot coverage: 60%
Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback: 25 ft
Minimum rear yard setback: 20 ft
Minimum side yard setback: 15 ft
Building Height
Maximum building height: 60 ft
Floor Area
Minimum floor area per unit: None specified
Notes:
For additions to the above requirements, refer to Section
3.11.2: A, B and I.
. Zoning Districts
 PSP Development Requirements
§ 3.21
 Essential Services § 3.29
4. Use Standards
 Special Events § 4.55
 Other Similar Uses § 4.27
5. Site Standards
 Signs § 5.1
 Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 5.2
 Temporary Construction Structures
and Uses § 5.3
 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
§ 5.4
 Frontage on Streets Required § 5.5
 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the
Side Street Line § 5.7
 Unlawful Dwelling § 5.8
 Compliance with Yard
Requirements § 5.9
 Corner Clearance § 5.10
 Building Grades and Grading of
Land § 5.11
 Protection of Excavations § 5.12
 Fences, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures § 5.13
 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management § 5.14
 Landscaping and Screening
Standards § 5.15
 Sidewalks § 5.16
 Exterior Lighting § 5.17
6. Development Procedures
 Condominium Development
Standards § 6.1
 Special Land Uses § 6.2
 Site Plan Review § 6.3
The above drawings are not to scale.
60 ft
How do I calculate height?
©clearzoning
20’ Min.
25’ Min.
CL R/W
PL
Building
Envelope
©clearzoning
15’
Min.
15’
Min.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-38 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
A. PURPOSE
The River district is established for the purpose of accommodating a concentration of entertainment,
restaurant, retail, industrial and office uses combined with residential and loft dwellings. Collectively, the
uses permitted in this district are intended to provide a controlled atmosphere conducive to community
recreation, cultural events, and artistic enjoyment.
The goal of the River District is to provide a harmonious relationship between residential and commercial
uses which hold periodic outdoor events or festivals accessory to their principle use. All uses in the district
will conform to the character of the district, the surrounding residential districts, and not conflict with
existing or planned uses.
This mixed-use district will complement downtown Marshall. It is designed to accommodate a lively social
and recreational environment with a wide variety of uses in a pedestrian-friendly, walkable setting.
Development of the River District will take advantage of the natural and man-made
resources in the area including Marshall’s riverwalk.
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENT
New buildings shall be regulated by the dimensional regulations of the underlying
zoning district.
C. PERMITTED USES
In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, the following uses are permitted. In the
event of a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the underlying zone, the provisions of this
Chapter apply:
1. Live/work studios for artists and creative businesses. At least 400 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
used exclusively for living purposes
2. Retail sales of goods and services
3. Studios or schools for arts and crafts, photography, music or dancing
4. Open air markets § 4.29
5. Mixed-use development
D. PROHIBITED USES
1. Adult- and sexually-oriented businesses
E. DESIGN AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
1. Setbacks:
A. Minimum front yard setback: 10 ft*
B. Maximum front yard setback: 20 ft*
C. Minimum side yard setback: 0 ft
D. Minimum rear yard setback: per underlying zoning district
*The intended purpose of the 10 to 20-foot build-to zone is to provide an opportunity to create public
spaces, outdoor dining or display areas, and landscaping while maintaining a consistent building line along
streets.
2. The following design standards shall apply to all new development within the River District:
A. Parking for any use within the River District shall be located in the rear or side yard.
B. Any street-facing façade of a building in the River District shall feature an entryway and shall be no
less than 30 percent windows between two and eight feet above grade.
C. Projecting signs shall be permitted within the River District, subject to the standards of Section 5.1.
3.1.15 River District Overlay
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-39
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.16
A. PURPOSE
1. The Hospital Campus Overlay (HCO) district is designed to establish and define an overlay district. The
HCO district is established for the purpose of accommodating a concentration of health care uses, retail
uses associated with principal Hospital uses, and residential dwellings within a campus-like setting. The
goal is that expansion of health care services and related structures will take place within the boundary
of the HCO district which the Marshall City Council has determined to be appropriate for Hospital
expansion. The Marshall City Council desires to, by adoption of this ordinance, encourage growth and
viability of the hospital, which is expected to provide related employment, growth and expansion of the
tax base, and provision of high quality health care for the residents of the City of Marshall and
surrounding areas.
2. The HCO district is intended to provide a harmonious relationship between residential, health care,
cultural and commercial uses. This mixed-use district will complement Downtown Marshall. It is designed
to accommodate a lively social, residential and commercial campus-like environment and promote easily
accessible health care services in a pedestrian-friendly setting, with convenient parking for those who
drive to the district.
3. Expansion of health care and supporting uses within the HCO district is anticipated as health care
services and related uses continue to expand. Street closures may also be a component of the district,
subject to City Council approval. The HCO provides the regulatory framework to permit expansion of
health care and supporting uses.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES IN THE HCO DISTRICT
No building or land shall be used and no buildings shall be erected except for one or more of the principal
permitted uses, principal uses subject to special conditions, principal uses subject to special approval, or
accessory structures and uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, in accordance with the height, area,
and bulk regulations provided therein, except as otherwise provided in this Section; provided, however, that
the following uses shall be permitted within the HCO district, in addition to the uses permitted in the
underlying district:
1. Medical and health care uses including hospitals, outpatient clinics, continuing/long term care services,
hospice services, laboratories, medical research facilities, urgent or emergency medical services, offices
of doctors, physical therapists, dentists, home health services, therapy, diagnostic or treatment centers,
hospital related services and other health care providers.
2. Nursing homes, retirement homes and other residential uses dependent upon or directly related to
medical care such as convalescent care, skilled nursing, group homes for the disabled and overnight
accommodations, and licensed daycare facilities.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Accessory structures and uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use permitted by this
Section.
C. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
Accessory uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use permitted by this Section shall be
permitted. Accessory uses specifically include restaurants and food service within health care buildings and
retail trade, including gift stores, florists, and other retail ancillary to and located within a hospital campus.
Hospital Campus Overlay District
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-40 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
D. LAND USES SUBJECT TO SPECIAL CONDITIONS IN THE HCO DISTRICT.
In the HCO district, the following uses shall be considered conditional and shall require special land use
approval and shall comply with any applicable special land use permit requirements of Section 6.2.
1. Retail Pharmacies.
2. Home health services.
3. Home medical equipment facilities.
E. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
Dimensional requirement shall be regulated by the underlying district as specified in Section 3.1; provided,
however, that the following requirements shall apply to development within the HCO district:
1. Surface Parking Setbacks.
A. Lots abutting residentially used property:
B. Lots abutting non-residentially used property:
C. See Section 3.1.16.G Design Regulations for Hospital Campus Overlay for Parking Lot Screening
Requirements.
2. Minimum Yard Setbacks (for buildings and structures).
A. For a non-residentially used lot abutting a residential district, the following minimum setbacks shall
apply to all non-residential uses:
B. For a non-residentially used lot abutting or located within an HCHSD (Health Care and Human
Service district), POSD (Professional Office Service), B-2 (Local Business) or B-3 (Neighborhood
Commercial), the following setbacks shall apply:
Hospital Campus Overlay District 3.1.16
3.16.E.1.A Surface Parking Lots Abutting Residentially UsesdProperty Minimum Yard Setback
Front 10 feet
Side 10 feet
Rear 10 feet
3.16.E.1.B Surface Parking Lots Abutting Non-Residentially Used Property Minimum Yard Setback
Front 0 feet
Side 0 feet
Rear 0 feet
3.16.E.2.A Building and Structure Minimum Yard Setbacks for Non-Residentially Used Lots Abutting a
Residential District
Front 20 feet*
Side 20 feet*
Rear 20 feet*
* If a zoning lot is separated from a residential district by a street, there shall be a ten (10)-foot minimum
setback on the side of the zoning lot facing the residential district.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-41
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Building Height.
A. Building Height and Grade are defined by Section 2.2.
B. Maximum building height for any building constructed within that area of the Hospital Campus
Overlay district north of the location of Prospect Street upon the adoption of this Section shall be 35
feet.
C. Maximum building height for any building constructed within that area of the Hospital Campus
Overlay district south of Prospect Street shall be sixty-five (65) feet and shall not exceed 5 stories.
D. At any location within the Hospital Campus Overlay district, an additional building height of no more
than fifteen (15) feet may be permitted for mechanical equipment and roof appurtenances. All
rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from view by a parapet wall or other decorative
screening method based on the goal of completely obscuring the view of the rooftop equipment by a
5'10" tall person standing at grade level within 100' of the building.
E. Any new building constructed within the HCO district that abut residentially zoned property, north of
Prospect Street or west of Madison Street, shall have a minimum step-back requirement of 10 feet
for the first story after the first 24 feet of elevation above average grade. This step-back
requirement for additional stories shall be 10 feet back for every story, at a maximum of 16 foot in
height, measured from the roof of the previous story for all sides of the building that directly abut
residentially zoned property.
4. Maximum Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage shall be regulated by application of required minimum
setbacks, not by a specified percentage.
F. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
Land that is located within the HCO district, as reflected on the Zoning Map, is subject to the regulations of
the underlying zones unless specifically modified by the provisions of this Chapter. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this Chapter, an underlying zone, and any other provisions of the zoning
ordinance, the provisions of this Chapter apply.
G. DESIGN REGULATIONS FOR HOSPITAL CAMPUS OVERLAY.
1. Definition Note: For the purpose of this subsection 3.1.16.H only, the term "abutting" does not apply to
property that is across a street, alley or road easement from the subject property, except as otherwise
noted below.
2. Landscaping and Buffer Treatment. The following provides a description and related standards for
various landscape and buffer treatment types in the HCO district. Also refer to the HCO district Edge
Zones graphic.
A. Garden edge/buffer: a garden edge/buffer area shall be provided when a nonresidential use abuts
a residentially used lot that is not in the HCO district.
i. The objective of the garden edge/buffer is to screen hospital structures, noise, and light that
emanates from vehicles, buildings and site lighting fixtures, while providing an aesthetically
pleasing, diversely vegetated viewscape and safe walking environment for pedestrians.
ii. Site amenities and landscape features shall be designed to be compatible with abutting
neighborhood character.
Hospital Campus Overlay District 3.1.16
3.16.E.2.B Building and Structure Minimum Yard Setbacks for Non-Residentially Used Lots Abutting an
HCHSD, POSD, B-2 or B-3 District
Front 0 feet
Side 0 feet
Rear 0 feet
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-42 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
iii. Landscaping shall provide tree canopy shading of paved surfaces in accordance with
subsection 5.15.7, supplemented with additional plantings along internal walkways, and
landscaping or walls or fence to screen views of driving and parking surfaces in accordance
with subsection 5.15.9.
iv. A minimum of 1) an evergreen buffer of closely spaced trees, 2) a decorative six-foot (6') high
fence or 3) a six-foot (6') high decorative screen wall is required in the HCO district when
abutting residentially zoned property. Large canopy deciduous trees spaced a minimum of forty
lineal feet, on average, and sized at three-inch caliper or greater shall supplement evergreen
and/or wall/fence requirements to provide screening at varying heights. When abutting a
street, the street frontage edge requirements in subsection 3.1.16.G.2.B shall be met.
v. For locations where noise buffering is determined by the Planning Commission to be necessary,
the use of a six-foot (6') high decorative screen wall instead of other screening options noted in
(4) above shall be provided. The wall shall be supplemented with large canopy deciduous trees
(three-inch minimum caliper) planted every forty (40) lineal feet, on average, along the
perimeter where the wall is placed to improve the overall appearance and visual height of the
screening. The Planning Commission may approve a six-foot (6') high landscaped berm in lieu of
a decorative wall when it determines that it would be a more appropriate screening technique
directly adjacent to residentially-zoned property. The berm shall also include other plantings to
provide an effective visual screen at varying heights.
vi. Vehicle and pedestrian wayfinding shall be provided at appropriate locations through signage
and other visual cues to facilitate orderly movement to, in, and from the HCO district.
vii. Full cut-off lighting at no more than a maximum height of 25 feet shall be used throughout the
development site, and house-side shields shall be used to prevent light spillover onto
residentially-zoned properties.
viii. If used, retaining walls should be designed to reduce their visual impact while maximizing
safety elements. Masonry, concrete or other textured material with terracing and landscaping
shall be used to reduce the visual impact of retaining walls.
B. Street frontage edge. A street frontage edge shall be provided when a nonresidential use is located
across the street from a residentially used lot that is not in the HCO district. See Section 5.15.8
Method of Screening for minimum city street right-of-way screening requirements.
i. The objective of the street frontage edge is to minimize the visual impact of structures and
parking in the HCO district from residential areas located across a street.
ii. Site amenities and landscape features shall be designed to be compatible with adjacent
neighborhood character.
iii. Vehicle and pedestrian wayfinding shall be provided at appropriate locations through signage
and other visual cues to facilitate orderly movement to, in, and from the HCO district.
iv. Exterior lighting, with a maximum height of 25 feet, shall be designed for safety and uniform
light distribution, including the use of full cut-off fixtures in all pole and building-mounted
lighting.
v. Landscaping and signage are encouraged at HCO district entrances to provide visual emphasis
and ease of identification for both drivers and pedestrians.
vi. Parking lots and vehicular circulation areas shall be screened by a hedgerow, decorative fence
or decorative wall per Section 5.15.8. The area from the ground to a minimum height of three
feet shall be totally obscured from the public street. If a wall or fence is provided, the setback
area shall contain a planting strip abutting the wall or decorative fence. Small shrubs,
ornamental grasses, and small, flowering plants are appropriate in these locations. Parking
spaces directly abutting the perimeter of a street frontage edge shall have landscape islands
planted with large (three-inch caliper minimum) deciduous trees. These islands, required by
subsection 5.15.7.B, should be strategically placed within the parking lotto provide a dual
benefit of shading parking spaces and enhancing the perimeter buffer of the HCO district.
Hospital Campus Overlay District 3.1.16
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-43
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
C. Transition edge. A transition edge shall be provided when a non-residential use is located adjacent
to or across the street from a non-residentially used lot.
i. The objective of the transitional edge is to allow for minimally screened HCO district structures
and parking.
ii. Vehicle and pedestrian wayfinding shall be provided at appropriate locations through signage
and other visual cues to facilitate orderly movement to, in, and from the HCO district.
iii. Exterior lighting, with a maximum height of 25 feet, shall be designed for safety and uniform
light distribution, including the use of full cut-off fixtures in all pole and building-mounted
lighting.
iv. Parking lots and vehicular drives shall be screened from streets in accordance with the
hedgerow or decorative wall provisions in subsection 5.15.8. Alleys are exempt from screening.
D. Interior edges. An interior edge shall be provided for all non-residentially used lots on both sides of
Madison Street, Prospect Street, Mansion Street, and High Street, south of Mansion, unless such
street is closed or vacated. See Section 5.15.6 for minimum interior landscaping requirements and
Section 5.15.7 for minimum parking lot landscaping requirements.
i. The objective of the interior edge is to provide clear sight lines to publicly accessible spaces in a
safe environment.
ii. Low shrubs and pruned trees shall be utilized to provide high visibility and accessibility near
sidewalks, public entrances into buildings and parking areas.
iii. Parking lots and vehicular drives shall be screened from streets in accordance with the
hedgerow or decorative wall provisions in subsection 5.15.7.
iv. Vehicle and pedestrian wayfinding shall be provided at appropriate locations through signage
and other visual cues to facilitate orderly movement to, in, and from the HCO district.
v. Overhead walkways over streets may be permitted to interconnect buildings and parking
structures and to enhance pedestrian safety, providing they are a minimum height of 15' clear
from the road surface.
vi. Exterior lighting, with a maximum height of 25 feet, shall be designed for safety and uniform
light distribution, including the use of full cut-off fixtures in all pole and building-mounted
lighting.
Hospital Campus Overlay District 3.1.16
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-44 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
PUD Planned Unit Development 3.1.17
A. PURPOSE.
The intent of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) district is to permit flexibility in regulations for
development that includes a mix of land uses or is proposed for a site containing unique natural or historic
features that the developer and city desire to preserve. The standards of this subchapter are intended to
encourage innovative design and create opportunities that may not be obtainable through the more rigid
standards of the other zoning districts. The provisions of this subchapter are designed to promote land use
substantially consistent with recommendations of the city’s master plan and the character of the surrounding
area. To further this purpose, modifications and departures from generally applicable district regulations and
other Chapter provisions may be allowed by the City Council as part of an approved PUD, after
recommendation by the Planning Commission.
B. SCOPE.
Approval of a planned unit development (PUD) application shall require an amendment to the zoning
ordinance to revise the official zoning map. The provisions of this subchapter may be applied to any parcel of
land under single ownership in any zoning district, subject to a determination that the application meets the
standards of Section 3.1.17.C. These regulations are not intended as a device for ignoring the more specific
standards of the city, or the planning upon which the standards are based. The PUD process shall not be
used for the sole purpose of increasing the use or development intensity, nor in situations where the same
land use objectives can be accomplished by the application of conventional zoning standards.
C. QUALIFYING CONDITIONS.
Planned unit development (PUD) applications shall meet the following qualification standards:
1. A PUD shall include sufficient contiguous land area to conform to the purpose and applicable regulations
of this subchapter and Chapter, adequately serve the needs of all permitted uses in the development,
and ensure compatibility between abutting uses and zoning districts.
2. The PUD shall include one or more of the following elements:
A. A complementary mixture of uses or housing types within a unique, high quality design;
B. Significant natural or historic features that will be preserved; or
C. A nonconforming use or structure, functionally obsolete building, or recognized brownfield site that
will be redeveloped.
D. One-half acre except for the B-3 district.
3. The PUD shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to
the city, where the benefit would otherwise not be feasible.
4. The PUD site shall have direct frontage on and access to a public street classified as a collector or
arterial street by the city, county, or state road authority having jurisdiction.
5. The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in traffic or the use of
public services, facilities and utilities.
6. The PUD site shall have the capacity to accommodate the intended development and the development
shall not place an unreasonable burden upon surrounding land or landowners.
7. The proposed development shall be consistent with the intent of the master plan for land use.
8. The PUD site shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners and shall be capable of being
planned and developed as one integral unit.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-45
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
D. CONCEPTUAL PUD PLAN REVIEW.
Applicants are encouraged to meet informally with city staff to discuss a proposed planned unit development
(PUD) concept, site issues, application of Chapter standards, and city land development policies and
procedures, prior to submitting plans for formal review.
1. Planning Commission review. Any person may also request that a conceptual PUD plan be placed on a
regular Planning Commission meeting agenda as a discussion item for review and comment. The
conceptual plan shall include the following minimum information:
A. Ownership interest. Declaration of all persons with an ownership interest in the land on which the
PUD project will be located, including a description of the nature of each entity’s interest (e.g. fee
owner, option holder, lessee or land contract vendee).
B. Proposed uses. The proposed uses to be permitted within the PUD project, including the dwelling
unit density of proposed residential uses, size and location of proposed open spaces, and gross floor
area and land area of any non-residential uses.
C. Circulation. The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system planned for the proposed development,
including the location of existing streets and sidewalks adjacent to the development, arrangement of
interior streets, sidewalks, pathways, and access drives, proposed connections to abutting streets
and sidewalks, and designation of any street(s) for private ownership or dedication to the public.
D. Structures and improvements. The proposed layout of structures, parking areas, and other
improvements.
E. Drainage. Site drainage showing topography and flow directions, including computations of flows into
storm sewers or retention or detention areas.
F. Natural features. The locations and gross land area of wetland areas, wetland buffers, well head
protection areas, floodplain, and significant natural features such as tree stands, unusual slopes,
streams, and water drainage areas shall be provided.
2. Comments not binding. Comments and suggestions by the city regarding a conceptual PUD plan shall
constitute neither an approval nor a disapproval of the plan, nor shall the city be bound in any way by
such comments or suggestions in preparing for formal submittal or review of a condominium site plan.
3. Fee. The city may charge a fee for such meetings or conceptual reviews to cover administrative costs.
E. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
Applications for planned unit development (PUD) approval shall be submitted by the owner of an interest in
land for which PUD approval is sought, or by the owner’s designated agent. The PUD application and
development plan shall be prepared in the manner specified in this subchapter.
1. Submittal. The PUD application materials, required fees, and sufficient copies of the completed
development plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
2. Incomplete applications. PUD applications found by the Zoning Administrator to be incomplete or
inaccurate shall be returned to the applicant without further review.
3. Required information. The following written documentation and graphical information shall be included
as part of any PUD application:
A. A completed application form and application fee.
B. Proof of ownership of the property to be utilized in the subject site or evidence of a contractual ability
to acquire the property, such as an option or purchase agreement.
C. A complete and current legal description for the property to be used in the subject site and size of
property in acres.
D. A site analysis map illustrating the location of existing buildings and structures, right-of-way and
easements; driveways adjacent to and across from the subject site; woodlands and trees outside
woodlands over 12 inches in caliper; significant natural and historic features; existing drainage
PUD Planned Unit Development 3.1.17
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-46 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
PUD Planned Unit Development 3.1.17
patterns, surface waterbodies, floodplain areas and wetlands; topography at two foot contour
intervals; and surrounding land uses, zoning and buildings within 300 feet of the subject site.
E. A preliminary development plan illustrating a conceptual layout of proposed land use, acreage
allotted to each use, residential density, proposed setbacks, roadways, conceptual landscape plan,
natural features to be preserved and a preliminary plan for utilities and storm water management.
i. Building footprints, structures, parking areas, drives and pedestrian paths shall also be shown
on the preliminary development plan.
ii. If a multi-phase PUD is proposed, the land area and details of proposed uses in each phase shall
be identified.
F. A list identifying all anticipated deviations from Chapter regulations otherwise applicable to the
proposed uses.
G. Such information as shall be necessary to show eligibility under Section 3.1.17.C.
H. Any other information which the Planning Commission or City Council may require to determine if the
proposed project meets eligibility criteria, or may request to aid in their review of the proposed
project.
I. The Planning Commission may require submittal of a traffic impact study or PUD impact assessment
to assist in determining the specific impacts and necessary mitigation measures for large or
intensive PUD projects.
F. PUD REVIEW PROCEDURES.
This Section is intended to provide a consistent and uniform method for review of planned unit development
(PUD) applications per the standards of this subchapter and Chapter. The PUD rezoning request and
preliminary development plan shall be subject to review and approval in accordance with the following:
1. Technical review. Prior to Planning Commission consideration, the PUD application and development
plan shall be distributed to appropriate city officials and staff for review and comment. The Zoning
Administrator may also submit the application and development plan to applicable outside agencies and
designated city consultants for review. The applicant shall be responsible for any fees charged by the
outside agencies or city consultants.
2. Public hearing. Upon receipt of a complete PUD application, a public hearing shall be scheduled and held
before the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 103 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act
(P.A. 110 of 2006). The public hearing and notice required by this Section shall satisfy the public hearing
and notice requirements for amendment of the official zoning map.
3. Planning Commission recommendation. After the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the PUD application and development plan, together with any reports and recommendations from city
staff or officials, consultants, and other reviewing agencies, along with any public comments. The
Planning Commission shall make a determination based on the requirements of this subchapter and
Chapter, and shall submit a report on the public hearing and the Planning Commission’s
recommendation to the City Council in accordance with the following:
A. Tabling. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that the PUD application or development
plan is not sufficiently complete for consideration, failure of the applicant to attend the meeting, or
upon request by the applicant, the Planning Commission may postpone consideration and action on
the PUD application and development plan until a later meeting.
B. Recommendation of approval. Upon determination that the PUD application and development plan
are in conformance with the standards of this subchapter and Chapter, the Planning Commission
may recommend to the City Council that the PUD rezoning application and preliminary development
plan be approved.
C. Recommendation of approval subject to conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend
approval of the PUD rezoning application and preliminary development plan to the City Council,
subject to reasonable conditions deemed necessary to:
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-47
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
PUD Planned Unit Development 3.1.17
i. Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the proposed development will be capable
of accommodating increased service loads caused by the development.
ii. Ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land.
iii. Promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
iv. Protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the individuals in the development and those
immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole.
v. Achieve the intent and purpose of this subchapter and Chapter.
D. Recommendation of denial.
i. Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that the PUD application be denied
upon determining that the PUD application or development plan:
a. Fails to meet the PUD eligibility standards of Section 3.1.17.C;
b. Fails to conform with specific provisions of this subchapter or Chapter;
c. May be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or orderly development of the city; or
d. Is otherwise not in conformance with the intent of this subchapter.
ii. A written record shall be provided to the applicant and the City Council listing the reason(s) for
such denial.
4. City Council consideration and action. Following receipt of a recommendation from the Planning
Commission on the PUD rezoning application and preliminary development plan, the City Council shall
consider the application and take final action to approve or deny the PUD. The City Council may also
send the PUD application back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
A. The City Council may impose such conditions on any approval as deemed necessary to ensure
conformance with the purpose and regulations of this subchapter and Chapter.
B. The City Council may cause to have legal documents, covenants or contracts prepared and may
require the execution thereof by the applicant to ensure compliance with the approved PUD rezoning,
preliminary development plan or conditions of PUD approval.
C. The City Council may require that the developer furnish a letter of credit or other financial guarantee
in a form and amount acceptable to the city staff to ensure compliance with the approved PUD
rezoning, preliminary development plan or conditions of PUD approval.
5. Final PUD site plan review and approval.
A. After the PUD rezoning and preliminary development plan have been approved by the City Council,
the applicant shall submit a detailed site plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission
per Section 6.3.
B. If the Planning Commission determines that the detailed site plan or proposed use(s) are not
consistent with the approved PUD, the applicant shall be directed to amend the final site plan to
conform to the approved PUD, or to submit a request to amend the PUD per Section 3.1.17.N.
G. EFFECT OF PUD APPROVAL.
1. Approval of a planned development application shall constitute an amendment to the zoning ordinance.
The approved PUD rezoning, preliminary development plan, and any conditions of approval shall
constitute an inseparable part of the zoning amendment, and all improvements and land uses shall
conform to the approved PUD.
2. Upon City Council approval, the subject property shall be designated on the official zoning map and a
notice of the adoption of the zoning map amendment shall be published per the requirements of the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006).
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-48 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.17 PUD Planned Unit Development
H. EXPIRATION OF PUD APPROVAL.
Upon approval by the City Council, the PUD rezoning and preliminary development plan shall remain valid for
a period of two years.
1. If a final site plan for the project is not submitted within two years of PUD approval, the land shall revert
to the prior zoning classification(s).
2. If a final site plan is submitted and approved by the Planning Commission within two years following
approval of the PUD rezoning, the PUD rezoning shall remain valid for an additional five years. If the
project is not completed within five years from the date of final site plan approval, the land shall revert to
its prior zoning.
3. The City Council may grant one extension of such approval for up to 365 calendar days upon written
request and determination that conditions have not changed in a manner that would impact the
approved PUD site design or permitted uses.
I. PHASING.
Approval of a PUD application by the City Council confers on the applicant and any subsequent owners of the
PUD parcel, the right to develop the PUD parcel in accordance with the overall density, dwelling unit mix, and
final plan of the approved PUD. Where phasing of the development is planned, a separate site plan review
shall be required for each phase in accordance with Section 6.3. The uses and final site design for each
phase shall be substantially consistent with the approved PUD rezoning and preliminary development plan.
For all residential uses, the plan shall identify the number, type and density of dwelling units per acre by
phase.
J. DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
The following development requirements and use standards shall apply to any proposed planned unit
development (PUD), and shall be incorporated into any proposed preliminary concept plan and final PUD site
plan:
1. Applicability of Chapter regulations in a PUD. Except where specified in this subchapter or authorized as
a deviation by the City Council, all other provisions of this Chapter shall apply to PUD projects. Limited
deviations from Chapter requirements may be granted by the City Council as a part of the PUD approval,
subject to the following:
A. Recommendation from the Planning Commission.
B. A determination that such action will result in a higher quality of development not feasible under the
applicable Chapter standards.
2. General PUD design standards. Any PUD shall comply with the following project design standards.
A. The uses and design of the PUD shall be harmonious with the character of the surrounding area, in
terms of density, intensity of use, size and height of buildings, architecture, and other impacts.
B. The development shall be designed to promote preservation of any significant natural, historical, and
architectural features on the site and the integrity of the land.
C. Public water and sewer facilities shall be available or shall be provided for by the developer as part of
the site development.
D. Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to
the site shall be provided. Sidewalks shall be provided where appropriate.
E. The uses and design shall be consistent with the available capacity of the existing street network and
utility systems; or the applicant shall, as part of the approval, provide for upgrading of the
infrastructure to the extent required to accommodate the PUD.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-49
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
PUD Planned Unit Development 3.1.17
3. Permitted uses in a PUD. Any principal or accessory use or combination of uses permitted in any zoning
district in the city may be permitted as part of an approved PUD, subject to the following limitations:
A. The specific list of proposed PUD permitted uses shall be subject to Planning Commission
recommendation and City Council approval.
B. Any use or combination of uses otherwise permitted by this Chapter may be prohibited within a PUD,
or additional conditions or limitations may be imposed on any permitted use, in accordance with the
purpose and regulations of this subchapter and Chapter.
C. All permitted uses shall be established and maintained in accordance with the approved PUD plan,
the regulations of this subchapter, and any conditions of PUD approval.
D. Adult- and sexually-oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 118 of the city code of ordinances,
shall be prohibited within any PUD.
4. Residential development standards. The following standards shall apply to any proposed PUD that
includes a residential component:
A. Dwelling unit computations. The total number of dwelling units permitted within the residential
component of a PUD shall be determined as follows:
i. Subtract the following areas from the gross land area of the PUD site to determine the net
residential development area:
a. Areas within existing or proposed street rights-of-way and drainage or utility easements,
excluding private access driveways;
b. Areas devoted to approved non-residential uses within the PUD; and
c. Areas identified as regulated wetlands or permanently inundated by water.
d. Those areas deemed un-developable, as determined by the City Council after
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
e. Common open space areas permanently set aside for preservation and parkland donated to
and accepted by the city as part of the proposed PUD shall be considered allowable areas
for calculations of dwelling unit density.
ii. Determine the maximum number of dwelling units permitted in the PUD by multiplying the net
development area by the maximum permitted dwelling unit density permitted by right in the
underlying zoning district.
B. Density averaging. Where the proposed PUD is located in more than one zoning district, the density
permitted by right in each underlying zoning district shall be calculated separately. The maximum
permitted dwelling unit density in the PUD may be averaged over the entire PUD site to
accommodate natural or man-made features.
C. Minimum required open space and recreation areas. A minimum of 20% of the of the net residential
development area of the PUD shall be set aside as permanent common open space or recreation
area, except where previously approved site plans within a multi-phase PUD include sufficient open
space or recreation areas available to all uses of the PUD.
i. Such required open space shall be dedicated for use by the residents of the PUD, and shall
include a passive or active recreational component.
ii. The proposed open space shall conform to the standards of Section 3.1.17.K to be eligible to
receive density credit under this Section.
iii. The City Council may require that no individual area intended to satisfy the requirements of this
division shall be less than one acre in size, after recommendation from the Planning
Commission.
D. Optional increase in PUD permitted density. An increase in the maximum permitted dwelling unit
density may be approved for a PUD project by the City Council after recommendation by the Planning
Commission, provided that the PUD developer can demonstrate compliance with one or more of the
following criteria:
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-50 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.1.17 PUD Planned Unit Development
i. A density increase of up to 20% may be permitted where 25% or more of the gross land area of
the PUD is dedicated to open space. The proposed open space shall conform to the standards
of Section 3.1.17.K to be eligible to receive density credit under this Section.
ii. A density increase of up to 5% may be permitted for each contiguous two acre wooded area
preserved as open space, provided that the wooded area shall consist of at least 40 trees per
acre having a minimum caliper of one and three-fourths inches at 42 inches height from the
surrounding ground level.
E. Standards per type of development area. Unless waived or modified in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in this subchapter, the dimensional and other standards of the
following residential districts shall apply to uses within a PUD:
i. For areas zoned or planned for detached single-family housing, the standards of the R-3
(Traditional Residential) district shall apply.
ii. For areas zoned or planned for other than detached single-family housing, the standards of the
MFRD (Multiple Family Residential) district shall apply.
iii. For all other circumstances, applicable development standards shall be determined by the City
Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission.
F. Non-residential development standards. Non-residential uses in a PUD shall comply with the
applicable regulations for each individual use, as specified in this Chapter. Where conflicts exist
between provisions, the regulations applicable to the most dominant use shall apply.
K. OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION.
The following standards and requirements shall apply to any common open space areas within a planned unit
development (PUD):
1. The area within 20 feet of a building shall not be considered as common open space.
2. Open space areas shall consist of a minimum of 4,000 square feet of continuous area.
3. Open space shall not include existing or proposed street rights-of-way, parking areas or buildings.
4. Open space areas shall not have a boundary dimension of less than 15 feet.
5. Common open space areas may not be located with a 100-year flood plain or any natural water body.
6. Such areas shall be permanently preserved, maintained, and dedicated for use as open space through
the use of a conservation easement or similar device satisfactory to the City Attorney. Requirements and
limitations on the use of such common open space areas shall be addressed in an open space
agreement prepared by the applicant and subject to city approval.
A. The agreement shall include:
i. Legal description of lands within the project area.
ii. Legal description of lands to be retained as required common open space, and lands for which
the developer wishes to obtain a density increase per the standards of this subchapter.
iii. Details of any conservation easement, including what entity, organization or agency will accept
and maintain the easement.
iv. A plan for permanent maintenance of the proposed open space.
B. The agreement shall be binding upon the city, and the grantor and grantee of all lots or parcels
within the project area.
C. Upon PUD approval, the applicant shall record the open space agreement at the Calhoun County
Register of Deeds office, and shall provide proof of such recording to the Zoning Administrator.
7. Any amendments to the recorded open space agreement shall be subject to City Council approval, and
shall be recorded at the Calhoun County Register of Deeds office.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-51
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
PUD Planned Unit Development 3.1.17
L. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
Planned unit development (PUD) approval runs with the land, not with the landowner. If the land is sold or
otherwise exchanged, the approved PUD shall remain in effect unless the applicant submits a request to
amend or terminate the PUD, or the PUD terminates pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.1.17.H or Section
3.1.17.M.
1. It shall be the responsibility of the developer and landowner(s) or operators of an approved planned unit
development (PUD) project to develop, improve, operate and maintain the PUD site, permitted uses,
structures, and all improvements in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and Chapter and
all conditions of PUD and site plan approval.
2. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subchapter shall be a violation of the use provisions of this
Chapter and shall be subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use violation.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall inspect the development at each stage to verify compliance with the
conditions of the approved PUD or approved site plans, as applicable.
M. RESCINDING APPROVAL.
The City Council may, after recommendation of the Planning Commission, rescind approval of a PUD or any
portion thereof upon determination that the PUD site, permitted uses, structures or improvements have not
been improved, constructed or maintained in compliance with this subchapter and Chapter and all conditions
of PUD approval. Such action shall be subject to the following:
1. Public hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held in accordance with
the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Act 110 of 2006), at which time the owner of an interest in land for
which PUD approval was sought, or the owner’s designated agent, shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence in opposition to rescission.
2. Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the City Council with regard to the rescission
shall be made and written notification provided to the owner or designated agent.
3. Reverts to previous zoning. Any portion of a rescinded PUD shall immediately revert to the status and
requirements of the underlying zoning district, without benefit of the PUD provisions.
N. AMENDMENTS AND APPEALS.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to consider appeals of PUD determinations.
Proposed changes to an approved PUD shall be subject to the same review and approval procedures and
standards as a new PUD application.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-52 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.2 ZONING MAP.
The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the official zoning map for the City,
which is hereby made an integral part of this Chapter. All references, notations and information shown on the
zoning map shall be as much a part of this Chapter as if fully described herein.
3.3 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map, unless otherwise shown, shall follow
lot lines or the center lines of streets, roads or alleys, or the extension thereof, railroad right-of-way lines and
the corporate limits of the City. Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be
determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
3.4 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
All uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Chapter and other City codes and ordinances. No
structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor shall permits or certificates of occupancy
be issued, except in conformance with this Chapter and other City codes and ordinances.
3.5 STREET, ALLEY AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
All streets, alleys and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in
the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way. Where
the centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such street or alley, unless
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such
centerline.
3.6 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.
Wherever any area is annexed to the City or the boundaries of the City are otherwise extended through a
development agreement to include additional land area, zoning classification of the land area brought in shall
be subject to the following:
1. Land that is brought into the City from another governmental jurisdiction shall be classified to whatever
district of this Chapter most closely conforms with the zoning designation of the other governmental unit.
2. The City Council may adopt a new official zoning map for the land area following a public hearing and
recommendation from the Planning Commission, per Section 7.1.
3. In making a recommendation to City Council on the zoning classification(s) for such land areas, the
Planning Commission shall consider any previous township or county zoning classifications that existed
for the land prior to extension of the City boundaries, the pattern of land uses in the area, adopted City
Master Plan recommendations, and planned future land use designations for the land area or adjacent
areas within the City.
3.7 ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.
Any street, alley, railroad right-of-way or other public way or portion thereof within the City not otherwise
classified within the boundaries of a zoning district on the official zoning map shall, upon vacation,
automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the parcel(s) to which it attaches.
3.8 PROHIBITED USES.
Uses that are not specifically listed as a principal or special condition use permitted by this Chapter in a
zoning district, or not otherwise determined to be similar to a listed and permitted use, shall be prohibited in
the district.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-53
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.9 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES IN DISTRICTS.
Within each zoning district there are uses that, when developed in accordance with sound planning and site
plan principles, are consistent with the purpose and objectives of the district. For the purpose of this Chapter,
these uses shall be known as principal permitted uses as set forth in the individual districts, and shall be
allowed within that particular district subject to the development requirements of this Chapter.
3.10 LAND USES SUBJECT TO SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
1. Within each zoning district it is recognized that there are uses, because of their unique characteristics
which cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration in each
case of the impact of such uses upon neighboring land, and of the public need for the particular use at
the particular location. Such uses may be consistent with the purpose and objectives of the particular
zoning district only in specific locations, under specific conditions and when developed in accordance
with sound planning and site plan principals.
2. Uses subject to special conditions (special land uses) may be permitted as set forth in the individual
districts, subject to a public hearing, review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, and
approval by the City Council in accordance with the procedures and conditions specified in Section 6.2.
3.11 NOTES TO DISTRICT STANDARDS
1. Applicability. The notes contained in Section 3.11.2 are additions, exceptions, and clarifications to the
district standards contained in Section 3.1. The applicability of individual notes to each district is
provided in the tables on the following pages.
2. Notes to district standards:
A. Except as otherwise specified, all side yards abutting residentially zoned land shall have a minimum
distance of twice the one yard requirement.
B. All rear yards abutting residentially zoned land shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet between
the principal building and rear property line.
C. Parking shall not be permitted in any required front yard, except within an approved driveway.
D. The Planning Commission may waive these standards if it determines it is necessary to allow
flexibility in the siting and construction of new buildings in the district.
E. Apartments shall comply with the applicable standards for the MFRD district. Single-family detached
dwellings shall comply with the applicable standards for the R-3 district. All other uses shall comply
with the applicable standards for the B-3 district.
F. The total floor space in all buildings on the lot may not exceed one and one-half times the total net lot
area (floor area ratio of 1.5).
G. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not include areas of basements, breezeways,
unenclosed porches, terraces, attached garages, attached sheds or utility rooms.
H. In all residential districts, the width of side yards which abut a street upon which other residential lots
front shall not be less than the required front yard setback for homes which front upon such side
street.
I. No rear yard setback is required where such property abuts a public alley, providing that accessory
buildings in the rear yard shall meet the required setback.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-54 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
34-3.11.2 Applicability of Notes to District Standards
Note to
District
Standard
R-1 R-2 R-3 MFRD MHPD POSD HCHSD B-2 B-3 B-4 FS I-1 I-2 PSP
A        
B        
C    
D  
E 
F   
G     
H    
I           
J 
J. During the site plan approval, the Planning Commission shall approve a site plan with a front yard
setback, for a zoning lot in the I-1 district, of not less than 20 feet, provided all of the following
conditions are met:
i. The zoning lot subject to site plan approval is part of an approved platted subdivision or site
condominium.
ii. The subdivision or site condominium is at least 15 acres.
iii. The subdivision or site condominium has at least three lots.
iv. The subdivision or site condominium is subject to restrictive or protective covenants containing
development or construction standards regulating the exterior appearance or placement of
structures.
v. The front, side, and rear yard setbacks are a minimum of 20 feet.
vi. The site plan prohibits loading, storage, and parking within the front yard.
3.12 R-3 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
To ensure compatibility with the character of existing buildings in the neighborhood and the purpose of the R-
3 district, all principal and accessory buildings and structures in the R-3 district shall be subject to the
following development requirements:
1. Building design and composition. Principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be subject to
the following design and composition standards:
A. Wherever the lot is rectangular in shape, all exterior walls of a building greater than six feet in length
shall be constructed parallel to or perpendicular to the side lot lines of the lot.
B. The main entrance to a dwelling shall be located on the front building facade, unless otherwise
required for barrier-free access.
C. Accessory buildings and attached garages shall have a front yard setback that is at least ten feet
greater than the front setback of the principal building.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-55
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
D. In the event that a new dwelling is proposed to be constructed on the rear portion of a lot that has
frontage on two streets and an alley, the front of such new dwelling shall face the street on which the
dwelling is addressed.
E. The minimum pitch of the roof of any building shall be four to twelve (4:12), and the maximum pitch
of the roof of any building shall be twelve to twelve (12:12).
F. Additions to existing dwelling units may be constructed with a pitch that matches any roof pitch of
the existing dwelling unit. The roof pitch of a dormer, turret or similar architectural feature shall not
exceed twenty-four to twelve (24:12).
2. Front yard paving and hardscape materials. A maximum of 50% of the front yard of a lot may be covered
with an improved surface such as concrete pavers, brick pavers, flagstone, rock or gravel which shall
include driveways, and sidewalks located on the property.
3. Access. Where a lot has frontage along an alley, access to any new off-street parking area shall be from
the adjoining alley. Alley access shall not be required where a detached garage is proposed to be
accessed from an existing driveway curb cut from a public street, or when alley access is determined to
be hazardous by the Street Superintendent.
4. Site design. Off-street parking areas shall be set back from all streets right-of-way a minimum distance
equal to the principal building’s front yard setback or at least 20 feet, whichever is less. This provision
shall not apply to single-family dwellings and shall not preclude temporary parking in driveways.
5. Established building line. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth measured from and
perpendicular to the street right-of-way. Where a front yard of greater or less depth than specified exists
in front of a dwelling on the same side of the street in the same block, the depth of the front yard of any
dwelling thereafter erected or placed on a lot in such block shall not be less, but need not be greater,
than the average depth of the front yards of existing dwellings.
3.13 MFRD DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
To ensure compatibility with the intent and purpose of the MFRD district, all uses and principal and accessory
buildings and structures in the district shall be subject to the following development requirements:
1. The maximum number of multiple-family or attached dwelling units shall not exceed 12 units per acre.
Single-family detached dwellings and customary accessory structures shall conform to the area, height,
width, and setback standards of the R-3 (Traditional Residential) district, as specified in Section 3.1.4.D.
2. Internal streets may be public or private, subject to the following:
A. All public streets shall meet minimum platting requirements.
B. Private streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 66 feet.
C. Street shall be surfaced with concrete, bituminous asphalt or other approved hard surface.
D. A typical cross section shall be submitted to the City for approval.
3. In any multiple-family or multiple group development, no building shall be closer than 25 feet to the
adjacent boundary line; 50 feet from an R-1, R-2 or R-3 district boundary; and 50 feet from a public rightof-
way line.
4. In any multiple-family or multiple-group development, 40% of the net site area shall be placed in open
space, of which 120 square feet per dwelling shall be developed open space.
A. An area dedicated and improved for active recreation shall be required as part of the net open space
requirement, and shall be designed to meet a cross section of the recreation needs of the residents
of the development.
B. Required perimeter yard setbacks for the development may be included as open space.
C. The net open space area shall not include off-street parking and loading areas or dedicated rights-ofway
or access easements.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-56 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.14 MHPD DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Manufactured housing parks within a Manufactured Housing Residential district (MHRD) shall be subject to
all the rules and requirements of the Mobile Home Commission Act, P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended (M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.2301 et seq.), the Manufactured Housing Commission General Rules, and the following minimum
requirements:
1. Plan review. The preliminary plan for a manufactured housing park shall be submitted to the City and
reviewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the application requirements and procedures
specified in Section 11 of the Mobile Home Commission Act, P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended. The Planning
Commission shall take action to approve or deny the preliminary plan, or approve the preliminary plan
subject to conditions, within 60 days after the City officially receives a complete and accurate application.
The Planning Commission may table an application for further study, or to obtain additional information,
provided that final action is taken within the 60-day review period. A copy of the state-approved final
construction plan shall be submitted to the City prior to the start of construction on the site.
2. Minimum manufactured housing site size. Individual sites may be reduced to as small as 4,400 square
feet, provided that for every square foot of land gained through such reduction, at least an equal amount
of land shall be dedicated as open space for the collective use and enjoyment of all manufactured
housing park residents. This open space shall be in addition to the minimum open space required under
subsection 9 of this Section, or the Manufactured Housing Commission rules.
3. Setbacks. Manufactured houses shall comply with the following minimum setbacks:
A. For a home not sited parallel to an internal road, 20 feet from an adjacent home, including an
attached structure that may be used for living purposes for the entire year.
B. For a home sited parallel to an internal road, 15 feet from an adjacent home, including an attached
structure that may be used for living purposes for the entire year if the adjacent home is sited next to
the home on and parallel to the same internal road or an intersecting internal road.
C. Ten feet from an attached or detached structure or accessory of an adjacent home that may not be
used for living purposes for the entire year.
D. Fifty feet from any permanent building.
E. One hundred feet from any baseball, softball or similar recreational field.
F. Seven feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement for an internal road.
G. Seven feet from an adjacent home site’s parking space or off-site parking bay.
H. Seven feet from a common sidewalk.
I. All mobile homes, accessory buildings and parking shall be set back not less than 20 feet from any
manufactured housing park boundary line, except that a minimum setback of 50 feet shall be
provided from the street rights-of-way of public streets abutting the park.
J. Fifty feet from the edge of any railroad right-of-way.
4. Roads. Roads shall satisfy the minimum dimensional, design, and construction requirements in the
Manufactured Housing Commission Rules. The main entrance to the park shall have access to a public
street by a permanent easement, which shall be recorded by the developers. All roads shall be hardsurfaced.
5. Parking. Each manufactured housing site shall be provided with two parking spaces per the
Manufactured Housing Commission Rules.
6. Common storage areas. If boats, boat trailers and utility trailers are permitted to be parked within the
manufactured housing park, adequate parking spaces for such vehicles shall be provided in a central or
collective parking area. This area shall be in addition to the automobile parking requirements of this
Section, and shall be adequately locked, fenced and permanently buffered.
7. Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks having a minimum width of three feet shall be provided on at least one
side of internal manufactured housing park streets. In addition, a four foot wide concrete sidewalk shall
be constructed along any public street abutting the manufactured housing park.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-57
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
8. Accessory buildings and facilities. Accessory buildings and structures, including park management
offices, storage buildings, laundry facilities or community facilities, shall be designed and operated for
the exclusive use of park residents.
A. Site-built buildings and structures within a manufactured housing park, such as a management office
or clubhouse, and any addition to a manufactured house that is not certified as meeting the
standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for manufactured
houses, shall be constructed in compliance with applicable state building, electrical and fire codes
and shall be subject to approval of appropriate permits and certificates of occupancy by the City.
B. Storage accessory to a manufactured home. Storage sheds with a maximum area of 144 square
feet may be placed upon any individual manufactured home site for the storage of personal property.
Except as otherwise noted in this Section, no personal property (including tires) shall be stored
outside or under any manufactured home, or within carports which are open on any side. Bicycles
and motorcycles may be parked in carports. Seasonal outdoor storage of outdoor cooking grills is
permitted, so long as they are kept on either a finished wooden deck, a concrete or asphalt patio, or
equivalent type of surface associated with the home.
9. Open space. Any manufactured housing park containing 50 or more manufactured housing sites shall
provide a minimum of 25,000 square feet of open space (R125.1946), which shall be shown on the
preliminary plan. Any other open space areas or recreational improvements provided at the developer’s
option shall also be shown on the preliminary plan.
10. Perimeter screening. Where a manufactured housing park abuts an existing residential development,
screening shall be provided along the boundary abutting the residential development. If the
manufactured housing park abuts non-residential development, screening shall not be required.
11. Screening along public rights-of-way. A landscaped screen shall be provided along all public streets
abutting the manufactured housing park. This screen shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs at least
three feet in height, planted so as to provide a continuous screen at maturity.
12. Alternative screening. Alternative screening devices may be utilized if they conceal the manufactured
housing park as effectively as the required landscaping elements described above.
13. Parking lot landscaping. Landscaped planting strips and islands shall be dispersed throughout all
parking lots to direct traffic flow, create shade and break-up large expanses of pavement. Parking lot
landscaping shall be subject to the following standards:
A. All landscaped areas shall be designed to ensure proper protection of the plant materials. Where
adjacent to streets, driveway aisles, or parking areas, shall be protected with concrete curbing. Plant
materials used shall be hardy, salt-tolerant species characterized by low maintenance requirements.
B. The size and number of planting islands and proposed plantings shall be in scale with the overall
site, and shall clearly define the egress/ingress points, interior circulation system and fire lanes.
Landscaping shall not obscure traffic signs or lighting, access to fire hydrants or motorist sightdistance.
C. Planting islands shall have a minimum width of five feet and a minimum area of 100 square feet. A
minimum of one deciduous shade tree shall be provided for each 100 square feet of planting area
within the island. Ornamental trees, shrubs, mulch or groundcover shall be used to cover all
unplanted areas of the island.
14. Trash disposal. The proposed method(s) and location(s) of trash storage and disposal shall conform to
the requirements of Part 5 of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) Manufactured
Home Park Standards, and shall be identified on the preliminary plan.
15. Awnings. Awnings may be attached to any manufactured house. Awnings shall comply with the setback
and distance requirements set forth in this Section, and shall require a permit.
16. Sewer service. Public sewer systems shall be required in a manufactured housing park, if available
within 200 feet of the park boundaries at the time of preliminary plan approval. If a public sewer system
is unavailable, the development shall connect to a state-approved sewage system.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-58 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
17. Water service and storm drainage systems. Internal water supply and drainage systems shall conform
to the requirements of Part 2 - 4 of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ)
Manufactured Home Park Standards.
18. Telephone and electric service. All electric, telephone, cable TV, and other lines within the park shall be
underground per the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules.
19. Fuel oil and gas. Any fuel oil and gas storage shall be located in underground tanks, at a safe distance
from all manufactured housing sites. All fuel lines leading to manufactured housing sites shall be
underground and designed in conformance with the Manufactured Housing Commission Rules and
other applicable local, county and state regulations.
20. Operational requirements.
A. Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a manufactured housing park unless that
individual obtains a license for such operation in compliance with the requirements of the Mobile
Home Commission Act (P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended). The Zoning Administrator shall
communicate recommendations regarding the issuance of such licenses to the Director of the
Bureau of Construction Codes and Fire Safety, Michigan Department of Labor and Economic
Growth.
B. Violations.
i. Whenever, upon inspection of any manufactured housing park, the Building Official finds that
conditions or practices exist which violate provisions of this Section, the Building Official shall
give notice in writing by certified mail to the Director of the Bureau of Construction Codes and
Fire Safety, Michigan Department of Labor and Economic Growth, including the specific nature
of the alleged violations and a description of possible remedial action necessary to effect
compliance. This process shall be governed by Sections 17(2) and 36 of the Mobile Home
Commission Act (P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended).
ii. The notification shall include such other information as is appropriate in order to fully describe
the violations and potential hazards to the public health, safety and welfare resulting from the
violation. A copy of such notification shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of
the park owner or agent.
C. Inspections. The Building Official or other authorized City agent is granted the authority, as specified
in the Mobile Home Commission Act, P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended, to enter upon the premises of
any manufactured housing park for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of
this Section.
D. License. A manufactured housing park shall not be operated until a license has been issued by the
Michigan Department of Labor and Economic Growth.
21. Sale of mobile homes.
A. The business of street selling new or pre-owned manufactured homes as a commercial operation in
connection with the operation of a manufactured housing community shall be prohibited. The
operator of a manufactured housing community, or designee, who is an authorized licensed
manufactured home retailer or broker, is permitted to feature and sell in-park model homes to be
located on a variety of sites within the manufactured housing community.
B. New or pre-owned manufactured houses located on sites within the manufactured housing park, to
be used and occupied on that site, may be sold by an authorized licensed manufactured home
retailer or broker, or by a resident of the manufactured housing park, provided the park’s
regulations permit such sale.
22. Mailbox clusters. The United States Postal Service may require that manufactured housing parks be
served by clusters of mailboxes serving several sites rather than individual mailboxes serving individual
sites. If mailbox clusters are required, they shall be located at least 200 feet from any intersection of a
manufactured housing park road with a public road.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-59
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.15 HCHSD DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Land in this district shall be adjacent to the B-3 (Neighborhood Commercial) district and permitted
development sites shall not be bisected by a street.
3.16 B-2 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Buildings in the B-2 district shall possess architectural variety while also enhancing the overall cohesiveness
of the district’s character and appearance, as determined by the Planning Commission. Building heights,
story levels, window sizes and proportions, architectural features, and building materials shall be consistent
with or complementary to existing and planned buildings in the immediate vicinity. Except as otherwise
noted, buildings and uses in the B-2 district shall comply with the following:
1. Street trees. On every site involving new development or redevelopment, street trees shall be provided
within the road right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.15.8.D. The Planning
Commission may waive the requirement of street trees upon determining that such plantings would be
impractical due to inadequate right-of-way, excessive reduction in sidewalk width or other factors.
Landscaping shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.15.
2. Screening. Screening shall be provided for new or expanded uses in this district in accordance with the
following:
A. Such uses shall be screened from the street rights-of-way and abutting residential uses by a
landscaped berm, buffer strip, or greenbelt meeting the requirements of Section 5.15.8.
B. Such uses shall be screened from a single-family residential district by a building housing a
permitted use, or a screen wall meeting the requirements of Section 5.15.8.
C. The Planning Commission may waive these requirements upon determining that the screening
would serve no good purpose or that there is adequate existing screening between uses and
districts.
3.17 B-3 GUIDELINES TO CONSIDER FOR DEVELOPMENT
1. The purpose of guidelines is not to prevent change in the district or to impose conditions, but to guide
owners or their designers toward the vision the Marshall community has for its downtown. The roof
shape, the texture, the scale, the details, and the color of the proposed building all contribute to the look
and feel of the district. However, compatible contemporary designs rather than duplications are
encouraged. The following principles should be taken into account:
A. When economically feasible, the height of the proposed building should be compatible with the
height of buildings on the block or the street. The height of features not intended for human
occupancy, such as chimneys, steeples, spires, and cupolas may exceed existing heights on an
individual basis.
B. Encourage architectural details that compliment the architectural details of contributing structures
in the district.
C. Encourage exterior colors that are compatible with the natural materials and the paint colors of
contributing buildings in the district.
D. Encourage contemporary construction that does not directly copy from historic buildings in the
district but is compatible with them in height, proportion, roof shape, material, texture, scale, detail,
and color.
E. The Planning Commission may consider, when reviewing a site plan, those documents approved by
other City boards and commissions.
2. Where an applicant wishes to present a site plan, taking these principles into consideration, the
Planning Commission may approve a site plan that varies from the strict application of this Chapter to
accomplish the objectives of the applicant’s plan.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-60 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.18 B-4 AND FS DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
To ensure compatibility with the intent and purpose of the B-4 and FS districts, all uses and principal and
accessory buildings and structures in the district shall be subject to the following development requirements:
1. Barriers. All development in the B-4 and FS districts shall be physically separated from the feeder road
by a curb and planting strip or other suitable barrier designed to limit vehicle ingress and egress to
planned access points.
2. Accessways. Each separate use, groupings of buildings or grouping of uses on a single zoning lot shall
not have more than two accessways from a feeder road. Such accessways shall not be located closer
than 300 feet to the point of intersection of a freeway entrance or exit ramp baseline and the feeder road
centerline.
A. Where the ramp baseline and feeder road centerline do not intersect, no driveway curb cut or similar
vehicular access point from the public right-of-way shall be located closer than 300 feet from the
point of tangency of the ramp baseline and the feeder road pavement.
B. A marginal access road may be required by the Planning Commission to service uses fronting on a
feeder road under multiple ownerships, or where direct vehicle access cannot be provided in
compliance with the minimum 300-foot separation distance.
3.19 I-1 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
To ensure compatibility with the intent and purpose of the I-1 (Research and Manufacturing) district, all uses
and principal and accessory buildings and structures in the district shall be subject to the following
development requirements:
1. Screening. The Planning Commission may require use areas or facilities permitted in the I-1 district to be
screened from street rights-of-way or abutting residential districts or uses in accordance with Section
5.15.8.
2. Parking and loading. All parking, loading and maneuvering space shall be contained within the site.
Special consideration shall be given to any potential loading and unloading nuisances on surrounding
uses.
3. Access. Vehicular access for employees, delivery vehicles, and trucks shall be coordinated or shared with
adjoining uses where feasible and shall be designed to minimize impacts on public streets and
surrounding uses.
4. Machines permitted. Permitted machines shall be installed and operated so as not to emit or allow
noise, odor, fumes, dust, smoke, glare or radioactive material exceeding detectable limits within any
residential district in the City.
5. Source of power. Power for any manufacturing or heating process or activity shall be derived only from
electrical energy, smokeless fuels, such as gas or oil, or smokeless solid fuels containing less than 20%
of the volatile content on a dry basis.
6. Building design standards. All exterior building facades shall be of the same finish material as the front
facade of the main building unless façade is of brick, stone, decorative masonry, or other similar
material. All materials used shall be recognized as finished materials.
7. Impact assessment. In the event, the proposed use may have significant impacts upon the environment,
traffic, infrastructure or demands for public services that potentially exceed anticipated impacts of other
uses permitted in the district. An impact assessment may be requested describing the expected odor,
aesthetic, environmental, and traffic impacts associated with the use. If requested, the impact
assessment shall include the following:
A. The assessment shall also describe procedures for managing storm water runoff and preventing
pollution of surface water bodies or groundwater.
B. The assessment shall include proposed mitigation measures to be employed, which shall be subject
to Planning Commission approval.
C. The City reserves the right to hire experienced professionals to evaluate the impact assessment and
prepare additional analyses, with the cost borne by the applicant.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-61
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.20 I-2 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
To ensure compatibility with the intent and purpose of the I-2 (General Industrial) district, all uses and
principal and accessory buildings and structures in the district shall be subject to the following development
requirements:
1. Setbacks. To protect the public health, safety, comfort, and welfare and minimize land use conflicts, it
may be required that intensive industrial uses be set back a minimum of 500 feet from any residential
district or use.
2. Screening. All uses shall be screened from street rights-of-way and abutting residential districts or uses
in accordance with Section 5.15.8.
3. Parking and loading. All parking, loading and maneuvering space shall be contained within the site.
Special consideration shall be given to any potential loading and unloading nuisances on surrounding
uses.
4. Access. Vehicular access for employees, delivery vehicles, and trucks shall be coordinated or shared with
adjoining uses where feasible, in the determination of the Planning Commission, and shall be designed to
minimize impacts on public streets and surrounding uses.
5. Impact assessment. The proposed use may have significant impacts upon the environment, traffic,
infrastructure or demands for public services that potentially exceed anticipated impacts of other uses
permitted in the district. The applicant shall submit an impact assessment describing the expected odor,
aesthetic, environmental, and traffic impacts associated with the use.
A. The assessment shall also describe procedures for managing stormwater runoff and preventing
pollution of surface water bodies or groundwater.
B. The assessment shall include proposed mitigation measures to be employed, which shall be subject
to Planning Commission approval.
C. The City reserves the right to hire experienced professionals to evaluate the impact assessment and
prepare additional analyses, with the cost borne by the applicant.
3.21 PSP DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
To ensure compatibility with the intent and purpose of the PSP (Public/Semi-Public Services) district, all uses
and principal and accessory buildings and structures in the district shall be subject to the following
development requirements:
1. Minimum setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall apply to all structures, parking lots, and
similar site improvements in the PSP district, where the zoning lot is contiguous to a residentially zoned
district or existing residential use that has a common frontage in the same block:
A. A minimum front yard setback distance from all street rights-of-way shall be provided equal to the
minimum required setback for the residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, whichever is greater.
B. The land within the required setback area shall be planted with shrubs, trees, or lawn maintained in
a healthy, growing condition and neat, orderly appearance.
2. Screening. Where a zoning lot in the PSP district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district or the side
or rear lot lines of an existing residential use, screening shall be provided along the district or lot
boundaries in accordance with Section 5.15.8.
3. Accessory private off-street parking facilities. Private off-street parking areas shall be accessory to and
for use in connection with one or more permitted principal uses located in an adjoining zoning district
and shall be subject to the following:
A. Parking lots shall be contiguous to a multiple-family residential or non-residential district. Parking
areas may be approved when adjacent to such districts, or on the end of a block where such areas
front on a street that is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private
driveway or public street or public alley between the PSP district and above listed districts.
B. Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, and shall not be used as
an off-street loading area.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-62 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
C. No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in
such parking area.
D. No building other than those for shelter or attendants shall be erected upon the premises and they
shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
3.22 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
1. Elevator and stairway towers; ventilation fans or mechanical equipment; firewalls or parapet walls;
skylights; individual domestic radio and television reception antennae; wireless communication facilities;
scenery lofts; steeples; chimneys; grain elevators; silos; gas containers; industrial production facilities for
flour mills, steel mills and refineries; and similar structures may be erected above the height limits herein
prescribed. No such structures shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space for
residential, business or industrial use.
2. No such structure may be erected to more than twice the applicable height limits of the district in which it
is located. No such structure shall have a total area greater than 25% of the roof area of the building.
Such structures shall be screened by a solid wall, landscaping or architectural features compatible in
appearance with the principal building. The Planning Commission may require an additional building
setback from street rights-of-way and lot boundaries, up to one additional foot of setback for each foot of
additional height above the maximum permitted in the zoning district.
3.23 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT AREA OR WIDTH REQUIREMENTS
Lots of record existing prior to the adoption or amendment of this Chapter with less than the required
minimum lot area or width for the zoning district in which such lot is located may be used for any use
permitted within the district. In areas not served by public or other approved public water or sewage facilities,
the minimum lot area required by this Chapter shall be increased to include any additional area deemed
necessary by the Health Department to ensure a safe water supply and adequate sewage disposal.
3.24 OTHER PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
Limited projections into required yard setbacks shall be permitted in any zoning district, subject to the
following:
1. Cornice, sill, chimney or fireplace. A cornice, eave belt course, sill, canopy or other similar architectural
feature (not including bay window or other vertical projection which shall be a part of the main building)
may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of
such side yard and may extend or project into a required front or rear yard not more than 36 inches.
Chimneys or fireplaces may project into a required front, side or rear yard not more than two feet,
provided the width of such side yard, is not reduced to less than five feet.
2. Fire escape. A fire escape may extend or project into any front, side or rear yard not more than four feet.
3. Open stairway or balcony. An open, unenclosed stairway or balcony, not covered by a roof or canopy may
extend or project into a required rear yard not more than six feet and such balcony may extend into a
required front yard not more than six feet.
4. Porch. In the R-3 (Traditional Residential Neighborhood) district an unenclosed platform or landing which
does not extend or project into any required front, side or rear yard not more than eight feet is exempted
from yard requirements provided that the width of a side yard is not reduced to less than five feet. An
overhang, canopy, or portico may be placed over the open porch, but it shall not be enclosed.
5. Overhangs. Overhangs on a principal building of two feet or less may project into a required side, rear,
front, or front yard setback
3.25 ACCESS THROUGH YARDS
Walks, terraces, access drives or other pavement serving a like function shall be permitted in any required
yard.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-63
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3.26 RUBBISH AND WASTE MATERIAL.
It shall be unlawful throughout the City to openly store, collect or place garbage, discarded building
materials, tires, refuse, junk, inoperable and unlicensed motor vehicles, or other similar materials, except
upon land owned and operated as a solid waste site in accordance with applicable state or federal law.
3.27 BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
A building that is lawfully under construction for which a building permit has been issued at the time of
adoption of this Chapter shall be allowed to be completed. The adoption or amendment of this Chapter shall
not require any changes to the plans, construction or designated use of such buildings, provided that
construction is diligently carried through to completion without more than one interruption exceeding 30
days.
3.28 RESTORATION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any
structure declared unsafe by the Building Inspector, or required compliance with his or her lawful order.
3.29 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the City, it
being the intent hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this chapter, with the
following exceptions:
1. Public utility transformer stations, substations, and gas regulator stations shall be subject to the
following:
A. A front yard setback of not less than 50 feet shall be provided, and two side yards and a rear yard
shall be provided, each shall not be less than 25 feet in width.
B. The site shall be enclosed by a wall that effectively screens the view of the use from property used
for residences, public walkways and rights-of-way; or another suitable screening as determined by
the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the standards of Section 5.15.8.
C. Such uses shall not include outdoor storage yards.
2. Buildings 100 square feet or less and 12 feet in height or less shall be reviewed and approved by the
Zoning Administrator and are subject to the accessory building requirements of the district in which they
are located. Buildings associated with essential services not meeting the above criteria shall be subject
to the height and setback requirements of the district and a site plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the Planning Commission.
3. In the B-3 district, essential services are permitted only when conducted within a completely enclosed
building and shall not include storage yards.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
3-64 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-1
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 4.0
Use Standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-2 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.1 Single-Family Dwelling,
Detached
4.2 Home Occupations
4.3 Private Recreation Facilities
4.4 Accessory Apartments
4.5 Cemeteries
4.6 Institutional Uses
4.7 Group Child Care Homes
4.8 Permanent or Temporary
Structure Solely for the Sale of
Produce
4.9 Farms
4.10 Golf Courses
4.11 Two-Family and Boarding Houses
4.12 Bed and Breakfast Inns
4.13 Massage Therapy
4.14 Drive-In and Drive-Through
Facilities
4.15 Accessory Structures and Uses
4.16 Commercial Greenhouses,
Nurseries, and Garden Centers
4.17 Gas Stations, Repair Centers, and
Public Garages
4.18 Personal Service Establishments
4.19 Restaurants
4.20 Retail Establishments
4.21 Business Service Establishments
4.22 Veterinary Hospitals and Clinics
4.23 Mixed Use Development
4.24 Open-Air Businesses, Outdoor
Display Areas, and Dealership
Sales Lots
4.25 Plant Materials Nursery
4.26 Adult- and Sexually- Oriented
Businesses
4.27 Other Similar Uses
4.28 Microbreweries
4.29 Open Air Market
4.30 Outdoor Display of Merchandise
in the Public Right-of-Way
4.31 Single-Family Homes in the B-3
District
4.32 Laundromats (Self Service or Coin
Operated)
4.33 Adult and Child Care Centers
4.34 Hotels and Motels
4.35 Laboratories for Research and
Testing, and Experimental
Product Development Facilities
4.36 Packaging of Previously Prepared
Goods and Materials
4.37 Indoor Storage and Warehousing
of Finished Products
4.38 Machine Shops
4.39 Printing, Lithographic,
Blueprinting, and Similar
Processes
4.40 Restaurants, Cafeteria Facilities,
Medical Facilities, Health Clubs,
and Recreational Facilities
4.41 Electroplating, Heat-Treating,
Metal Plating, Stamping, Pressing,
Casing, Buffing, and Polishing
4.42 Self-Storage Warehouses
4.43 Outdoor Storage Yards, General
4.44 Accessory Residential Dwellings
Article 4.0 Use Standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-3
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 4.0 Use Standards (continued)
4.45 Compounding, Manufacturing,
Packaging, Or Treatment of Goods
4.46 Assembly, Fabrication,
Manufacturing, Packaging, Or
Treatment of Products from
Previously Prepared Materials
4.47 Wireless Communication Facilities
and Services
4.48 Storage and Repair of Vehicles
4.49 Storage and Parking of
Commercial Vehicles and
Recreational Equipment
4.50 Electric Vehicle Infrastructure
4.51 Mobile Food Vending
4.52 Recycling and Related Uses
4.53 Solar Energy Systems
4.54 Wind Energy Systems
4.55 Special Events
4.56 Donation Collection Bins
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-4 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.0 Use Standards
4.1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, DETACHED
Detached single-family dwellings, except manufactured houses located in an approved and licensed
manufactured housing park, shall comply with the following standards:
1. All structures have overhangs of not less than one foot as measured horizontally from the side of the
structure to the outside edge of the eave and gable end.
2. The exterior dimension of any building shall not be less than 24 feet in width and depth.
3. No structure shall have exposed wheels, towing mechanism, or undercarriage.
4. New dwellings shall be placed or constructed with a primary entrance on the front façade.
5. Dwelling units not located in a manufactured home park shall be permanently attached to a perimeter
foundation with the same perimeter dimensions as the dwelling per R125.1943 of the Manufactured
Housing Commission General Rules.
4.2 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations are permitted as either a permitted or special land use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and MFRD
districts subject to the following:
1. Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or permanent accessory structure on
the property and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, not involving more than one employee other
than members of the immediate family residing on the premises.
2. Home occupations shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
3. Home occupations shall not change the residential character of the principal dwelling or zoning lot, and
shall not endanger the health, safety and welfare of any other person residing in that area by reason of
noise, noxious odors, unsanitary or unsightly conditions, heat or other hazards or conditions created or
exacerbated by the home occupation.
4. No article or service shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except such as is produced by
such occupation.
5. There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the structure or premises to accommodate the
home occupation, or the other outdoor visible evidence of conduct of the home occupation and there
shall be no external or internal alterations not customary in residential areas.
6. The following activities shall be prohibited: Outdoor storage of materials, equipment, machinery, and
vehicles; signs not otherwise permitted for the principal residential use; and delivery of materials
except by common ground carrier.
7. For home occupations in which customers or patrons visit the site for the delivery of goods, the
Planning Commission may regulate the hours of operation.
8. A home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from
the premises. For the purposes of this Section, a commercial vehicle shall be defined as one with any
sign, markings, address, telephone number, or other form of display that advertises or is associated
with a home occupation on that premises.
4.3 PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITIES
Private recreation areas or centers are permitted as a special land use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, MFRD and PSP
districts and shall be subject to the following:
1. No building shall be located within 100 feet of a dwelling.
2. A restaurant with a bar shall be allowed as an accessory use for the members use only subject to the
following condition: The area used for such purposes shall be located in the main building and shall not
exceed 50% of the ground floor area, excluding those areas incidental to the operation of the accessory
use, such as the kitchen and storage areas.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-5
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Accessory uses and structures shall be located not less than 35 feet from any property line or street rightof-
way.
4. Access shall be directly from and onto a major thoroughfare or regional arterial, and not through a
residential neighborhood.
5. The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein which would attract persons from, or are intended
to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line abutting a
major or secondary thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan.
6. Front, side, and rear yards shall be a minimum of 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in accordance
with Section 5.15 as it pertains to trees, shrubs, and grass. In no instance shall decorative walls or
fences as allowed under Section 5.15.8.C be allowed in lieu of the trees, shrubs, and grass.
7. Swimming pools shall be installed in accordance with the Michigan Building Code as amended from time
to time and shall not be located within the 80 foot setback adjacent to a residential building.
4.4 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS
Attached or detached accessory apartments subject to the following:
1. The use shall be accessory to a principal dwelling on the same lot, which shall be occupied by the
landowner;
2. The use shall be limited to one accessory apartment per site; and
3. Accessory apartments as defined in Section 2.2 may be located within a single-family dwelling or a
detached garage. Accessory apartments within a detached garage shall have a minimum side yard and
rear yard setback of ten feet.
4.5 CEMETERIES
Cemeteries are permitted as a special land use in the R-1, R-2, and PSP districts and shall be subject to the
following:
1. Crematoriums shall be prohibited within or directly abutting a residential district.
2. All buildings or structures shall be located according to the policies suggested by the Parks, Recreation,
and Cemetery Board and as approved by the City Council for all public and private cemeteries.
4.6 INSTITUTIONAL USES
Institutional uses, as defined in Section 2.2, are permitted as a special land use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, POSD
districts, and as a permitted use in the B-3, MFRD and PSP districts, subject to the following in addition to
any other requirements provided for elsewhere in this Chapter:
1. Height. The principal building’s height shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height requirements of
the district up to a maximum height of 50 feet except in a R-1, R-2, or R-3 district, provided that the
minimum required front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be increased above the minimum required by
one foot per foot of building height exceeding the district maximum. The highest point of chimneys,
church spires, cupolas, domes, and similar structures may be erected to a height exceeding the
maximum height allowed in the schedule of regulations for the district in which it is located, provided that
no such structure shall occupy a total area greater than 20% of the roof area of the building.
2. Refuse and garbage. Any refuse and garbage collection area or devices shall comply with Chapter 50 of
the City Code of Ordinances.
3. Screening. Screening shall be provided in accordance with Section 5.15.8 where the site abuts a
residential district or use.
4. Accessory facilities. Accessory facilities such as rental, fellowship or social halls, gymnasiums or
recreation facilities, and similar uses incidental to the principal use shall be permitted, subject to the
requirements of this Chapter. Other uses on the site, such as retreat facilities or conference centers,
schools, accessory dwellings, and similar uses shall meet the requirements of this Chapter for such uses.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-6 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5. Frontage and access. Such uses shall have frontage on, and direct vehicle access to a public street
classified as a collector, arterial (major street) or major thoroughfare by the City’s Master Plan, or county
or state road authorities. Vehicle access to local streets shall be limited to secondary access where
necessary for health and safety purposes.
6. Impact studies. The Planning Commission may require a traffic impact study for institutional uses that
have a seating capacity of over 500 persons. The Planning Commission may require an assessment of
the impacts of a proposed institutional use in the B-3 (Neighborhood Commercial) district on existing or
planned retail, restaurant, and entertainment uses in the district, for the purpose of determining whether
the proposed use would be in accordance with the intent and purpose of the B-3 district.
4.7 GROUP CHILD CARE HOMES
Group child care homes are permitted as a special land use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and MFRD districts and shall
be subject to the following:
1. Licensing. In accordance with applicable state laws, all child day care homes shall be registered with or
licensed by the State of Michigan, and shall comply with the standards outlined for such facilities.
2. Outdoor play area. A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area shall be provided per child, at the
maximum licensed capacity of the child care home, in the rear yard area of the child care home
premises. The outdoor play area shall be suitably fenced and screened.
3. Pick-up and drop-off. Adequate areas shall be provided for employee and resident parking, and pick-up
and drop-off of children or adults, in a manner that minimizes pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, and allows
maneuvers without affecting traffic flow on the public street.
4. Separation requirements. New group child day care homes shall be located a minimum of 1,500 feet
from any other state licensed residential facility, as measured between the nearest points on the property
lines of the lots in question. The Planning Commission may permit a smaller separation between such
facilities upon determining that such action will not result in an excessive concentration of such facilities
in a single neighborhood, or in the City overall.
5. Hours of operation. Child care homes shall operate a maximum of 16 hours per day.
4.8 PERMANENT OR TEMPORARY STRUCTURE SOLELY FOR THE SALE OF PRODUCE
In the R-1 district, one permanent or temporary structure solely for the sale of produce grown on the land
used for agricultural purposes shall be permitted as a special land use provided adequate vehicular access
and off-street parking is provided as determined by the Planning Commission.
4.9 FARMS
In the R-1 district, farms are permitted as a special land use subject to the following:
1. Farming activities shall be limited to parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of a plat.
2. Farms shall have an area of not less than five acres.
3. Farms shall be subject to local, county and state health and sanitation ordinances, laws, and regulations.
4. No farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or
rendering plants.
5. The slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised or maintained on the premises for
a minimum of one year and are for the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-7
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.10 GOLF COURSES
In the R-1 district, golf courses , which may or may not be operated for profit, shall be permitted as a special
land use subject to the following:
1. The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the major thoroughfare and any
proposed service roads, entrances, driveways and parking areas that will encourage pedestrian and
vehicular traffic safety.
2. Development features, including the principal and accessory buildings and structures, shall be so located
and related as to minimize adverse impacts upon adjacent uses. All principal or accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands. Where
topographic conditions are such that the building(s) would be screened from view, the Planning
Commission may modify this requirement.
3. Lighting of a golf course for use after daylight hours shall be prohibited.
4.11 TWO-FAMILY, BOARDING HOUSES AND TOURIST HOME.
Two-family dwellings and boarding houses shall be subject to the following:
1. The size and architectural design shall be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood and shall not
be detrimental to the future use or development of adjacent lots.
2. Any refuse and garbage collection area or devices shall comply with Chapter 50 of the City Code of
Ordinances.
3. The Planning Commission may limit the density of such units in a single neighborhood upon determining
that additional uses of this type would undermine the purpose
4.12 BED AND BREAKFAST INNS
Bed and breakfast inns are permitted as a special land use n the R-3, MFRD, and HCHSD districts, and as a
permitted use in the B-3 district, all subject to the following:
1. The bed and breakfast operations shall be accessory to and located within the principal residence on the
site. Accordingly, the bed-and-breakfast operations shall be confined to the single-family dwelling unit
which is the principal dwelling on the site. Not more than 50% of the gross floor area of the principal
building shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms.
2. A maximum of six bed and breakfast sleeping rooms shall be permitted per principal dwelling. The
Planning Commission may limit the number of sleeping rooms based on site or building limitations, and
principles of good design.
3. The dwelling unit shall be the principal residence of the operator, and the operator shall live in the
dwelling unit when the bed and breakfast facility is in operation.
4. There shall be no separate cooking facilities for the bed and breakfast operation, other than those that
serve the principal residence. Food may be served only to those persons who rent a room in the bed and
breakfast facility. Restaurants open to the general public, gift shops, retail stores, and public meeting
rooms shall be prohibited.
5. Each dwelling utilized as a bed and breakfast inn shall comply with all applicable provisions of the State
Construction Code, Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Property Maintenance Code,
Mechanical Code, and Fire Prevention Code enforced by the City.
6. All required parking for any bed and breakfast inn shall be screened from adjacent residential uses, as
required by the Planning Commission under Section 5.15.8. Off-street parking in the front yard shall be
prohibited.
7. No structure either on the premises of the bed and breakfast inn or on lots adjacent thereto shall be
removed to provide parking for the bed and breakfast inn.
8. Duration of stay of guests shall be limited to a maximum of seven consecutive days.
9. All bed and breakfast operations shall maintain a guest register, which shall be subject to inspection
during reasonable hours by the Zoning Administrator or City Clerk.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-8 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
10. A bed and breakfast operation shall also comply with Chapter 110, § 110.69 of the City Code of
Ordinances for licensing of a bed and breakfast operation.
4.13 MASSAGE THERAPY
Massage therapy clinics and uses shall be permitted in the POSD, HCHSD, B-2, and B-3 districts, subject to
the following:
1. Accessory use. In addition to districts where therapeutic massage is permitted as a principal use,
hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, medical clinics or the offices of physicians, chiropractors,
osteopaths, psychologists, clinical social workers or family counselors licensed to practice in the state
shall be permitted to provide massage therapy services as an accessory use. Beauty salons,
barbershops, and retail stores selling physical therapy supplies shall also be permitted to provide
massage therapy services as an accessory use.
2. Certification. All massage therapists shall be licensed (where such licenses are available), and shall be
certified members of the American Massage and Therapy Association or International Myomassethics
Federation. Proof of such licenses or certifications shall be provided to the City.
3. Adult massage parlors prohibited. All activities that meet the definition of an adult use or sexuallyoriented
business shall be prohibited.
4.14 DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
In the B-2 and B-4 districts, drive-in or drive-through facilities are permitted as a special land use. Drive -
through facilities are a permitted use in the FS district. All shall be subject to the following:
1. When a drive-in or drive-through establishment adjoins property located in any residential district,
screening shall be provided along the boundary of the residential district in accordance with Section
5.15.8.
2. The entire parking area shall be paved with a permanent surface of concrete or plant-mixed bituminous
material and shall be graded and drained in accordance with this Chapter. Any unpaved area of the site
shall be landscaped with lawn or other horticultural materials, maintained in a neat and orderly fashion
at all times and separated from the paved area by a raised concrete curb, six inches in height.
3. Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided as prescribed in this Chapter.
4. The site plan shall be submitted to the Public Safety Department for review and recommendation as to
suitability of access location and design, lighting, and other safety-related site design elements.
4.15 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
Accessory structures and uses that are customarily incidental to any principal use permitted are permitted by
this district, subject to the following:
1. Permitted accessory uses shall be maintained in conjunction with an existing permitted use on the
premises.
2. Such accessory uses shall not constitute, create or increase a nuisance condition, or adversely impact a
permitted use of adjoining or nearby premises.
4.16 COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSES, NURSERIES AND GARDEN CENTERS
Commercial greenhouses, nurseries, and garden centers, up to a maximum of 10,000 square feet usable
floor area are permitted in the B-2 and B-4 districts when accessory to a principal use. Such uses are
permitted as special land uses in the I-1 district with no limits on square footage.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-9
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.17 GAS STATIONS, REPAIR CENTERS, AND PUBLIC GARAGES.
The following regulations and requirements are provided for gas stations and repair centers located in any
zoning district to regulate and control the problems of noise, odor, light, fumes, vibration, dust, danger of fire
and explosion and traffic congestion that may result from the unrestricted and unregulated construction and
operation of gas stations and repair centers; and to regulate and control the adverse effects which these and
other problems incidental to such uses may exercise upon adjacent and surrounding areas.
1. Scope. All gas stations and repair centers erected after the effective date of this Chapter shall comply
with this Section. No gas station or repair center existing on the effective date of this Chapter shall be
altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with this Section than existed on the effective date
of this Chapter.
2. Minimum area and frontage. A gas station or repair center shall be located on a lot having a frontage
along the principal street of not less than 150 feet and having a minimum area of 15,000 square feet.
3. Setbacks. A gas station or repair center building housing an office and/or facilities for servicing, greasing
or washing motor vehicles shall be located not less than 40 feet from any street lot line, and not less
than 50 feet from any side or rear lot line directly adjoining a residentially zoned district. Where the side
or rear line abuts an open public alley, the structure may be constructed on such property line.
4. Driveways. All driveways providing ingress to or egress from a gas station or repair center shall comply
with the standards of this Chapter, and shall not be more than 30 feet wide at the property line. Not
more than one curb opening shall be permitted per street frontage. No driveway or curb opening shall be
located nearer than 20 feet to any corner or exterior lot line, as measured along the property line. No
driveway shall be located nearer than 30 feet to any other driveway, as measured along the property line.
5. Curbs and paving. A raised concrete curb, six inches in height, shall be erected around the perimeter of
the paved area of the lot, except for driveway openings. The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by a
building, shall be hard surfaced with concrete or a plant-mixed bituminous material, except desirable
landscaped areas, which shall be separated from all paved areas by a raised concrete curb, six inches in
height.
6. Equipment location. All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, hydraulic hoists and
pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline and fuel pumps shall be located not less than
15 feet from any lot line and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline
or serviced while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way.
7. Number of pumps. A gas station or repair center located on a lot having an area of 15,000 square feet
shall include not more than four double gasoline and fuel pumps or eight single gasoline and fuel pumps
and two enclosed stalls for servicing, lubricating, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles. An additional
two gasoline and fuel pumps or one enclosed stall may be included with the provision of each additional
2,000 square feet of lot area.
8. Screening. Where a gas station or repair center adjoins property located in any residential district,
screening shall be provided along the boundary of the residential district in accordance with Section
5.15.8. Where the use is separated from the residential district by an alley, screening shall be provided
along the alley lot line.
10. Prohibited locations. No gas station, repair center, or public garage shall be located nearer than 200
feet, as measured from any point on the property line, to any school, playground, church, hospital or
other such use where large numbers of people congregate.
11. Outdoor storage and parking. All repair work shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building.
There shall be no storage of vehicle components and parts, trash, supplies or equipment outside of a
building. Outdoor storage or parking of vehicles or trailers, other than private passenger automobiles,
shall be prohibited between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
12. Removal of underground storage tanks. All underground gasoline storage tanks shall be removed from
the premises after an automobile service station use has been abandoned or terminated for more than
365 consecutive calendar days, subject to compliance with applicable state laws or regulations regarding
storage tank removal.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-10 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
13. Service centers may include facilities for storage, minor repair or servicing, engine tune-ups, servicing of
spark plugs, batteries, distributors and distributor parts; servicing of brakes and shocks, air conditioning
and exhaust systems; oil change or lubrication; tire servicing and repair to include replacement, wheel
balancing and alignment, but not recapping or re-grooving; installation or replacement of mufflers and tail
pipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake-fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, wiper blades, grease retainers,
wheel bearings, mirrors, auto glass, accessory equipment, and the like; radiator cleaning and flushing;
fuel pump, oil pump and line repairs; minor servicing and repair of carburetors; or similar servicing or
repairs that do not normally require any significant disassembly or storing the automobiles on the
premises overnight.
4.18 PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Personal service establishments are permitted in the B-2 district within a completely enclosed building,
provided that each occupies a maximum of 4,000 square feet usable floor area.
4.19 RESTAURANTS
1. In the B-2 and B-3 districts, restaurants (excluding drive-in restaurants and those with drive-through
facilities) are permitted, where the patrons are served while seated within the building occupied by such
establishment.
2. In the B-3 district, outdoor eating areas accessory to a permitted restaurant establishment are permitted
provided they comply with Chapter 90 of the City Code of Ordinances and any other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction.
4.20 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
1. In the B-2 district, retail establishments whose principal activity is the sale or rental of merchandise
within a completely enclosed building are permitted up to a maximum of 60,000 square feet of usable
floor area, including supermarkets and planned commercial centers with up to eight different uses.
2. In the B-3 district, retail sales in which both a workshop and retail outlet or showroom are required, such
as or similar to a plumbing shop, interior decorating, upholstering, printing, specialty food stores, and
home appliance are permitted uses, provided that not more than 50% of the usable floor area shall be
used for servicing, repairing, or processing activities. Retail outlet or showroom activities area shall be
provided in that portion of the building where the customer entrance is located.
3. In the B-4 district, retail establishments whose principal activity is the sale or rental of merchandise are
permitted within a completely enclosed building, including supermarkets and planned commercial
centers
4. In the I-1 and I-2 districts, accessory retail sales of products or services produced or assembled as part of
the principal industrial, technical or research use of the zoning lot, together with related accessories or
similar supporting goods or services are permitted uses. Such accessory retail uses shall occupy no
more than 10% of the gross floor area of all principal buildings on the lot.
4.21 BUSINESS SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
In the B-2 district, business service establishments of an office, showroom or workshop nature, such as a
decorator, upholsterer, caterer, exterminator or building contractor, and similar establishments that require
retail outlets such as floor covering are permitted, except that no outdoor storage of equipment or materials
shall be permitted.
4.22 VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND CLINICS
In the B-2 district, veterinary hospitals and clinics with outdoor pens, boarding, or other similar uses are
permitted as a special land use, except when located next to a residential district. In the B-4 district, they are
a permitted use, except when located next to a residential district
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-11
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.23 MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT
In the POSD, HCHSD, B-2, B-3, B-4 and FS districts, mixed-use development, with business, commercial, or
service uses on the ground floor, residential, and office uses on upper floors, is a permitted use subject to the
following:
1. No residential use may be located on the first floor.
2. No floor used for business or office uses may be located above a floor used for residential purposes.
3. A separate, private entrance shall be provided for the residential uses.
4.24 OPEN AIR BUSINESSES, OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREAS, AND DEALERSHIP SALES LOTS
In the B-2, and B-4 districts open air businesses, and outdoor display areas for sale, exhibition, rental or
leasing of equipment, machinery, automobiles and other motor vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers,
boats, building supplies, hardware and other items are permitted as a special land use and shall be subject
to the following:
1. Location requirements. All sales activity and the display of all merchandise shall be limited to the area
specified on an approved plan. No sales activity or display of merchandise shall be permitted in a street
right-of-way or required setback area.
2. Setback requirements. Open air businesses and outdoor display areas shall be set back a minimum of
ten feet from any parking area, driveway or access drive, and 20 feet from any residential district or use.
3. Sidewalk standards. The proposed activity shall be located so as to ensure safe vehicular and pedestrian
circulation. A minimum of five feet of sidewalk width to the entrance of the establishment shall be
maintained free for pedestrian circulation.
4. Maintenance standards. Open-air businesses and outdoor display areas shall be kept clean, litter-free,
with outdoor waste receptacles provided. Written procedures for cleaning and waste containment and
removal responsibilities shall be included with all applications and approved as part of site plan review.
Vending machines and devices for the outdoor broadcasting of voice, telephone monitoring, music or any
other amplified sound shall be prohibited.
5. Surface. Sales and display areas shall be provided with a permanent, paved surface of bituminous
asphalt, concrete or similar paving materials, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all
surface water. All areas for display of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, and similar items shall be
paved.
6. Screening. Such uses and associated site improvements shall be separated from any required parking
areas by landscaping, a decorative wall or other architectural feature, and shall be screened from street
rights-of-way and abutting residential districts or uses in accordance with Section 5.15.8.
7. Hours of operation. Operational hours for open-air businesses, outdoor display area, and exterior lighting
may be restricted by the Planning Commission to protect nearby residential districts.
4.25 PLANT MATERIALS NURSERY
In the B-2 district, plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials not grown on the site, and sales
of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies is permitted as a special land use, subject to
the following:
1. The storage or display of all materials or products shall meet all setback requirements for structures
within the district.
2. All loading and parking shall be provided off-street in accordance with this Chapter.
3. Outdoor storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be prohibited.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-12 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.26 ADULT- AND SEXUALLY- ORIENTED BUSINESSES
In the B-2 and I-2 districts, adult- and sexually-oriented businesses are permitted as a special land use, as
defined in and subject to the standards of Chapter 118 of the City of Marshall code of ordinances.
4.27 OTHER SIMILAIR USES
In recognition that every potential land use cannot be specifically addressed in this chapter, land uses may
also be permitted in a given zone if the Zoning Administrator determines that the use is similar to a permitted
or special land use within the respective zone; the use is not specifically listed as either a permitted or special
land use in any other zone; and, the use is not specifically prohibited by this chapter.
The Zoning Administrator shall select the use listed in that zone which most closely resembles the proposed
use and the proposed use shall comply with all requirements and standards applicable to that similar use.
The determination as to whether a proposed use is similar in nature and class to another permitted or special
land use within a zone shall be considered an expansion of the use regulations.
The determination as to whether a proposed use is similar in nature and class to another permitted or special
land use within a district shall be considered as an interpretation of the use regulations, and not as a use
variance. Any use determined by the Zoning Administrator to be a similar use shall thereafter be included in
the enumerations of permitted or special land uses in that zone. The Zoning Administrator may elect to take
any request for interpretation of the use regulation to the Planning Commission for a determination.
4.28 MICROBREWERIES
In determining the 60,000 barrel threshold, all brands and labels of a brewer, whether brewed in this state or
outside this state, shall be combined and all facilities for the production and manufacture of beer that are
owned or controlled by the person(s) shall be treated as a single facility.
4.29 OPEN AIR MARKET
1. In the B-3 and PSP districts, open air markets are permitted as approved by the City Council for location
and hours of operation.
2. In the River District Overlay, open air markets are a permitted use subject to the following:
A. Each event, sale, or festival may last no longer than one calendar day.
B. Event, sale, or festival may take place between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday and 8:00 a.m. through midnight Friday through Saturday.
i. Outdoor set-up for event, sale, or festival may start as early as 7:00 a.m., seven days a week.
ii. Outdoor tear-down for event, sale, or festival should be completed by 10:00 p.m., Sunday
through Thursday, and 1:00 a.m., Friday through Saturday.
C. Business owner shall insure for adequate parking. Parking requirements as outlined in Section
5.14.5 shall apply with the following exceptions:
i. Use of other adjoining business’ parking areas is permitted with permission from the business
owner.
ii. Use of gravel parking for events is acceptable.
iii. For uses that are permitted but not defined in Section 5.14.5, the standard of one parking space
per three expected guests shall be used.
D. All outdoor events, sales, and festivals shall have a setback of 20 feet from the street right-of-way
and railroad tracks.
E. All dumpsters, portables restrooms and the like shall conform to the screening standards in Section
5.15.8 and must be removed from the property within three days of the conclusion of the event.
F. Approval for events, sales, or festivals not conforming to the River District Overlay regulations shall
conform to the standards and processes in Section 4.55.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-13
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
G. For an event, sale, or festival involving more than 100 vehicles, owner must obtain clearance
through the Department of Public Safety.
H. Owner is responsible for any excessive noise produced during the event, sale, or festival and must
follow the requirements outlined in § 134.02 of the City of Marshall Code of Ordinances.
4.30 OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
In the B-3 district, outdoor displays of merchandise in the public right-of-way are permitted, subject to the
following:
1. Shall comply with Chapter 90 of the City Code of Ordinances.
2. Merchandise shall be for display only and shall not have sharp edges, open flames, barbed wire or
otherwise represent a health or safety hazard to customers or pedestrians.
3. No outdoor display shall cause damage, discoloration or any alteration to the structure or appearance of
the sidewalk, street trees, planters, street furniture, or other public facilities.
4. The party responsible for the outdoor display shall provide evidence of insurance coverage naming the
City as an additional insured party in an amount acceptable to the City.
5. Businesses located on Michigan Avenue shall also obtain approval from the Michigan Department of
Transportation.
4.31 SINGLE-FAMILY HOMES IN THE B-3 DISTRICT
In the B-3 district, single-family homes converted to commercial uses, may be converted back to a residential
use on the existing lot, improved, and expanded in conformance with Section 3.1.10.D as a special land use.
4.32 LAUNDROMATS (SELF SERVICE OR COIN OPERATED)
In the B-3 district, laundromats (self-service or coin-operated) are permitted as a special land use, provided
that such devices exhaust directed to the rear of the building only.
4.33 ADULT AND CHILD CARE CENTERS
In the B-3, I-1 and I-2 districts, adult and child care centers are permitted as a special land use, subject to the
following:
1. The Planning Commission shall find that the facility does not result in an excessive number of such
facilities in the City in relation to the evidence of need.
2. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. All such uses shall provide adequate drop-off and waiting
space so that pickup vehicles are not required to stand in a public right-of-way.
3. The site layout shall be designed to insure pedestrian safety by separating outdoor activity or play areas
from parking and driveways.
4. Area requirements for child care facilities:
A. There is provided and maintained a minimum of 75 square feet of indoor or outdoor play area per
child and provided that such total area shall not be less than 1,500 square feet.
B. Outdoor play areas shall be enclosed with a fence not less than 60 inches in height and screened
from any adjoining lot or use.
C. Pick-up and drop-off areas shall be provided, with the location(s) and layout subject to Planning
Commission approval.
D. Such use shall not be located within 500 feet from uses that would present a nuisance or a danger
to the health, safety and welfare to the children attending such use, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-14 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5. Area requirements for adult care facilities. In addition to the following standards, day care providers are
encouraged to meet the standards outlined by the National Adult Day Services Association.
A. Required indoor areas: A minimum of sixty (60) square feet of multipurpose space shall be provided
for each participant, exclusive of office space, storage, restrooms, hallways, and other service areas
unless they are commonly used by participants. The facility shall also provide a supervised rest area
for participants, separate from activities areas.
B. A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of supervised outdoor recreation space shall be provided for
each participant utilizing the outdoor recreation area at any given time. Such outdoor space shall
offer sufficient seating areas and shade for participants.
4.34 HOTELS AND MOTELS
1. Motels are permitted in the FS district, hotels are permitted in the B-4 and FS districts and permitted as a
special land use in the B-3 district and HCHSD, provided that each living unit shall contain not less than
250 square feet of floor area or exceed 10%; and provided further that, no guest shall establish
permanent residence for more than 30 consecutive days in any one calendar year.
2. In the HCHSD, units may not exceed eight.
4.35 LABORATORIES FOR RESEARCH AND TESTING, AND EXPERIMENTAL PRODUCT
DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, laboratories for research and testing, and experimental product development
facilities are permitted uses when enclosed entirely within a building.
4.36 PACKAGING OF PREVIOUSLY PREPARED GOODS AND MATERIALS
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, packaging of previously prepared goods and materials is a permitted use, but not
including the bailing of discards such as iron or other metal, wood (including pallets), lumber, glass, paper,
rags, cloth, or other materials not generated on site.
4.37 INDOOR STORAGE AND WAREHOUSING OF FINISHED PRODUCTS
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, indoor storage and warehousing of finished products are permitted uses, excluding
the storage of bulk petroleum, hazardous materials, or related products, garbage, or rubbish.
4.38 MACHINE SHOPS
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, machine shops are a permitted use, provided no vibration from the operations shall
be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the zoning lot.
4.39 PRINTING, LITHOGRAPHIC, BLUEPRINTING, AND SIMILAR PROCESSES
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, printing, lithographic, blueprinting, and similar processes are permitted uses when
used to manufacture product and product sales and servicing but excluding freestanding retail copy and
printing centers offering only carry-in/carry-out service.
4.40 RESTAURANTS, CAFETERIA FACILITIES, MEDICAL FACILITIES, HEALTH CLUBS, AND
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, accessory restaurants, cafeteria facilities, medical facilities, health clubs, and
recreational facilities are permitted for employee use and provided as an incidental use within the same
principal building as a permitted principal industrial, technical or research use on the property.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-15
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.41 ELECTROPLATING, HEAT-TREATING, METAL PLATING, STAMPING, PRESSING, CASING,
BUFFING, AND POLISHING
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, electroplating, heat-treating, metal plating, stamping, pressing, casing, buffing and
polishing are permitted uses, subject to appropriate measures to prevent obnoxious conditions or nuisance.
4.42 SELF-STORAGE WAREHOUSES
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, self-storage warehouse facilities shall be subject to the following:
1. Use standards. Self-storage-warehouses shall be limited to storage of household goods and nonhazardous
commercial goods. Storage of recreational vehicles and recreational equipment shall be
subject to the following:
A. Such storage shall be incidental to the main use of enclosed storage.
B. Such storage shall be located to the rear of the lot and subject to any additional screening, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
C. All such recreational vehicle and equipment storage shall be operable and licensed to operate on the
highways of the State of Michigan.
2. Screening. All storage facilities shall be screened from adjacent uses and street rights-of-way in
accordance with Section 5.15.8.
3. Manager or caretaker’s residence. A manager or caretaker’s residence shall be permitted accessory to a
self-storage warehouse use.
4.43 OUTDOOR STORAGE YARDS, GENERAL
In the I-1, I-2, and PSP districts, general outdoor storage shall be permitted as a special land use subject to
the following:
1. Setbacks. Any storage area shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the district in which
the facility is located, and no storage shall be permitted in the front yard.
2. Screening. Storage areas shall be screened from all street rights-of-way and abutting uses in accordance
with Section 5.15.8. The Planning Commission may permit the use of a screen wall up to ten feet or
fence up to eight feet in height, upon determination that the additional height is necessary to adequately
screen the proposed use.
3. Use standards. All outdoor storage areas shall further comply with the following:
A. No materials shall be stored above the height of the required wall or fence.
B. No junk or junk vehicles shall be stored, and no trailer, manufactured home or truck trailer shall be
stored or used for storage.
C. Stored materials shall be contained to prevent blowing of materials or dust upon adjacent properties
and access by small animals. The Planning Commission may require stored materials to be covered,
and may impose additional conditions upon the use to minimize adverse impacts on adjacent uses.
D. The Planning Commission may require outside storage areas to be paved or surfaced with hard
surface material, and may require installation of a storm water drainage system.
4.44 ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
In the I-1 and I-2 districts, residential dwelling accessory to a permitted principal industrial, technical or
research use of the zoning lot and containing only quarters for an on-site manager, caretaker or watchman
are permitted as a special land use.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-16 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4.45 COMPOUNDING, MANUFACTURING, PACKAGING, OR TREATMENT OF GOODS
In the I-1 and I-2 district, assembly, fabrication, manufacture, packaging, or treatment of food products
(except for the butchering and animal slaughtering), candy, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics and toiletries,
hardware and cutlery, musical instruments, optical goods, toys, novelties, electrical instruments and
appliances, electronic instruments and devises, electronic consumer products, and pottery and figurines or
other ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or natural gas,
apparel and leather goods, textile goods, and furniture and fixtures are permitted uses when not abutting
residential and permitted as special land uses when abutting residential.
4.46 ASSEMBLY, FABRICATION, MANUFACTURING, OR TREATMENT OF PRODUCTS FROM
PREVIOUSLY PREPARED MATERIALS
In the I-2 district, assembly, fabrication, manufacture or treatment of products from previously prepared
materials, including bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, felt, fiber, glass, leather, paper, plastics, precious
or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal (excluding large stampings such as automobile fenders or
bodies), shell textiles, wax, wire, wood (excluding power saw and planing mills), and yarns are permitted uses.
4.47 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND SERVICES
1. The purpose of this Section is to carry out the will of the United States Congress by permitting facilities
within the City that are necessary for the operation of wireless communications systems.
A. In recognition of the public need and demand for advanced telecommunication and information
technologies and services and the impacts such facilities may have on properties within the City, it is
the further intent of this Section to:
i. Maximize the use of existing and future wireless communication facilities by encouraging colocation
of multiple antennae on a facility where feasible.
ii. Consider public health and safety in the location and operation of wireless communications
facilities, and protect residential areas, community facilities, historic sites and buildings from
potential adverse impacts of such facilities.
iii. Minimize the adverse visual and other impacts of such facilities through innovative design,
adequate screening, sufficient setback area, and timely removal of facilities upon the
discontinuance of use.
iv. Minimize the adverse impacts caused by these facilities on the public health and safety of
persons and property within the City, as well as to minimize the adverse aesthetic impacts
caused by these facilities.
B. It is not the intent of this Section to materially limit wireless transmission or reception, or
unnecessarily burden access to wireless services or competition among different providers.
2. Principal permitted and accessory uses. The following wireless communication facilities shall be
permitted as an accessory use subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Attached wireless communication facilities in all districts at locations where a wireless
communication facility currently exists, provided that the existing structure or facility shall not:
i. Increase in height by more than 20 feet or 10% of its original height, whichever is greater.
ii. Increase in width by more than the minimum necessary to permit collocation.
iii. Existing equipment area compound will not increase by more than 2,500 square feet.
B. Collocation of an attached wireless communication facility on a structure previously approved for
collocation by the Planning Commission.
The following wireless communication facilities shall be permitted as a principal use subject to site plan
approval per Section 6.3 and the standards of this Section:
C. Wireless communication facilities located on monopole support structures of no more than 175 feet
in height in the I-1 or I-2 districts, provided that the monopole shall have a holding capacity of not
less than three wireless communication facilities.
D. Collocation not meeting Section 4.47.2 A. or B. shall be subject to MCL 125.3514.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-17
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Permitted uses subject to special conditions. Wireless communication facilities may be permitted as a
use subject to special conditions, subject to the standards of Section 6.2 and the following:
A. I-1 or I-2 districts. Wireless communication facilities with monopole tower support structures with a
height of greater than 175 feet may be permitted in the I-1 or I-2 districts as a special land use,
subject to the following:
i. Wireless communication facilities shall no located no closer than 500 feet to any residential
zoning district,
ii. Wireless communications facilities shall be located no closer than the height of the support
structure to the right-of-way of any interstate, limited access highway or major thoroughfare.
iii. If located on the same parcel with another permitted use, such facilities and any other structures
connected therewith shall not be located in a front yard.
iv. Wireless communication facilities may be attached to a utility pole located within a right-of-way,
provided that the existing pole is not modified to materially alter the structure or result in an
impairment of sight lines or other safety interests.
B. Other zoning districts. Wireless communication facilities may be permitted in all other zoning
districts as a special land use, subject to the following:
i. The applicant must demonstrate to the Planning Commission’s satisfaction that all locations
otherwise permitted by this Section cannot reasonably meet the coverage or capacity needs of
the applicant.
ii. Such wireless communication facilities shall be located on a priority basis only on the following
sites:
a. Governmentally owned sites;
b. Religious or other institutional sites;
c. Public or private school sites; or
d. Public parks and other large permanent open space area when compatible.
iii. Wireless communication support structures in such locations shall be of an alternative or stealth
design such as incorporation into a steeple, water tower, bell tower, flagpole or other form
compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, adjacent neighborhoods, and the
general area, as determined by the Planning Commission.
4. Required information. The following information shall be provided for all new or altered wireless
communication facilities:
A. Site plan. A site plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 6.3, showing drawings for all
proposed attached wireless communication facilities or wireless communication support structures.
B. Demonstration of need. The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed wireless
communication support structure due to a minimum of one of the following:
i. Proximity to an interstate or limited-access highway or major thoroughfare.
ii. Proximity to areas of population concentration.
iii. Proximity to commercial or industrial business centers.
iv. Avoidance of signal interference due to buildings, woodlands, topography, or other obstructions.
v. Other specific reasons.
C. Service area and power. As applicable, a description of the existing and planned service areas,
wireless communication support structure height and type, and signal power expressed in effective
radiated power (ERP) upon which the service area has been planned.
D. Map of nearby facilities. A map showing existing or proposed wireless communication facilities
within the City, and further showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities
within a seven mile radius which are relevant in terms of potential collocation or in demonstrating
the need for the proposed facility. If the information is on file with the City, the applicant shall update
as needed. A written request for confidentiality must be prominently stated by the applicant.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-18 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
E. Data on nearby facilities. For each location identified by the applicant/provider, the applicant shall
include the following data, if known, with the applicant/provider expected to exercise reasonable
diligence to obtain information:
i. The structural capacity and whether it can accommodate the applicant’s facility, as proposed or
modified.
ii. Evidence of property owner approvals.
iii. Whether the location could be used by the applicant/provider for placement of its attached
wireless communication facility; if the location cannot be used, a disclosure of the technological
considerations involved, with specific reference to how use of the location would prohibit the
applicant/provider from providing services.
F. Fall zone certification. To determine the required setbacks, a State of Michigan registered engineer
shall submit a determination and certification regarding the manner in which the proposed structure
will fall. The fall zone or collapse distance as cited in the certification shall be the minimum setback
required from a property line or occupied structure. In the absence of an engineer’s certification, the
minimum setback shall equal 75 feet or the height of the tower, whichever is greater.
G. Description of security for removal. A performance guarantee shall be required for the wireless
communication support structure to ensure removal and maintenance, in accordance with this
Section. The security shall be in the form of a performance bond or dedicated escrow account
placed with the City for coverage of stated purposes, and may be required as part of a development
agreement between the City and the applicant. The security shall be a promise of the applicant and
owner of the property to remove the facility in accordance with the requirements of this Section, with
the provision that the applicant and owner shall pay costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the City in
securing removal.
H. FCC and FAA approval. The applicant shall provide proof of approval for the location and design of
the wireless communication facility from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), and Michigan Aeronautics Commission (MCC).
I. Lot area. All wireless communication facilities shall be located on a minimum of a one-half acre
parcel and shall have direct or deeded access to a public road right-of-way. Verification of said
access shall be provided upon application for approval.
J. Screening. All existing vegetation shall be shown on the site plan and shall be preserved during and
after installation to the maximum extent possible. Furthermore, additional landscaping shall be
required in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter for the district in which it is located.
K. Security information. All wireless communication sites shall be fenced with appropriate material with
a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of eight feet. All accessory buildings shall be
located within the fenced area. The use of barbed wire, electric current or charge of electricity is
strictly prohibited.
5. Compatibility of support structures. Wireless communication support structures shall not be injurious to
the neighborhood or detrimental to the public safety and welfare. Support structures shall be
harmonious with the surrounding areas, and aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the natural
environment. In addition, all structures shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent
unauthorized access.
6. Maximum height. The maximum height of wireless communication support structures shall be the lesser
of 250 feet, the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary by the applicant, or such lower heights
as required and approved by the Federal Aviation Administration.
A. The applicant shall demonstrate a justification for the height and provide an evaluation of alternative
designs that might result in lower heights.
B. Accessory buildings shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within respective
zoning districts.
7. Setbacks from all zoning districts. Wireless communication support structures abutting any lot zoned for
other than residential purposes shall have a minimum setback in accordance with the required setbacks
for the principal buildings for the zoning district in which the support structure is located. But in no case
shall the required setback be less than 75 feet. Wireless facilities shall be set back not less than 500
feet from any residential district.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-19
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
8. Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant variances for the setback of a wireless
communication support structure to accommodate a change that would reduce its visual impact or to
meet the required collocation standards. The Zoning Board of appeals may also grant variances for the
height of a support structure of up to 50 feet only in cases where a variance would permit additional
collocations.
9. Compatibility of accessory structures. Wireless communication facilities proposed on the roof of a
building with an equipment enclosure shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building upon
which they are located. The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be
an accessory building, provided the accessory building conforms with all district requirements for
accessory buildings and is constructed of the same or compatible building material as the principal
building.
10. Appearance of support structures. The color of wireless communication support structures and all
accessory buildings shall minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize aesthetics, and ensure
compatibility with its surroundings. The applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition, as well as maintaining the safety of the
site and structural integrity of any structures.
11. Federal and state requirements. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal
Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted on the site plan.
Structures shall be subject to any state and federal regulations concerning non-ionizing electromagnetic
radiation. Furthermore, if more restrictive state or federal standards are adopted in the future, the
antenna shall be made to conform to the extent required by such standard or the approval and permit for
the structure shall be subject to revocation by the City. The cost of testing and verification of compliance
shall be borne by the operator of the antenna.
12. Lighting. Lighting on a wireless communication facility shall be prohibited unless otherwise required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or Michigan Aeronautics Commission. The Planning Commission may
require a height reduction to eliminate the need for lighting unless the applicant provides adequate
technical data demonstrating the need for the requested height, including an analysis demonstrating that
other sites are unavailable or inadequate for their purposes.
13. Collocation. All wireless communication support structures shall accommodate a minimum of three, but
no more than six attached wireless communication facilities. Support structures shall allow for future
rearrangement of attached wireless communication facilities to accept other attached facilities mounted
at varying heights.
A. When collocation is not feasible. Wireless communication support structures shall not be approved
unless the applicant documents that its attached wireless communication facilities cannot be
feasibly collocated or accommodated on an existing support structure or other existing structure due
to any of the following reasons:
i. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the support structure, as
documented by licensed engineer, and the existing support structure or other structure cannot
be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost.
ii. The planned equipment would cause interference affecting the function of other equipment on
the structure, as documented by a licensed engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented
at a reasonable cost.
iii. Support structures within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a
height necessary for the coverage area and capacity needs, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer.
B. Determining feasibility of collocation. Collocation shall be deemed to be feasible when all of the
following are met:
i. The applicant/provider will pay market rent or other market compensation for collocation.
ii. The site is able to provide structural support, considering reasonable modification or
replacement of a facility.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-20 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
iii. The collocation being considered is technically reasonable and will not result in unreasonable
interference, given appropriate physical adjustments.
iv. The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond maximum
height limits.
C. Refusal to permit collocation. If a party who owns or controls a wireless communication support
structure shall fail or refuse to alter a structure to accommodate a feasible collocation, such facility
shall thereafter be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or
extended in any respect.
i. If a refusal to permit a feasible collocation requires the construction or use of a new wireless
communication support structure, the party failing or refusing to permit a feasible collocation
shall be deemed to be in direct violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of
this Section.
ii. The party refusing to permit a feasible collocation shall be prohibited from receiving approval for
a new support structure within the City for a period of five years from the date of the failure or
refusal to permit the collocation.
iii. Such a party may seek and obtain a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals if, and to the
limited extent, the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context,
shall mean a demonstration that enforcement of the five year prohibition would unreasonably
discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communication services, or that
such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless
communication service.
D. Collocation offer required. An application for a new wireless communication support structure shall
include a letter from the applicant to all potential users offering an opportunity for collocation. If,
during a period of 30 days after the notice letters are sent to potential users, a user requests in
writing to collocate on the new support structure, the applicant shall accommodate the request(s)
unless collocation is not feasible based on the criteria of this Section.
E. Administrative review of collocation. Applications for collocation on existing, approved structures
shall be reviewed administratively. Colocation of new wireless communications antennas and
equipment is eligible for approval by the Zoning Administrator within fourteen (14) days of receipt of
a complete application package and applicable fees, if all of the following standards are satisfied:
i. The wireless communications equipment will be colocated on an existing wireless
communications support structure or in an existing equipment compound
ii. The existing wireless communications support structure or existing equipment compound is in
compliance with the City of Marshall zoning ordinance or was approved by the City of Marshall
Planning Commission.
iii. The proposed colocation will not do any of the following:
a. Increase the overall height of the wireless communications support structure by more than
20 feet or 10% of its original approved height, whichever is greater.
b. Increase the width of the wireless communications support structure by more than the
minimum necessary to permit colocation.
c. Increase the area of the existing equipment compound to greater than 2,500 square feet.
d. The proposed colocation complies with the terms and conditions of any previous final
approval of the wireless communications support structure or equipment compound by the
Planning Commission.
14. Removal. When a wireless communication facility has not been used for 180 consecutive calendar days,
the party who owns or controls such a facility shall notify the City in writing of its discontinued use and
shall undertake removal of all or parts of the wireless communication facility by the users or owners or
their successors of the facility and owners of the property on which the facility is located within 90 days
of notifying the City.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-21
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
A. The removal of antennae or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations
(transmission or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
The situation(s) in which removal of a wireless communication facility is required may be
applied and limited to a portion of the facility.
B. Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, the property owner or persons
who had used the wireless communication facility shall immediately apply for and secure the
application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and
complete the demolition/removal, restoring the condition which existed prior to the construction of
the facility.
C. If the required removal of the wireless communication facility or a portion thereof has not been
lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and after at least 30 days written
notice sent by certified mail, the City may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required
portions thereof, with its actual costs and reasonable administrative charges to be drawn or
collected from the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility or,
if necessary, through appropriate judicial remedies.
15. Radio frequency emission standards. Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable
federal and state standards relative to electromagnetic fields and the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions.
16. Effect of approval. Final approval for a wireless communication support structure shall be effective for
a period of 180 calendar days. One extension of up to an additional 180 calendar days may be
granted, provided that a written request is submitted prior to the expiration date.
4.48 STORAGE AND REPAIR OF VEHICLES
The repair, restoration, storage or maintenance of vehicles in any residentially zoned district shall be
subject to the following: inoperable vehicles, vehicle parts, equipment, tools, and supplies shall be stored in
accordance with § 73.31 of the City Code of Ordinances.
4.49 STORAGE AND PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
Outside storage of motor homes, travel trailers, folding-type trailers, pickup campers, snowmobiles on
trailers, boats, and similar recreational equipment on all lots zoned or used for residential purposes shall
be subject to the following:
1. Outside storage accessory to a principal building and use. Recreational equipment as defined in
Section 2.2 may be stored, parked or placed on a lot zoned or used for residential purposes and
occupied by a principal residential building and use, or on a lot contiguous to an occupied lot under the
same ownership, subject to the following:
A. A maximum of three but not more than one of each unit type may be stored or parked outside,
provided that the ownership of such units shall be in the name of a member of the immediate
family of the lot’s owner, tenant or lessee.
B. Such outside storage shall be located in a rear yard, and shall be parked on a paved or gravel
surface with a maximum width of 12 feet and screened from adjacent lots by a six foot fence that
complies with or landscaping of the same height along a side and rear lot line.
C. Such units shall not be closer than ten feet to any structure and five feet to any lot boundary,
unless otherwise provided by this Section.
D. The combined area covered by the dwelling, accessory structures, and the area covered by the
outside storage of such units shall not exceed 40% of the net lot area.
E. Recreational equipment may be stored, parked or placed within any front yard or within a public
right-of-way where on-street parking is permitted for a period not exceeding 48 hours for loading
and unloading or normal maintenance and cleaning.
F. In the case of through lots, parking shall be permitted in the effective rear yard, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator, provided the parked vehicle meets the front and side yard principal
building setback requirements for the zoning district and subsection 1.B of this Section.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-22 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
G. In the case of through lots on a corner (i.e. lots with frontage along three streets), parking shall be
allowed only in the side yard. The Zoning Administrator may permit parking in the effective rear
yard, upon determination that such parking would be allowed in the adjacent lot.
2. None of such units or any recreational equipment parked or stored outside shall be connected to
electricity, water, gas or sanitary facilities for living, lodging or housekeeping purposes and none of the
same shall be used for living, lodging or housekeeping purposes, except for not more than seven days
within any 60 day period, or as otherwise authorized under the City’s Code of Ordinances.
3. All recreational equipment and vehicles shall be maintained in good condition, shall be operable and
shall have a current license or registration.
4. The parking and/or storage of buses and converted buses in excess of 18 feet in length and boats in
excess of 30 feet in length shall be prohibited. A suitable covering shall be placed over all boats
whenever stored outside.
5. No recreational equipment may be parked or stored on a vacant residentially zoned lot, except as
otherwise authorized under subsection 1.A of this Section.
6. Detachable camper tops shall not be stored in any residential district except in accordance with this
Section. Camper tops not installed on a licensed and operable vehicle shall be placed on the ground
and stabilized.
7. A recreational equipment officially designated for barrier-free use in accordance with state law, and
used as the regular means of transportation by or for a handicapped person may be parked within any
required setback area.
8. Commercial vehicles of over one ton shall not be parked or stored at any time on a lot zoned or used for
residential purposes. Open storage or outdoor parking of semi-tractor (WB-50 or larger) trucks or semitrailers,
bulldozers, earth carriers, cranes or similar equipment or machinery shall be prohibited, except
while in use for approved construction on the lot.
4.50 ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE
1. General.
A. All charging station installations shall be subject to building and electrical permits.
B. An electric vehicle charging space may be included in the calculation for minimum parking spaces
that are required for the principal use.
C. No minimum number of electric vehicle charging spaces is required.
D. When a sign provides notice that a parking space is a publicly designated electric vehicle charging
station, no person shall park or stand any non-electric vehicle in a designated electric vehicle
charging station space. Further, no person shall park or stand an electric vehicle in a publicly
designated electric vehicle charging station space when not electrically charging or parked beyond
the days and hours designated on the regulatory signs posted.
E. Usage Fees: An owner of a charging station is not prohibited from collecting a fee for the use of a
charging station, in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. Fees shall be
prominently displayed on the charging station.
F. Retail Charging Stations as a Primary Use: If the primary use of a parcel is the retail charging
of electric vehicle batteries, then the use shall be considered a gasoline service station for zoning
purposes. Installation of charging stations shall be subject to special land use approval and located
in zoning districts which permit gasoline service stations.
G. Charging Stations Accessory to Residential Uses: Charging stations located at single-family, multiple
-family, and mobile home park dwellings shall be designated as restricted use only.
H. Data Collection: To allow for maintenance and notification, the City of Marshall shall require the
owners of public charging stations to provide information on the charging station's geographic
location, date of installation, equipment type and model, and owner contact information.
2. Locational Standards for multiple family residential, non-residential development, and public rights-ofway.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-23
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
A. Electric vehicle charging stations located in the public right-of-way shall be located adjacent to the
parking space at the beginning or end of a block face, which shall be designated as the electric
vehicle charging space.
B. Developments with three or more electric vehicle charging spaces, including public parking lots, shall
provide at least one barrier-free electric vehicle charging space.
C. Where possible, electric vehicle charging spaces should be located adjacent to each other in order to
reduce the amount of electrical infrastructure necessary to serve them.
D. Where charging station equipment is provided within a pedestrian circulation area, such as a
sidewalk or other accessible route to a building entrance, the charging station equipment shall be
located so as not to interfere with accessibility requirements of the Michigan accessibility code or
other applicable accessibility standards.
3. Design Standards for multiple family residential, non-residential development, and public rights-of-way.
A. Electrical infrastructure serving the charging station shall be located underground
B. Canopies are permitted; these canopies shall cover only the electric vehicle charging space or
spaces. Canopies must provide a clearance height of not less than 14 feet.
C. Where charging station equipment is installed, adequate site lighting shall be provided.
D. Charging station outlets and connector devices shall be no less than thirty six inches (36") and no
higher than forty eight inches (48") from the ground or pavement surface where mounted, and shall
contain a retraction device and/or a place to hang permanent cords and connectors a sufficient and
safe distance above the ground or pavement surface. Equipment mounted on pedestals, lighting
posts, bollards, or other devices shall be designated and located as to not impede pedestrian travel
or create trip hazards on sidewalks.
E. Adequate charging station equipment protection, such as concrete filled steel bollards, shall be
used. Nonmountable curbing may be used in lieu of bollards, if the charging station is set back a
minimum of twenty four inches (24") from the face of the curb.
4. Signage.
A. Each commercial charging station space shall be posted with signage approved by the City of
Marshall indicating the charging station space is only for use by electric vehicles for charging
purposes. Days and hours of operations shall be included if time limits or tow away provisions are to
be enforced. Private-use charging stations are exempt from signage requirements.
B. Directional signs conforming to the federal Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are permitted
in accordance with the sign provisions of this Ordinance, Section 5.1.
C. Information on the charging station, identifying voltage and amperage levels and time of use, fees, or
safety information shall be provided on the charging station equipment.
5. Battery Handling and Storage. Electric vehicle batteries shall be properly managed in accordance with
local, state and federal law. After an electric vehicle has been involved in an accident, or the battery has
sustained damage, and where the electric vehicle is being stored or disposed of, its battery systems
must first be properly de-energized according to manufacturer specifications.
4.51 MOBILE FOOD VENDING
Mobile Food Vending is permitted as a temporary land use, subject to the following conditions:
1. Location. Mobile food vending is permitted in the B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2, POSD, and PSP districts on private
property that is vacant or used for non-residential purposes, subject to the following:
A. The vendor must provide approval of the property owners.
B. Mobile food vending units shall be located and maintained on a dust-free surface and shall not be
placed on existing landscaped areas.
C. Mobile food vending units shall not be located in sensitive environmental areas such as wetlands or
floodways.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-24 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
D. Location of the unit on a lot must be situated to minimize adverse impacts to adjacent properties.
Operations shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists, parking lot circulation, emergency access,
access to or along a public street, alley, sidewalk, or trail. Customer queuing may be allowed on a
public sidewalk provided a minimum of 6 feet of unobstructed sidewalk around the line of customers
is maintained.
2. Number of Vendors. No greater than one food truck per 1,500 square feet of dust-free surface shall
operate on a site. However, if there are more than two mobile food vending units on a parcel at any one
time, the following shall apply:
A. A designated on-site manager is required to direct traffic flow and maintain the site as described in
this Section, and
B. A restroom shall be provided within 200 ft of the vending area.
3. Duration. A mobile food vending unit may be allowed to park at an approved location up to three days per
week if the applicant has satisfied all of the requirements of this Section. A vendor may seek a new
approval for a location on a different property in the City within the same calendar year.
4. Goods available. Mobile food vending units may only sell food and non-alcoholic beverages. Sales of
alcoholic beverages are prohibited. No others goods or services may be sold from a mobile food vending
unit.
5. Trash and upkeep. Mobile food vending units and the area upon which they are temporarily located shall
be kept in good repair and free of refuse and debris. A trash receptacle shall be provided by the mobile
food unit and emptied daily, or more frequently to meet demand. The trash or recycling receptacle must
be removed from the site when the mobile food unit departs.
6. Hours of operation. Mobile food vending units shall not be in operation between the hours of 10 p.m. and
7 a.m. The Zoning Administrator may extend operating hours upon finding that such extension will not
negatively impact adjacent uses.
7. Parking. Mobile food vending units shall not occupy any parking spaces required for the existing use of
the property. The City may take into consideration seasonal variation in parking demand and building
occupancy when making this determination. There shall be at least three parking spaces for the mobile
food vending unit provided and maintained on a dust-free surface.
8. Site amenities permitted. Mobile food vending units may provide seating for up to twelve customers
within 30 ft of the mobile food vending unit. Such seating shall not occupy any required parking spaces
and shall be kept in good repair. One additional parking space shall be provided for every two seats. This
requirement may be waived or modified by the approving body if it finds there is ample parking nearby.
Mobile food vending units shall only serve customers on foot; drive-thru mobile food vending is not
permitted.
9. Signage. Mobile food vending units may be painted with signage but shall not have any signs or other
objects that otherwise attract attention projecting from the unit. The sole exception is that one a-frame
sandwich board sign up to 6 square feet in area may be provided on the subject site. No additional site
signage is permitted.
10. Sound. Sound amplifying equipment is prohibited.
11. Lighting. Mobile food vending units shall be lit with available site lighting. No additional exterior lighting is
permitted unless permitted by the zoning board of appeals upon finding that proposed exterior lighting
mounted to the mobile vending unit will not spill over on to adjacent residential uses as measured at the
property line.
12. Temporary restroom facilities. Temporary restroom facilities, if provided, shall only be placed on the
subject property from one day before until one day after the approved mobile vending dates. Any
temporary restroom facility shall be placed a minimum of 100 ft from a single family residential use, as
measured from the property line.
13. Permits. Administrative approval is valid for the calendar year in which it is issued (January 1 to
December 31) with the exception that permits issued on or after November 1 shall be valid through the
following calendar year. A permit applies to a single approved location. Other permitting requirements are
as follows:
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-25
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
A. The mobile food vendor shall obtain and comply with all additional required permits and licenses as
applicable.
B. The mobile food vendor must demonstrate that the operation will be mobile and not limited to a fixed
location or series of fixed locations.
C. The applicant must demonstrate that operations will not obstruct the public way or constitute a
health hazard or other hazards.
4.52 RECYCLING AND RELATED USES
1. Junk Yards. Junk yards are permitted as a special land use in the I-1 district, subject to the following
standards:
A. Junk yards shall be entirely enclosed within an eight (8) foot high, decorative masonry wall or a six (6)
foot high decorative obscuring fence in combination with a minimum twenty (20) foot wide
landscaped greenbelt at the discretion of the approving body. The landscaped greenbelt shall be
located between the fence or wall and the property line.
B. There shall be no burning on the site.
C. A junk yard shall not be located adjacent to an existing residential use.
D. Junk yards shall not be located in a floodplain.
E. All machinery and accessory buildings shall comply with the setback standards of the district.
F. Junk yards shall comply with City performance standards for noise, dust, fumes, and vibrations.
G. All industrial processes including the use of equipment for cutting, compressing or packaging shall
be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
H. The operator shall not permit automotive fluids or similar hazardous materials to contaminate soil or
groundwater. Plans shall demonstrate that all areas for dismantling are conducted within an
enclosed building with floor drains connected to an approved holding tank.
I. Junk and other items stored outdoors shall not be stored in piles or stacks taller than the height limit
for accessory structures in the district.
J. A report shall be submitted to the Fire Chief detailing all hazardous or flammable materials used,
stored, collected for recycling or disposal, or associated in any other way with the operations on-site.
K. A spill prevention plan shall be submitted for review by the Fire Chief that details the procedures to
be followed in the event of a spill of any hazardous material, whether or not said material was
included in the report submitted subject to number 11 above.
L. Hours of operation shall fall between 7:00 am and 10:00 pm.
2. Recycling Collection Facilities. Recycling collection facilities are permitted in the I-1 and I-2 districts,
subject to the following standards:
A. Outdoor storage areas shall be entirely enclosed within an eight (8) foot high, decorative masonry
wall or a six (6) foot high decorative obscuring fence in combination with a minimum twenty (20) foot
wide landscaped greenbelt at the discretion of the approving body. The landscaped greenbelt shall
be located between the fence or wall and the property line.
B. Outdoor storage areas shall have an approved all-weather surface.
C. Items stored outdoors shall not be stacked higher than the obscuring fence or wall.
D. Items stored outdoors shall be covered or kept in containers.
E. Garbage shall not be stored on site for longer than necessary; all nonrecyclable materials shall be
kept in dumpsters, to be emptied on a weekly basis, at a minimum.
F. All machinery and accessory buildings shall comply with the setback standards of the district.
G. Drop-off areas shall be attended during business hours and kept free of debris.
H. Recycling collection facilities shall not be located in a floodplain.
I. Hours of operation shall fall between 7:00 am and 10:00 pm.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-26 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Recycling Processing Facilities. Recycling processing facilities are permitted in the I-1 and I-2 districts,
subject to the following standards:
A. Recycling processing facilities may include recycling collection facilities, subject to the standards of
Section 4.52.2.
B. Outdoor storage areas shall be entirely enclosed within an eight (8) foot high, decorative masonry
wall or a six (6) foot high decorative obscuring fence in combination with a minimum twenty (20) foot
wide landscaped greenbelt at the discretion of the approving body. The landscaped greenbelt shall
be located between the fence or wall and the property line.
C. Outdoor storage areas shall have an approved all-weather surface.
D. Items stored outdoors shall not be stacked higher than the obscuring fence or wall.
E. Items stored outdoors shall be covered or kept in containers.
F. Garbage shall not be stored on site for longer than necessary; all nonrecyclable materials shall be
kept in dumpsters, to be emptied on a weekly basis, at a minimum.
G. All machinery and accessory buildings shall comply with the setback standards of the district.
H. Drop-off areas shall be attended during business hours and kept free of debris.
I. All industrial processes including the use of equipment for cutting, compressing or packaging shall
be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
J. Loading docks or loading areas shall be screened from residential properties by a greenbelt and
masonry screen wall or fence.
K. Recycling processing facilities shall not be located in a floodplain.
L. Hours of operation shall fall between 7:00 am and 10:00 pm.
4.53 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
1. Small Solar Energy Systems. Small solar energy systems may be installed and operated in all districts,
provided the systems meet setback and other standards, as provided in this Section:
A. Small solar energy systems may be approved through the issuance of a Building Permit provided the
application meets setback and other standards, as provided in this Section, and provided solar
panels are roof mounted. If the Building Official has a good faith belief that the solar energy system
could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety, the Official may require the
applicant to apply for a Site Plan approval to the Planning Commission.
B. All ground mounted solar panels require approval by the Planning Commission. Ground-mounted
solar panels are not permitted on residential lots less than one quarter acre in size or in the B-3
district.
C. Approval by the Planning Commission is required for all small solar energy systems that do not meet
A and B above.
D. The requirement for a complete, professionally-prepared site plan shall not apply to applications
proposing 1) only roof mounted solar panels or 2) proposing ground mounted panels that do not
exceed 2,000 square feet in total area in non-residential districts, 400 square feet in area on
residential lots between one quarter acre and two acres in size, or 1,000 square feet in area on
residential lots larger than two acres. When a full site plan is not required, a sketch plan shall be
submitted. A sketch plan, drawn to scale, shall show existing and proposed structures, driveways,
adjacent structures within 100 feet, and any other information requested by the Planning
Commission that is necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. The sketch plan may be
drawn on an aerial or satellite photograph.
E. Excluding solar collection panels, solar energy system equipment may be installed within the
required side and rear yard, but shall not be closer than five (5) feet to any property line. Mechanical
equipment shall be screened from any street or neighboring residence by a decorative fence,
evergreen screening, or combination thereof. Screening requirements may be waived or reduced by
the Building Department or Planning Commission, as applicable, where it is determined that existing
vegetation or other features of the landscape accomplish the same.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-27
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
F. Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or solar glare shall not be
directed onto nearby properties or roadways. Traffic safety shall be protected and adjacent
properties shall be protected from unreasonable glare and radiation. The applicant shall submit
documentation to verify compliance with this Section. When deemed appropriate, the Planning
Commission may require a report from a registered civil engineer or other professional the Planning
Commission finds to be qualified to address this issue.
G. If the solar energy system ceases to operate or is abandoned for a period of six months or is deemed
by the Building Official to be unsafe or not consistent with code, the Applicant shall repair and
restore the system to good working order within a reasonable time set by the Building Official or, if no
longer operating or no longer in compliance with federal, state or local codes, it shall remove the
system in its entirety. This shall include removing posts, equipment, panels, foundations and other
items so that the ground is restored to its preconstruction state and is ready for development as
another land use.
H. Roof-mounted small solar energy systems, including solar water or swimming pool heating systems,
may extend up to five (5) feet above the roof surface even if this exceeds the maximum height limit
for the principal structure for the district in which it is located, or if this exceeds the height limit of an
accessory structure, subject to the following:
i. Solar panels shall not project beyond the edge of a roof or below the eave.
ii. The total area of solar panels shall not exceed the total area of the roof. Where panels are
mounted on one slope of a pitched roof, their total area shall not exceed the total area of that
slope.
I. Ground mounted photovoltaic solar energy systems, where the solar panels are attached to the
ground by a pole, metal frame or other similar support structure, shall comply with existing setbacks
and height limit for accessory structures in the district but in no instance shall the panels exceed
twenty (20) feet in height, measured from grade to the top of the panel. Ground mounted small solar
energy systems shall further comply with the following standards:
i. Ground-mounted systems shall not be located in the required front yard. In the I-1 and I-2
districts, ground-mounted systems may be located in the non-required front yard.
ii. The maximum ground area occupied by solar panels and associated paved surfaces shall be
3,500 square feet
iii. If more than 2,000 square feet of impervious surface is proposed, a drainage plan prepared by a
registered civil engineer is required.
iv. Panels shall not be located closer than their height to the property line.
v. Panels shall be screened from residential districts and public rights of way by a greenbelt, a sixfoot
decorative fence, or combination thereof.
2. Medium Solar Energy Systems. Medium solar energy systems may be installed and operated in the
PSOD, B2-, B-4, FS, I-1, I-2 and PSP districts, provided the systems meet setback and other standards, as
provided in this Section. Medium solar energy systems may be installed and operated by non-residential
uses only in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts. In the MFRD, HCHS and B-3 districts, medium solar energy
systems may be installed on rooftops only. Medium solar energy systems shall be subject to the following
standards:
A. Medium-sized solar energy systems shall be approved through the Site Plan approval process, which
requires action by the Planning Commission. A professionally prepared site plan shall be required.
B. Excluding solar collection panels, solar energy system equipment may be installed within the
required side and rear yard, but shall not be closer than five (5) feet to any property line. Mechanical
equipment shall be screened from any street or neighboring residence by a decorative fence,
evergreen screening, or combination thereof. Screening requirements may be waived or reduced by
the Building Department or Planning Commission, as applicable, where it is determined that existing
vegetation or other features of the landscape accomplish the same.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-28 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
C. Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or solar glare shall not be
directed onto nearby properties or roadways. Traffic safety shall be protected and adjacent
properties shall be protected from unreasonable glare and radiation. The applicant shall submit
documentation to verify compliance with this Section. When deemed appropriate, the Planning
Commission may require a report from a registered civil engineer or other professional the Planning
Commission finds to be qualified to address this issue.
D. If the solar energy system ceases to operate or is abandoned for a period of six months or is deemed
by the Building Official to be unsafe or not consistent with code, the Applicant shall repair and
restore the system to good working order within a reasonable time set by the Building Official or, if no
longer operating or no longer in compliance with federal, state or local codes, it shall remove the
system in its entirety. This shall include removing posts, equipment, panels, foundations and other
items so that the ground is restored to its preconstruction state and is ready for development as
another land use.
E. Roof-mounted medium solar energy systems, including solar water or swimming pool heating
systems, may extend up to five (5) feet above the roof surface even if this exceeds the maximum
height limit for the principal structure for the district in which it is located, or if this exceeds the
height limit of an accessory structure, subject to the following:
i. Solar panels shall not project beyond the edge of a roof or below the eave.
ii. The total area of solar panels shall not exceed the total area of the roof. Where panels are
mounted on one slope of a pitched roof, their total area shall not exceed the total area of that
slope.
F. Ground-mounted medium solar energy systems shall meet the front, rear, and side yard setback
requirements of the zone in which they are located, with the following exception: in all zones abutting
a residential district or residential use, the setbacks shall be at least 50 feet from all property lines
adjoining said district(s) or use.
G. Ground-mounted solar facilities shall meet the height limit requirements for accessory structures of
the district in which they are located, measured from grade to the top of the panel, but in no instance
shall the panels exceed twenty (20) feet in height in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts.
H. Ground mounted medium solar energy systems shall further comply with the following standards:
i. Ground-mounted systems shall not be located in the required front yard. In the I-1 and I-2
districts, ground-mounted systems may be located in the non-required front yard.
ii. The maximum ground area occupied by solar panels and associated paved surfaces shall be 1
half-acre.
iii. If more than 2,000 square feet of impervious surface is proposed, a drainage plan prepared by a
registered civil engineer is required.
iv. Panels shall not be located closer than their height to the property line.
v. Panels shall be screened from residential districts and public rights of way by a greenbelt, a sixfoot
decorative fence, or combination thereof.
3. Large Solar Energy Systems. Large solar energy systems are permitted as a special land use in the I-1
and I-2 districts, subject to the following standards:
A. Large solar energy systems shall meet all the requirements of Section 4.55.2 Medium Solar Energy
Systems, provided that all large solar energy systems shall be treated as a special land use in the I-1
and I-2 districts. The following additional standards and exceptions apply:
i. Where a principal building is present, the large solar energy system shall not be located in the
front yard.
ii. In addition to screening requirements, the site of a large solar energy system shall be secured by
a fence.
iii. There shall be no maximum ground area, provided that all setbacks and other standards of
Section 4.55.2 are met.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-29
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B. In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission shall particularly focus on the ability of the
use to be in harmony with the surrounding area and the intent and policies of the Master Plan.
Potential impact on neighboring properties in terms of glare, stormwater runoff, property values,
aesthetics, and screening shall be considered by the Planning Commission in determining whether
the use is appropriate on the subject property.
4.54 WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
A small residential system supplying not more than 5 kw is exempt from this chapter. Small wind energy
residential systems must meet accessory structure requirements for the district. Wind energy conversion
systems shall be permitted as a special land use in the POSD, FS, I-1 and I-2 districts, subject to the
following:
1. The proposed site shall have documented annual wind resources sufficient for the operation of the
proposed wind energy system provided, however, this standard shall not apply to an anemometer tower.
No wind energy system shall be approved without submission of a wind resource study documenting
wind resources on the site over a minimum of one (1) year.
2. The site area for a wind energy system shall be a minimum of five (5) acres or the amount of land
required to meet the setback standards of this Section, whichever is greater.
3. Height is measured from the ground at the base of the wind energy system and the highest point of the
wind energy system with the blade in the uppermost vertical position.
4. The maximum height of a wind energy conversion system is 150 feet. The Planning Commission may
approve up to 200 feet if the additional height will preserve natural features that would otherwise be
removed to help increase wind velocity.
5. The lowest point of the arc created by a rotating wind vane or blade on a wind energy system shall be no
less than twenty (20) feet above finished grade.
6. A tower shall be set back at least three times the height of the tower from the property line. Spacing
between towers shall be equal to four times the height of the tallest tower.
7. Sound levels shall not exceed sixty five (65) decibels on the dB(A) scale at any property line.
8. Lighting is prohibited unless required by the FAA.
9. The system shall not produce vibrations perceptible to humans at or beyond the property line.
10. On-site transmission lines shall be located underground.
11. Existing natural features and vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
12. Screening of the property shall be provided along adjacent roadways and residential property lines. This
requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission if it determines that existing features of the
property accomplish the required screening.
13. Where a building is present, the wind energy conversion system shall not be located in the front yard.
14. Wind energy systems shall meet applicable state and federal requirements, including the National
Electric Safety Code.
15. Wind energy systems shall be constructed and operated so that they do not interfere with television,
microwave, navigational or radio reception to neighboring areas.
16. Wind energy systems shall use a monopole mast with a galvanized steel finish or neutral paint color such
as medium gray. If the site lies on a bird or insect migration route, the Planning Commission may
consider permitting an alternate color.
17. The special land use application and site plan must be accompanied by a soil report showing that the
proposed foundation is adequate to keep the structure stable in the existing soil of the site.
18. One sign no greater than four square feet shall be posted on the tower base with emergency contact
information for the wind system operator.
19. The applicant shall provide a shadow flicker model for any proposed wind energy systems.
20. An application for a wind energy system shall be accompanied by a hazard prevention plan addressing,
at a minimum: fire hazards, fire mitigation, hazardous fluids, and collapse characteristics of the system.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-30 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
21. Any wind energy system that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. Any tower found to be unsafe or not in compliance with the special land use
conditions related to noise or shadow flicker placed upon it by the Planning Commission, shall be found
to be in violation of the special land use permit. The owner of any wind energy system that is abandoned
or in violation of the special land use permit shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of
notice from the City of such abandonment or violation. The site shall be returned as near as possible to
its original condition.
22. In order to ensure proper removal, a performance bond equal to reasonable removal costs shall be filed
by the applicant.
23. These regulations apply to technology available at the time of adoption.
24. A small residential system supplying not more than 5 kw is exempt from this chapter. Small wind energy
residential systems must meet accessory structure requirements for the district.
4.55 SPECIAL EVENTS
1. Standards. The following standards shall apply to all temporary special event structures and uses
(including carnivals, circuses, farmer markets, flea markets):
A. Seasonal sales events may be allowed on any lot with a permitted principal building. Seasonal sales
may also be allowed on a vacant lot when providing the minimum setback for buildings, structures
and parking required for the appropriate zoning district. In no case shall the setbacks for buildings,
structures and parking be less than ten feet.
B. If the petitioner is not the owner of the property, the petitioner shall provide written permission of
the owner of the property to allow such an event.
C. Special standards for temporary uses and seasonal or special events.
i. Approval for these types of uses shall be by City Council. The City Council shall consider the
intensity of the proposed use in relation to adjacent land uses and sufficient parking. City
Council may require site improvements, such as fencing, and restrict hours of operation to help
ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses.
ii. The applicant shall provide information establishing a reasonable liability insurance coverage is
carried, as determined by the City’s insurance carrier.
iii. Farmers markets that are to occur on a regular schedule shall be permitted only in districts
zoned commercial or on public land. City Council may extend the time period for the temporary
use permit so that a separate permit is not required for each event within any one calendar
year, provided the number of dates and a schedule are established at the time of application.
iv. A sketch plan shall be provided illustrating, if applicable, any or all of the following:
a. A description of traffic flow and parking management to ensure safe and efficient traffic
operations without creating unreasonable congestion on public streets.
b. Property lines.
c. Adjacent uses and zoning districts.
d. Existing and proposed buildings and structures.
e. Location of any areas for storage such as inventory not being displayed.
f. Parking layout
g. Boundaries of proposed sales areas.
h. The location and size of any proposed signs (off-premise signs shall also be mapped).
v. All equipment, materials, goods, poles, wires, signs and other items associated with the
temporary uses shall be removed from the premises within five days of the end of the event.
Following the five day period, the City shall use the escrow fee to clear such items from the
property.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-31
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
vi. The length of a temporary use or sales event shall not exceed seven days, except that the City
Council may permit sales during October, November or December for up to 60 days.
2. Review and approval standards. Except as otherwise noted above for carnivals, circuses, and similar
events as defined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be reviewed and approved for a temporary use or
seasonal event by the Zoning Administrator. Where appropriate, the Zoning Administrator shall consult
with the Director of Public Safety and Utilities and Infrastructure regarding public safety and traffic
concerns. If the request is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall state the reasons for denial in writing
and provide a copy to the applicant.
A. The proprietor of the temporary use or seasonal event may be required to deposit a cash bond or
similar type of escrow, in an amount established by City Council, prior to the issuance of a permit.
The escrow shall be used by the City to pay the cost of returning the property to its state prior to
commencement of the event or refunded to the proprietor upon compliance with the requirements
of this Chapter and any other applicable ordinances.
B. May need review by other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the proposed temporary
use such as sidewalk cafes, sidewalk sales, or other similar uses.
4.56 DONATION COLLECTION BINS
1. The intent of this section is to facilitate Donation Collection Bins in the city so that they remain, clean,
safe and do not create hazards to pedestrians or to vehicular traffic.
2. Donation Collection Bins are prohibited unless the Donation Collection Bin Operator has first obtained a
Donation Collection Bins Permit Application and Affidavit and Acknowledgment of Owner Giving
Permission to Locate a Donation Collection Bin on Real Property.
A. Donation Bin Collection permits are valid for a one (1) year period and are renewable annually.
B. A maximum of six (6) Donation Collection Bins permits will be issued on an annual basis with
preference given to continuing permit owners in good standing.
C. A maximum of one (1) Donation Collection Bins permit will be issued per Donation Collection Bin
Operator.
3. Donation Collection Bins are allowed in the B-2 Local Business district, B-4 Commercial Business district,
1-1 Research and Technical district and I-2 General Industrial district.
4. Donation Collection Bins shall conform to the following standards:
A. Donation Collection Bins shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural
damage, holes or visible rust and shall be free of graffiti. Donation Collection Bins are required to be
placed on a paved or concrete surface. Bins must be level and stable.
B. Donation Collection Bins shall be locked and be equipped with a secure safety chute so contents
cannot be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents.
C. Donation Collection Bins shall have a 12” x 12” identification plate with the name, mailing address,
email address, website and phone number of the operator, as well as whether the Donation
Collection Bin is owned and operated by a for-profit company or a not-for-profit company. Signage
shall conform to Section 5.1.
D. The Donation Collection Bin Operator and Property Owner shall maintain, or cause to be maintained,
the area surrounding the bins, free from any junk, noxious odor, debris and donated items.
E. Donation Collection Bins shall be located on a parcel where there is a functioning, permitted use.
F. Up to two Donation Collection Bins on a single lot of record are permitted if the two Donation
Collection Bins are side by side and are no more than one foot apart.
G. The total size of a Donation Collection Bin shall not exceed 7 feet in height, five feet in width and
four feet in depth.
H. Donation Collection Bins shall not cause a visual obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any
Donation Collection Bins shall be placed greater than ten feet from: (i) a public or private sidewalk
except that this provision does not apply to a private sidewalk as long as the private sidewalk
maintains a five-foot clearance; (ii) a public right-of-way; (iii) a driveway; or (iv) a side or rear property
line of adjacent property used for residential purposes.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
4-32 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
I. Donation Collection Bins shall not be placed in a designated fire lane or blocking a building entrance
or exit.
5. Upon determination of the Zoning Administrator that a Donation Collection Bin has been placed or is
being maintained in violation of this Chapter, an order to correct the offending condition shall be served
by certified mail on the Donation Collection Bin Operator and Property Owner of the parcel in which the
Donation Collection Bin has been placed. The order shall describe the offending condition and the
actions necessary to correct the condition. The order shall provide that the offending condition be
corrected within three (3) business days after mailing or an appeal from the order with the Zoning Board
of Appeals must be filed, pursuant to Section 7.8.4 Administrative Appeals. If a violation is neither
remedied nor appealed within the given time period set forth by the order, the Zoning Administrator shall
permanently revoke the Donation Collection Bin permit and transmit notification to the Public Works
Superintendent who thereafter shall impound the Donation Collection Bin that has been determined to
be in violation of this Chapter.
6. Unless the Donation Collection Bin and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution,
the owner of a Donation Collection Bin may, within sixty (60) days of impoundment, recover the Donation
Collection Bin and its contents upon payment of an impound fee of $50.00, plus labor for removing the
bin and a storage charge of $1.00 per day that the Donation Collection Bin is in the possession of the
city.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-1
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 5.0
Site Standards
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-2 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 5.0 Site Standards
5.1 Signs
5.2 Accessory Structures and Uses
5.3 Temporary Construction Structures and
Uses
5.4 Swimming Pools, Private or Public
5.5 Frontage on Streets Required
5.6 Location and Number of Permitted
Dwellings on a Lot
5.7 Corner Lot, Side Yard Width to the Side
Street Line
5.8 Unlawful Dwelling
5.9 Compliance with Yard Requirements
5.10 Corner Clearance Area
5.11 Building Grades and Grading of Land
5.12 Protection of Excavations
5.13 Fence, Walls, Hedges, or Similar
Structures
5.14 Parking, Loading, and Access
Management
5.15 Landscaping and Screening Standards
5.16 Sidewalks
5.17 Exterior Lighting
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-3
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.0 Site Standards
5.1 SIGNS
1. Intent. These regulations establish rules and standards for the construction, location, maintenance and
removal of privately-owned signs. Directional, emergency, or traffic-related signs owned by City, county,
state or federal government agencies are not regulated by this Section. The execution of these
regulations recognizes that the purpose of this Chapter is to protect the interest of public health, safety
and welfare and to ensure the maintenance of an attractive physical environment while satisfying the
needs of sign users for adequate identification, communication, and advertising. In order that such
purposes can be achieved, the following objectives shall be applied for this Chapter and any future
additions, deletions and amendments:
A. General. Ensure that signs are located, designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a way that
protects life, health, morals, property and the public welfare;
B. Public Safety. Protect public safety by prohibiting signs that are structurally unsafe or poorly
maintained; that cause unsafe traffic conditions through distraction of motorists, confusion with
traffic signs, or hindrance of vision; and that impede safe movement of pedestrians or safe ingress
and egress from buildings or sites;
C. Protect Aesthetic Quality of Districts and Neighborhoods. Prevent blight and protect aesthetic
qualities by preventing visual clutter and protecting views; preventing intrusion of commercial
messages into non-commercial areas; and eliminating signs and sign structures on unused
commercial properties. Also, to avoid glare, light trespass, and skyglow through selection of fixture
type and location, lighting technology, and control of light levels;
D. Free Speech. Ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected and to
allow signs as a means of communication;
E. Reduce Conflict. Reduce conflict among signs and light and between public and private information
systems;
F. Business Identification. Allow for adequate and effective signage for business identification and
other commercial speech, non-commercial speech, and dissemination of public information,
including but not limited to, public safety information and notification as may be required by law;
G. Foster Economic Development. Ensure that signs are located in a manner that does not cause visual
clutter, blight, and distraction, but rather promotes identification and communication necessary for
sustaining and expanding economic development in the City; and,
H. Recognize Unique Areas. Acknowledge the unique character of certain districts, and establish
special time, place and manner regulations that reflect the unique aesthetic, historical, and/or
cultural characteristics of these areas.
2. General Sign Regulations.
A. General Requirements. The following regulations shall apply, unless otherwise specifically stated in
this Chapter, to all signs erected or located in any zoning district within the City.
i. All signs shall conform to all applicable codes and ordinances of the City and, where required,
shall be approved by the Building Inspector and have a license and permit issued.
ii. Signs not visible from any street, alley or publicly-owned property are exempt from the provisions
of this Chapter and do not require a sign permit.
iii. A sign shall not be placed in, upon or over any public street, public right-of-way, alley or other
publicly-owned land, except as otherwise expressly permitted by this Chapter.
iv. Only signs established and maintained by the City, county, state or federal governments or
expressly permitted by this Chapter shall be permitted in a public street right-of-way, dedicated
public easement or upon publicly-owned land.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-4 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
v. No public or commercial pole, utility pole or other supporting member located in a public right-ofway
shall be used for the placement of any sign unless specifically designed and approved for
the use.
vi. No sign shall be located on or attached to any tree or other natural feature.
vii. A sign shall not be erected in any place where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color or
other characteristic, interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device, obstruct the view of any intersection or entrance to any public street or
alley, or constitute a public nuisance.
viii. No sign shall employ animated or moving parts, except as otherwise permitted in this Section.
ix. No sign shall employ any flashing, moving, oscillating, blinking or variable intensity light; except
as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
x. No sign shall exhibit statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature.
xi. No sign shall emit a sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke or vapor.
xii. All signs with a sign height of greater than two feet shall be set back the lesser of three feet from
a street right-of-way line or 15 feet from any front, side or rear property line unless attached to a
building or permitted within the public street right-of-way.
xiii. Signs affixed to the ground shall not obstruct vision above a height of two feet from the
established street grades within a clear vision zone. A clear vision zone is the triangular area
formed by the intersection of any street right-of-way lines and a point along each right-of-way line
25 feet from the point of the intersection.
xiv. All signs, except directional signs, awning signs, wall signs and window signs, must be set back
15 feet from the intersection of the edge of an access drive and a street right-of-way line.
xv. Signs required by any federal, state or municipal statute or ordinance shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter and shall not be included when calculating sign area.
xvi. Any commercial message lawfully established on a sign may be replaced with a non-commercial
message provided that the regulations of this Chapter are otherwise met.
xvii. Abandoned signs shall be removed or put into service. Removal of such signs shall include
removal of the poles and/or supports. If the property upon which the sign is located is vacant
and the previous use is abandoned, the entire sign (including above-ground base, height, poles,
size, wires, panels and any other element) shall be removed within 30 days of the property
becoming abandoned.
B. Signs Not Requiring a Permit. The following signs shall be permitted without a permit, pursuant to the
applicable regulations in this Section:
i. Address signs.
ii. Banner signs.
iii. Construction signs less than six square feet in area and less than six feet in height.
iv. Directional signs.
a. On premises.
b. Temporary signs.
v. Flag signs.
vi. Incidental signs.
vii. Murals.
viii. Nameplate signs.
ix. Real estate signs.
x. Temporary signs in residential districts.
xi. Water tower signs.
xii. Window signs displayed for less than 90 days.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-5
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
C. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:
i. Balloon signs.
ii. Portable signs, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance.
iii. Roof signs.
iv. Snipe signs.
v. Pennant signs.
vi. Feather and flutter signs.
vii. Any sign which requires a permit and is erected without a permit.
viii. Any sign or sign structure which obstructs the view of, or may be confused with, a traffic
directional/safety sign.
ix. Signs which simulate or imitate in size, color, lettering or design, any traffic sign or signal or any
sign which by design or location may in any manner interfere with, mislead or confuse the public
with respect thereto or obstruct the public view thereof.
x. Any signs not permitted under this Chapter.
D. Measuring Sign Area.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-6 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
i. The sign area shall include the surface area which encloses the extreme limits of sign copy,
together with the frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used
to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding only the
structure necessary to support the sign.
ii. A double faced sign, as defined in this Chapter, shall be considered as having one face and the
area of one face shall be included in computing the sign area.
E. Measuring Sign Height. Sign height shall be the vertical distance measured from the point of ground
immediately beneath the sign to the highest point of the sign, including decorative
embellishments. Where the ground elevation beneath a sign varies, the average grade of the
ground within a five-foot radius of the sign structure shall be used. The average grade shall be the
highest point within said radius plus the lowest point within said radius, divided by two. Any filling,
berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign shall not be included in
the calculation of average grade.
F. Addresses. Address signs shall be visible and legible from the public right-of-way.
G. Illumination of Signs.
i. Where illumination of signs is permitted by this ordinance, three methods of illumination are
permitted:
a. Internal Illumination. Where a sign is internally illuminated, no portion of the surface of the
sign shall be transparent.
b. External Illumination. Where a sign is externally illuminated, the source of illumination shall
be directed downward and shielded from directing glare onto neighboring properties or into
the public right-of-way.
c. Halo Illumination (Backlighting). Where a sign is backlit, forming a halo of light around the
sign copy on the surface behind the sign, the source of illumination shall not be visible from
neighboring properties or the public right-of-way.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-7
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Signs by Type, as Permitted by District.
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
A. R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts
i. Banner 1 24 square feet
6 feet when
not attached to
a building
1 N
ii. Construction signs less
than six square feet in
area and less than six
feet in height
6 square feet 4 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
iii. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height 1
12 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
Y
iv. Directional 1
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
v. Directional, Temporary
Off-Site
4 square feet per
sign 3 feet 1 N
vi. Flag Sign 1 80 square feet
25 feet when
groundmounted
1 N
vii. Incidental 1
6 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
viii. Ground; Changeable
copy permitted 1, 2
32 square feet; no
more than 25%
changeable copy
4 feet. 1 Y
ix. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 N
x. Real Estate 6 square feet 5 feet 1 per frontage N
1 These sign types are permitted for non-residential uses only, except that a ground sign may be permitted at
a subdivision, condominium development, or multiple family residential street entrance.
2 Electronic and animated signs are not permitted in these districts.
B. MFRD and MHPD districts
i. Banner 1 24 square feet
6 feet when
not attached to
a building
1 N
ii. Construction signs less than
six square feet in area and
less than six feet in height
6 square feet 4 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-8 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
B. MFRD and MHPD districts (continued)
iii. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height 1
12 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or
more than 6 sq ft)
Y
iv. Directional 1
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
v. Directional, Temporary
Off-Site
4 square feet per
sign 3 feet 1 N
vi. Flag Sign 1 80 square feet 25 feet when
ground-mounted 1 N
vii. Incidental 1
6 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
viii. Marquee 1
Total 5% of ground
floor wall area
Shall not project
above the eave or
roofline of the
marquee
2 Y
ix. Ground; Changeable
copy permitted for nonresidential
uses 1, 2
32 square feet; no
more than 25%
changeable copy
4 feet 1 Y
x. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 N
xi. Real Estate 6 square feet 5 feet 1 per frontage N
xii. Wall 3
Total 5% of ground
floor wall area, up
to 100 square feet
Shall not project
above the eave or
roofline (1 story
buildings), or the
first floor cornice
or 2nd floor
window sill (multi
story buildings)
1 Y
1 These sign types are permitted for non-residential uses only, except that a ground sign may be permitted at
a subdivision, condominium development, or multiple family residential street entrance, and incidental signs
are permitted for multifamily developments.
2Electronic and animated signs are not permitted in these districts.
3 Wall signs are not permitted for single family residential uses.
C. POSD district
i. Awning 12 Square Feet N/A 1 per awning Y
ii. Banner 32 square feet
6 feet when not
attached to a
building
1 N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-9
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
C. POSD district (continued)
iii. Construction signs less
than six square feet in
area and less than six
feet in height
6 square feet 6 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
iv. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height
32 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
Y
v. Directional
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
vi. Flag Sign 80 square feet
25 feet when
groundmounted
1 N
vii. Incidental
16 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
viii. Marquee
Total 5% of ground
floor wall area
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline of the
marquee
2 Y
ix. Ground; Changeable
copy permitted
32 square feet; no
more than 25%
changeable copy
9 feet 1 per frontage on a
thoroughfare Y
x. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 per tenant N
xi. Real Estate 24 square feet 8 feet 1 per frontage N
xii. Wall
Total 5% of ground
floor wall area, up
to 100 square feet
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline
1 per frontage Y
xiii. Window, Permanent
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area Y
xiv. Window, Temporary
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-10 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
D. B-3 district
i. Awning 12 Square Feet N/A 1 per awning Y
ii. Banner 32 square feet
6 feet when
not attached to
a building
1 N
iii. Construction signs less
than six square feet in
area and less than six
feet in height
6 square feet 6 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
iv. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height
32 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
Y
v. Directional
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
vi. Flag Sign 80 square feet
25 feet when
groundmounted
1 N
vii. Incidental
6 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
viii. Marquee; Changeable
copy permitted with
Planning Commission
approval
Total 25% of
ground floor wall
area
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline of the
marquee
2 Y
ix. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 per tenant N
x. Projecting 6 square feet
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline (1
story
buildings), or
the first floor
cornice or 2nd
floor window
sill (multi story
buildings)
1; or 1 per 8 feet of
frontage for multitenant
buildings
Y
xi. Real Estate 24 square feet 8 feet 1 per frontage N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-11
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
D. B-3 district (continued)
xii. Sandwich Board 12 square feet 4 feet
1 per establishment
or 1 per 20 feet of
frontage in multitenant
buildings
Y
xiii. Wall; Changeable copy
permitted with Planning
Commission approval
Total 25% of
ground floor wall
area, up to 200
square feet;
additional 50% for
side entrance;
additional 100%
for rear entrance
(75% where side
entrance is also
present)
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline (1
story
buildings), or
the first floor
cornice or 2nd
floor window
sill (multi story
buildings)
1 per frontage Y
xiv. Window, Permanent
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area Y
xv. Window, Temporary
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area N
E. B-2 and B-4 districts
i. Awning 12 Square Feet N/A 1 per awning Y
ii. Banner 32 square feet
6 feet when
not attached to
a building
1 N
iii. Construction signs less
than six square feet in
area and less than six
feet in height
6 square feet 6 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
iv. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height
32 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
Y
v. Directional
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-12 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
E. B-2 and B-4 districts (continued)
vi. Flag Signs 80 square feet
25 feet when
groundmounted
1 N
vii. Incidental
16 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
viii. Marquee
Total 25% of
ground floor wall
area
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline of the
marquee
2 Y
ix. Ground; Changeable
copy permitted
48 square feet;
72 square feet for
multi-tenant
centers; 72 total
square feet where
more than one
ground sign is
present; no more
than 25%
changeable copy
9 feet 1 per frontage on a
thoroughfare Y
x. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 per tenant N
xi. Real Estate 24 square feet 8 feet 1 per frontage N
xii. Sandwich Board 12 square feet 4 feet
1 per establishment
or 1 per 20 feet of
frontage in multitenant
buildings
Y
xiii. Wall
Total 25% of
ground floor wall
area, up to 200
square feet
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline
1 Y
xiv. Window, Permanent
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area Y
xv. Window, Temporary
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-13
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Aermit
Required
F. FS district
i. Banner 32 square feet
6 feet when
not attached to
a building
1 N
ii. Construction signs less
than six square feet in
area and less than six
feet in height
6 square feet 6 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
iii. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height
32 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
Y
iv. Directional
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
v. Flag Signs 80 square feet
25 feet when
groundmounted
1 N
vi. Incidental
16 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
vii. Ground; Changeable
copy permitted
48 square feet;
72 square feet for
multi-tenant
centers;
72 total square
feet where more
than one ground
sign is present; no
more than 25%
changeable copy
9 feet 1 per frontage on a
thoroughfare Y
viii. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 per tenant N
ix. Pylon; Changeable copy
permitted
100 square feet;
200 square feet
for multi-tenant
centers; no more
than 25%
changeable copy
30 feet 1 Y
x. Real Estate 24 square feet 8 feet 1 per frontage N
xi. Wall
Total 25% of
ground floor wall
area, up to 200
square feet
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline
1 Y
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-14 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
F. FS district (continued)
xii. Window, Permanent
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area Y
xiii. Window, Temporary
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area N
G. I-1 and I-2 districts
i. Awning 12 Square Feet N/A 1 per awning Y
ii. Banner 32 square feet
6 feet when
not attached to
a building
1 N
iii. Billboard
200 square feet;
up to 25%
changeable copy
20 feet 1 per 1,000 feet of
right-of-way frontage Y
iv. Construction signs less
than six square feet in
area and less than six
feet in height
6 square feet 6 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
v. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height
32 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
Y
vi. Directional
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
vii. Flag Signs 80 square feet
25 feet when
groundmounted
1 N
viii. Incidental
24 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-15
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type AMax. Surface
Display Area AMax. Height ANumber Permit
Required
G. I-1 and I-2 districts (continued)
ix. Marquee
Total 25% of
ground floor wall
area
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline of the
marquee
2 Y
x. Ground; Changeable
copy permitted
48 square feet;
72 square feet for
multi-tenant
buildings;
72 total square
feet where more
than one ground
sign is present; no
more than 25%
changeable copy
9 feet 1 per frontage on a
thoroughfare Y
xi. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 per tenant N
xii. Real Estate 24 square feet 8 feet 1 per frontage N
xiii. Wall
Total 25% of
ground floor wall
area, up to 200
square feet
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline
1 Y
xiv. Window, Permanent
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area Y
xv. Window, Temporary
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area N
H. HCHSD district
i. Awning 12 Square Feet N/A 1 per awning Y
ii. Banner 32 square feet
6 feet when
not attached to
a building
1 N
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-16 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
H. HCHSD district (continued)
iii. Construction signs less
than six square feet in
area and less than six
feet in height
6 square feet 6 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
N
iv. Construction Signs over
6 square feet or 6 feet in
height
32 square feet 8 feet
1 total (either less
than 6 sq ft or more
than 6 sq ft)
Y
v. Directional
4 square feet per
sign 6 feet 5 N
vi. Flag Signs 80 square feet
25 feet when
groundmounted
1 N
vii. Incidental
24 square feet
(total of all signs) 6 feet Limited by total
permitted area N
viii. Marquee
25% of marquee
surface, up to 10
square feet
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline of the
marquee
2 Y
ix. Ground; Changeable
copy permitted
250 sq 􀅌 total of all
signs; no more than
25% changeable
copy for any
11 feet
No limit; total sign
area shall not exceed
250
Y
x. Nameplate
2 square feet per
sign N/A 1 per tenant N
xi. Real Estate 24 square feet 8 feet 1 per frontage N
xii. Wall
Total 5% of ground
floor wall area, up
to 250 sq ft
Shall not
project above
the eave or
roofline
No limit; total sign
area may not exceed
250 sq ft
Y
xiii. Window, Permanent
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area Y
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-17
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.1.3 Signs by Type, as Permitted by District1 (continued)
Sign Type Max. Surface
Display Area Max. Height Number Permit
Required
H. HCHSD district (continued)
xiv. Window, Temporary
Temporary and
permanent window
signs together may
occupy a total of
25% of all ground
floor window area
N/A Limited by total
permitted area N
NOTES TO TABLE:
1. The standards summarized in this table are for reference purposes only. See the standards for each sign
type in this section for full regulations. In the event of inconsistency between this table and the standards
elsewhere in this section, the standards elsewhere shall control.
4. Specific Sign Regulations.
A. Awning Signs. Awning signs are permitted in the B-2, B-3, B-4, POSD, I-1, and I-2 districts, subject to
the following:
i. There shall be no more than one sign per awning.
ii. Sign area shall not exceed 12 square feet.
B. Billboard Signs. Billboard signs are permitted in the I-1 and I-2 districts, subject to the following:
i. Billboard signs shall not exceed 200 square feet per side.
ii. The height of a billboard sign shall not exceed 20 feet.
iii. Billboard signs shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to each other.
iv. Where a billboard sign includes a changeable copy area, such as panels for advertising fuel
prices, said area shall not exceed 25% of the total sign area.
C. Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs are permitted as follows:
i. Any changeable copy area shall be part of a permanent ground or pylon sign, except in the B-3
district, where the Planning Commission may permit changeable copy areas on wall signs and
marquee signs.
ii. The changeable copy sign area of any sign shall not exceed 25% of the sign area.
iii. The changeable copy sign area shall be counted as part of the total sign area allowed.
iv. Changeable copy signs include animated signs and electronic signs with changeable messages,
including fuel price signs. The illumination average of any electronic sign shall be limited to
2,000 nits during daylight hours, and shall be reduced to 250 nits from a half hour before
sunset to a half hour after sunrise. Animated signs shall be subject to the following:
a. Animated signs shall be turned off from midnight to 5:00 a.m.; excluding businesses open
during this time period.
b. No animated sign will be allowed in the same yard that directly abuts or is across the street
from a residential property.
c. The rate of change for an animated sign shall not exceed once per 12 seconds where the
speed limit is less than 45 miles per hour and once per 10 seconds where the speed limit is
45 miles per hour or greater.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-18 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
D. Directional Signs. Directional signs are permitted in all districts subject to the following:
i. Permanent directional signs:
a. The maximum height of an on-premises directional sign shall be six feet.
b. The number of directional signs per parcel shall not exceed five.
c. Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in area.
d. Permanent directional signs are permitted only for non-residential uses.
ii. Off-premises temporary directional signs, including but not limited to directional signs for a real
estate open house, garage/yard sale, or auction sale:
a. The maximum height of a temporary off-premises directional sign shall be three feet.
b. Temporary off-premises directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in area.
Temporary off-premises directional signs shall be permitted to remain on private property
for a maximum of six days.
c. Temporary off-premises directional signs may be placed in the right-of-way, provided they
are at least five feet from the back of curb or the pavement where there is no curb, and that
they are not located in the clear vision triangle of any driveway or roadway. Signs shall be
removed within three days of posting.
E. Flag Signs. Flag signs are permitted in all districts subject to the following:
i. Flag signs shall not exceed 80 square feet.
ii. Flag signs shall be displayed in one of two ways:
a. Affixed to a permanent pole affixed to the ground. Said pole shall not exceed 25 feet in
height.
b. Affixed to a permanent or temporary pole that is attached to a mounting point on the ground
floor exterior wall of a building. Where such a flag sign extends over a sidewalk, there shall
be not less than 8 feet of clearance from the lowest part of the flag to the surface of the
sidewalk.
iii. Flag signs shall be maintained in good condition.
iv. Up to three flag signs are permitted per parcel, provided that in no case shall the total area of all
flag signs exceed 80 square feet.
v. Flag signs are permitted only for non-residential uses.
F. Ground Signs. Ground signs are permitted in all districts except for the B-3 district and HCSD
districts, subject to the following:
i. Ground signs shall have a maximum height of nine feet in non-residential districts and four feet
in residential districts. The area of a ground sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in residential
districts and 48 square feet in non-residential districts. Ground signs for multi-tenant
commercial developments shall be permitted a maximum sign area of 72 square feet.
ii. Ground signs in residential districts shall only be permitted for non-residential uses or to identify
a subdivision, condominium development, or multiple family residential street entrance.
iii. Where a property fronts on two thoroughfares, one ground sign per frontage shall be permitted,
provided that the total area of the ground signs does not exceed 72 square feet.
iv. Ground signs are not permitted where a pylon sign exists on the premises.
v. Ground signs are permitted In the HCHSD district, provided that the total area of all ground
signs may not exceed 250 square feet, and the height of a ground sign may not exceed 11 feet.
There shall be no more than five ground signs in total in the district.
vi. Ground signs are not permitted in the B-3 district.
G. Incidental Signs. Incidental signs are permitted in all districts subject to the following:
i. The total square footage of incidental signs on a property shall not exceed 6 square feet in the R
-1, R-2, R-3, MFRD, MHPD and B-3 districts, 16 square feet in the B-2, B-4, FS, and POSD
districts, or 24 square feet in the I-1, I-2 and HCHSD districts and the HCOD overlay district.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-19
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
ii. The height of any incidental sign shall not exceed six feet, except where an incidental sign is
mounted on a building, fence or other structure, in which case, the sign shall not protrude
beyond the eave or upper edge of the structure.
iii. Incidental signs are not permitted for single-family residential uses.
H. Marquee Signs. Marquee signs are permitted in the MFRD, MHPD, POSD, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2, and
HCHSD districts, subject to the following:
i. A maximum of two sides of a marquee may feature a sign.
ii. The combined size of all signs on a marquee shall not exceed the total maximum allowable
area for a wall sign on the same building.
iii. Marquee signs shall not project more than 12 inches from the mounting surface.
iv. Marquee signs are permitted only for non-residential uses.
v. In the HCHSD district, marquee signs may occupy up to 25% of the vertical surface of the side
of the marquee on which the sign is mounted, or 10 square feet, whichever is less.
I. Murals. Murals are permitted in the B-2, B-3, B-4, and POSD districts, as well as the River District
overlay district.
J. Nameplate Signs. Nameplate signs are permitted in all districts, subject to the following:
i. Nameplate signs shall not exceed two square feet in area.
ii. Nameplate signs shall be mounted on the ground floor of the façade where the primary
entryway is located.
K. Projecting Signs. Projecting signs are permitted in the B-3 district, subject to the following:
i. Number allowed:
a. One sign per building.
b. A building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more than one projecting sign
on street frontage, provided the number of projecting signs does not exceed one for each
eight feet of building frontage.
ii. Locations, size, lighting, and height restrictions:
a. Projecting signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the building or wall.
b. Projecting signs shall not extend above the roof or eave line of a one story building. On
multi-story buildings, projecting signs shall be located below the first floor cornice or
window sill of the second floor window if no cornice is present.
c. Signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of 8 feet from the sidewalk to the bottom of the
sign.
d. Projecting signs shall be mounted a minimum of 4 feet from each building edge or lot line
as defined by a common wall between the businesses.
e. Projecting signs shall not exceed 6 square feet in area.
f. Projecting signs shall not be free swinging, so as to pose a danger to the public during high
winds.
g. Projecting signs shall not be lighted, internally or externally.
h. Where an establishment fronts on two or more streets, a projecting sign shall only be
permitted on the frontage where the main entryway is located.
L. Pylon Signs. Pylon signs are permitted in the FS district, subject to the following:
i. Pylon signs shall have a maximum height of 30 feet.
ii. The area of a pylon sign shall not exceed 100 square feet.
iii. No portion of the sign area shall be within nine feet of the ground.
iv. No portion of the ground support shall exceed a combined width of 36 inches.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-20 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
v. A pylon sign shall not be permitted where a ground signs exists on the premises. The maximum
sign area for a multi-tenant commercial development shall be 200 square feet.
vi. One pylon sign shall be permitted per zoning lot.
M. Temporary Signs.
i. General Requirements:
a. Temporary Off-Premises Directional Signs. See Directional Signs.
b. Temporary Signs in Residential Districts.
(1) Temporary signs shall not exceed three feet in height, except as otherwise permitted by
the Requirements for Specific Types of Temporary Signs.
(2) No temporary sign shall exceed six square feet in area, except as otherwise permitted by
the Requirements for Specific Types of Temporary Signs.
(3) The total area of all temporary signs displayed concurrently on one parcel shall not
exceed 24 square feet.
(4) Temporary signs shall not be placed on the exterior wall of a residential structure or
accessory structure.
c. Temporary Signs in Non-Residential Districts.
(1) Temporary signs shall not exceed six feet in height, except as otherwise permitted by the
Requirements for Specific Types of Temporary Signs.
(2) No temporary sign shall exceed six square feet in area, except as otherwise permitted by
the Requirements for Specific Types of Temporary Signs.
(3) The total area of all temporary signs displayed concurrently on one parcel shall not
exceed 32 square feet.
(4) Temporary signs shall not be placed within the clear vision triangle.
ii. Requirements for Specific Types of Temporary Signs:
a. Banner Signs. Banner signs are permitted in all districts, subject to the following:
(1) No more than five such signs shall be displayed for any given event or purpose.
(2) No more than one such sign shall be displayed concurrently on any property or parcel.
(3) The maximum area of a banner sign is 32 square feet in non-residential districts and 24
square feet in residential districts.
(4) Where a banner sign is not attached to a building, the maximum height of the banner is
6 feet.
(5) Banner signs shall be removed within two days of the conclusion of the advertised
event.
(6) In no event shall a banner sign remain posted for more than 42 days.
(7) No zoning lot shall display a banner sign for greater than 126 days in a calendar year.
(8) Banner signs are not included in the computation of maximum permanent sign area for
a site.
(9) Banner signs are permitted only for non-residential uses.
b. Construction Signs. Construction signs are permitted in all districts, subject to the following:
(1) One construction sign is permitted per site.
(2) Construction signs shall have a maximum height of 8 feet.
(3) Construction signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in size in non-residential districts or
12 square feet in residential districts.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-21
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(4) Construction signs shall not be erected until a building permit is obtained for the project,
if required, or until construction begins, whichever is later.
(5) Construction signs shall be removed when construction is complete or when real estate
signs are erected on the property, whichever occurs first.
(6) Construction signs 6 square feet in area or greater or greater than 6 feet in height shall
require a permit.
(7) Construction signs 6 square feet in area or greater or greater than 6 feet in height are
permitted only for non-residential uses.
c. Reserved.
d. It shall be unlawful to place or display a political or expressive sign on any property Real
Estate Signs. Real estate signs are permitted in all districts, subject to the following:
(1) One real estate sign is permitted per street frontage;
(2) Real estate signs shall not exceed 6 square feet in area in residential districts or 24
square feet in area in non-residential districts. An additional two square feet is permitted
for attachments such as, but not limited to, announcements that the property is sold,
reduced or pending, information regarding the property, or the agent’s name.
(3) Including attachments, the height of a real estate sign shall not exceed 5 feet in a
residential district or 8 feet in a non-residential district.
(4) One temporary real estate "open house" sign may be located on the premises being
sold. Temporary real estate open house signs shall be erected no more than ten days
prior to the day(s) of the open house and shall be removed within one day after the open
house.
(5) Real estate signs shall be removed within 5 days of completion of the sale, signing of a
lease agreement or other similar action, as determined by the City.
e. Sandwich Board Signs. Sandwich board signs are permitted in the B-2, B-3, and B-4 and
HCHSD districts, subject to the following:
(1) One sandwich board sign shall be permitted per business in a building, provided that the
spacing standards below are met.
(2) Sandwich board signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area per side.
(3) The height of a sandwich board sign shall not exceed 4 feet.
(4) The width of a sandwich board sign shall not exceed 3 feet.
(5) Sandwich board signs shall not be illuminated.
(6) Sandwich board signs shall be located a minimum of three feet from the back of curb of
the adjacent street or maneuvering lane. A pedestrian lane a minimum of four feet wide
shall separate the sign from the building.
(7) Sandwich board signs shall not be moored or anchored to any object, but shall be
designed or weighted to prevent instability or movement by wind or other natural forces.
(8) Sandwich board signs shall be placed as near to the entryway of the promoted
establishment as possible, and not further than ten horizontal feet from the center of
the entryway, as measured along the building façade.
(9) No sandwich board sign shall be placed less than 20 feet from another sandwich board
sign.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-22 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(10) Sandwich board signs shall be permitted only during operating business hours or from
the hours of 8:00am to 10:00pm, whichever is less, and must be stored inside when
the establishment is not open to the general public.
(11) Sandwich board signs shall not include moving parts or attachments, including, but not
limited to, balloons, pinwheels, streamers, pennants, flags, or similar adornments.
(12) Sandwich board signs must be professionally constructed of weather-proof, durable
material, and kept in good repair.
N. Wall Signs. Wall signs are permitted in the MFRD, MHPD, B-2, B-3, B-4, POSD, FS, I-1, I-2, and
HCHSD districts, subject to the following:
i. Wall signs shall not project outward from the surface of the wall more than 12 inches. No sign
attached to the wall of a building shall be erected so as to extend above the top of the wall or
beyond the edge of the wall of the building to which it is attached.
ii. Each property is permitted one or more wall signs and/or marquee signs. Total sign area:
a. Shall not be greater than the maximum sign area permitted for the property;
b. Shall not be more than 5% of the ground floor wall area of the wall to which it is attached for
buildings in the MFRD, MHPD, and POSD districts and the HCOD overlay district.
c. Shall not be more than 10% of the ground floor wall area of the wall to which it is attached
for buildings in the HCHSD district, up to a maximum of 250 square feet for all walls.
d. Shall not be more than 25% of the ground floor wall area of the wall to which it is attached
for buildings in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2 and FS districts. In a commercial development
with more than one tenant, the total sign area of all wall signs and/or marquee signs may
exceed 25%, provided that no sign for any tenant shall exceed 25% of that tenant’s ground
floor store frontage.
iii. In the B-3 zoning district, a public side entrance(s) shall be entitled to an additional 50% of sign
area on that side of the building.
iv. A public rear entrance(s) in the B-3 zoning district shall be entitled to an additional 100% of sign
area on the rear of the building unless the premises also has a public side entrance(s) in which
event the rear shall be limited to an additional 75% of sign area.
v. Wall signs are not permitted for single-family residential uses.
O. Water Tower Signs. Water tower signs are permitted on any water tower.
5.1.4.N Maximum Wall Sign Area
R1, R2,
R3
MFRD,
MHPD POSD B-3 B-2, B-4,
FS I-1, I-2 HCHSD
Maximum
wall sign
area
NA 100 sq. ft. 100 sq. ft. 200 sq. ft.
200 sq.
ft.
200 sq. ft. 250 sq. ft.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-23
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
P. Window Signs. Window signs are permitted in the B-2, B-3, B-4, POSD, FS, I-1, I-2, and HCHSD
districts, subject to the following:
i. The total area of all window signs shall not exceed 25% of all ground floor window area.
ii. No window sign shall exceed the maximum sign area square footage permitted on the property.
iii. Window signs include all signage positioned near or applied to a window and visible from the
public right-of-way or property line, including, but not limited to, signs painted directly onto the
window pane, decals, static clings, and posters placed in a window. Sign area shall be calculated
to the fullest extent of the limits of sign copy, regardless of the opacity of the window sign. Open/
closed signs placed in a window shall be considered incidental signs and shall not require a
permit. However, they shall be included in the total area of all window signs.
iv. Window signs intended to be displayed for a period of greater than 90 days shall require a
permit.
5. District-Specific Regulations.
A. R1, R2, R-3, MFRD, MHPD, B-3. Home occupations located in single family dwelling units shall be
permitted a single nameplate sign, to be affixed on the ground floor of the street-facing façade. No
other signs shall be permitted for any single family dwelling unit. Home occupations located in
attached or multi-family dwelling units are not permitted a sign.
B. River District Overlay. Live/work units shall be permitted a single nameplate sign.
6. Signs Permitted Subject to Special Conditions.
A. The Planning Commission may, through granting a special use sign permit, approve signs that exceed
the number, sign area or height permitted by the other provisions of this Chapter for sites that exceed
two acres in area and have more than 200 feet of public street frontage, provided the applicant
furnishes the surveys, site plans and other information as may be reasonably required by the
Commission for proper consideration of the matter.
B. The Planning Commission shall notify all parties having an interest in property within 300 feet of the
affected site of the time and place of any hearing or meeting which may be held relative to the
application.
C. The Commission may impose such conditions or limitations granting approval as may, in its
judgment, be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this Chapter.
D. In reviewing the application, the Commission shall consider the following standards as a basis for
establishing size, setback and placement of signs:
i. Visibility of vehicular and pedestrian traffic off-site and at the site, visibility and legibility of signs
for drivers and/or pedestrians and the impact upon the visibility of traffic signals or regulatory
devices in the public street right-of-way.
ii. Negative impact of proposed signs upon adjacent properties and their signage and the impact of
lighting and appearance of signs upon nearby residential zoned property.
iii. Particular site characteristics such as yard areas, landscaping, topography, location of buildings,
site use and number of street frontages.
7. Non-Conforming Signs.
A. A sign lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this Chapter or any applicable amendment thereto
which does not meet the standards of this Chapter may be continued as a legal non-conforming sign,
except as hereinafter provided. A legal non-conforming sign shall not:
i. Be substantially altered in content unless the use to which it applies remains the same after the
change in the words or symbols;
ii. Be substantially altered in structure so as to change the shape, size, location, type or design of
the sign; or
iii. Be reestablished or continued after the activity, business or use to which it applied has been
discontinued for 180 days or longer.
iv. “Substantially altered” does not refer to normal maintenance, such as painting, or a change in
message panels.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-24 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
v. A non-conforming sign may remain as long as the sign is properly maintained and is not
detrimental to health, safety, and welfare. If damaged beyond normal maintenance, the sign
shall not be repaired/replaced except in conformity.
B. If the owner of the premises on which a sign is located changes the use of the premises, or changes
the location of a property line or sign so that a sign is rendered non-conforming, the sign must be
removed or made to conform to the provisions of this Chapter.
8. Administration and Enforcement.
A. Enforcement.
i. The sign provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building
Inspector(s) or their designee.
ii. The Building Inspector(s) or their designee may enter at any reasonable time upon the premises
where any sign is located. All sign violations shall be considered civil infractions. No criminal
penalty shall be attached for violations except where a police officer has actually observed a
criminal violation being committed.
B. Permits. No person shall erect, place, relocate, alter or add to any sign for which a permit is required
without obtaining a permit.
C. Plans and Specifications. No person shall erect or alter any sign, except in accordance with the plans
and specifications approved by the Building Inspector.
D. Application and Permit Fee. Application for sign permits shall show the name and address of the
owner of the sign and the person responsible therefore and the location, type, sign height and sign
area of the sign and shall contain a drawing or other rendering of the proposed sign. The application
and permit fee shall be filed with the Building Inspector for investigation. If the Inspector finds that
the sign conforms to all provisions of this Chapter a permit shall be issued. The Inspector shall make
a finding within ten business days of filing the application or within 30 calendar days of the filing of
the application if the code official requires an interpretation or the application shall be deemed
approved as submitted.
E. Fees. The fee for sign permits shall be as adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of
the City Council.
F. Inspection.
i. After being erected, each sign for which a permit is required, shall be approved and inspected by
the Building Inspector for zoning compliance.
ii. If, upon any inspection by the Building Inspector, a sign is found to be unsafe or in a condition
that does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the Building Inspector shall give notice
of the condition to the owner or the person responsible. Within 30 days thereafter, the
necessary repairs shall be made in order to bring the sign into compliance with this Chapter.
iii. If the Inspector finds a sign to be in such an unsafe condition that immediate repairs or the
removal thereof are required, the Building Inspector shall take such precautions as may be
necessary to protect the safety of the public in the use of the streets the cost of which shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
G. Maintenance.
i. Signs, including the face, framing and all supports thereof, shall be kept and maintained in a
safe condition, shall be adequately protected against corrosion and shall conform to all the
provisions of this Chapter.
ii. Signs which are broken, torn, bent or whose supports are broken, bent or damaged, and signs
that are not reasonably level and plumb shall be repaired and installed in a manner prescribed
by the Enforcement Officer and / or Building Official, but in no case shall repair requirements
exceed building code requirements and the original condition of the sign and/or its supports.
iii. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and
electrical codes, and in conformance with this Code. Failure to comply with this Section may
result in action by the Enforcement Officer or Building Official to rescind the permit with
subsequent removal of the entire structure.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-25
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
iv. A sign shall have no more than 20 percent of its surface area covered with disfigured, cracked,
ripped or peeling paint, poster paper or other material for a period of more than 30 successive
days.
v. A sign shall not stand with bent or broken sign facing, with broken supports, with loose
appendages or struts, or more than 15 degrees from vertical for a period of more than 30
successive days, unless determined by the Building Official to pose a safety hazard, in which
case immediate action may be required.
vi. A sign shall not have weeds, trees, vines, or other vegetation growing upon it, or obscuring the
view of the sign from the public right-of-way from which it is to be viewed, for a period of more
than 30 successive days.
vii. An internally illuminated sign shall not be allowed to stand with only partial illumination for a
period of more than 30 successive days.
H. Nuisance. Any sign erected or displayed without a permit or any sign which does not comply with the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a hazard to the safety of the public and is declared to be
a public nuisance and may be abated by removal without notice.
I. Signs Within Fire Limits. No person shall erect a lighted or mechanical sign within the fire limits of
the City unless the sign and supports therefore be entirely constructed of fire-resistant materials and
complies with the provisions of the City’s Fire Code.
J. Obstruction Hazard. No person shall erect, display or maintain any sign which obstructs any fire
escape, building entrance or public passage, or at a horizontal distance of less than ten feet from
any fire hydrant or traffic light.
K. Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Inspector in connection with the enforcement of this Section. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also
have the power to authorize a variance from the strict application of this Section where the strict
application would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to the person owing or having
the beneficial use of the property. The relief may be granted provided it is without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this
Section. In considering applications, the Board shall follow the procedures contained in Section 7.8
of the Zoning Ordinance.
5.2 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
Accessory structures, except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter, shall be subject to the following:
1. General standards. Accessory structures and uses are permitted only in connection with, incidental to
and on the same lot with a principal building within the same zoning district.
A. No accessory structure or use shall be placed upon, occupied or utilized on a lot unless the principal
building is occupied or utilized except as provided for in this Chapter. No accessory structure shall
be constructed upon or moved to any parcel of property until a principal building is under
construction for which a building permit has been issued.
B. Where an accessory structure, such as a porch, deck or garage, is attached to a principal building
the accessory structure shall be subject to and comply with all regulations of this Chapter applicable
to the principal building such as Section 3.1. and this Section.
C. Such accessory structure shall not be utilized as a separate housekeeping unit or as a place of
business except as allowed under Section 4.4.
2. In a residential district an accessory structure shall comply with the following:
A. In no instance shall an accessory structure exceed a maximum of 30% of the required rear yard, plus
40% of any non-required rear yard.
B. In no instance shall an accessory structure exceed the ground floor area of the principal building.
C. In no instance shall all the principal building and accessory structures square footages combined,
exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed under Section 3.1 for the district in which the structure is
located.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-26 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. No detached accessory structure in a residential, multiple-family, commercial, or industrial district shall
exceed 15 feet in height, except as follows:
A. A detached accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height on those properties
occupied with two-story dwellings and where 50% of all properties within 200 feet of such property
are occupied with two-story dwellings.
B. In an industrial district, an accessory structure may not exceed two stories or 25 feet unless
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
4. An accessory structure having a two foot overhang shall be subject to the following:
A. Shall not be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or public street right-of-way
measured from the foundation. In the case of an easement, the easement shall become the setback
for the accessory structure and in no instance shall any part of the accessory structure project into
the easement.
B. Be located closer than ten feet to any principal building measured from the foundation.
C. The side and rear yard setback shall be increased one foot for every one foot of overhang beyond two
feet.
D. No accessory building shall be located in an easement.
5. A detached accessory structure in a residential district less than 200 square feet and does not have a
permanent foundation, may be located one foot from any lot line, except for a front yard setback.
6. No accessory structure may be closer than four feet to any other accessory structure except for an
accessory structure that complies with subsection 5 of this Section.
7. Accessory structures shall be erected in a rear yard, except an accessory structure may be allowed in a
non-required side yard, when set back a minimum of 75 feet from the front lot line and meets the side
yard setback for the district in which it is located as specified in Section 3.1.
8. No accessory building, structure or use shall be erected in any yard with public street right-of-way
frontage, including all such sides of a corner lot.
9. In no instance shall such an accessory structure be nearer than five feet to any adjoining lot line, except
that on a corner lot the entrance to a garage shall not be less than eight feet from the lot line adjacent to
the side street, except as otherwise permitted herein.
10. In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both
street frontages wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on such streets in the same block or
adjacent blocks.
11. In the case of an accessory building located in the rear yard on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the required front yard setback of the lot to its rear, such accessory
building shall be set back from the street side at least as far as the required front yard setback of the lot
at the rear of the subject corner lot.
12. Additional standards. The following additional standards shall apply to attached garages, accessory
mechanical equipment, and flagpoles:
A. Attached garages. Accessory garages structurally attached to a principal dwelling in any residential
district shall meet the requirement of Section 3.1 for principal building in the district in which it is
located.
B. Attached garages of fireproof construction may be erected to extend beyond the established building
line for the dwelling in those areas which are being developed according to a common plan that
includes the construction of attached garages in this configuration.
C. Residential mechanical equipment - of four tons or less may be located within three feet of a side or
rear lot line, in no instance shall such equipment be located in a front yard or front yard setback.
D. Commercial or industrial mechanical equipment - such as blowers, ventilating fans, exhaust fans,
and air conditioning units greater than four tons located adjacent to a residential district shall be
placed such that they will not have an adverse impact on the residential use due to noise and odors.
An exhaust hood outlet for food service establishments shall not vent towards any adjacent
residential use or district.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-27
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
E. Flagpoles. Flagpoles on the building or on the ground shall not exceed the maximum height allowed
in the zoning district. Flagpoles shall be set back a minimum distance from all lot lines ten feet or
the maximum extension of the largest flag intended to be displayed on the pole, whichever is
greater. Flags may be illuminated, provided the source of illumination shall be designed, arranged,
and shielded to prevent glare onto adjacent properties, telescopes, and adverse affects on motorist
visibility on adjacent rights-of-way.
F. Egress window wells. Egress window wells required for emergency egress from a basement shall
maintain a minimum of three feet to a side lot line and may be allowed to project into a front yard
setback no more than five feet.
13. Accessory structures and uses in non-residential districts. In non-residential zoning districts, accessory
structures and uses such as parking attendant, guard shelters, gate houses, and transformer buildings
may be located in the front or side yard of industrial districts and may occupy any of the ground area that
the principal building is permitted to cover or as otherwise allowed under this Chapter.
5.3 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION STRUCTURES AND USES
The following standards shall apply to all structures used for construction purposes on a development site:
1. A zoning permit for such structure shall be required, prior to installation.
2. No temporary structure shall be used as a dwelling unit.
3. The placement of temporary structures shall be in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter.
4. Temporary structures may only be used for the storage of construction materials, tools, supplies and
equipment, for construction management and supervision offices, and for temporary on-site sanitation,
solid waste or fuel facilities related to construction activity on the same lot.
5. Temporary structures shall be removed from the lot within 15 days after an occupancy permit is issued
by the City for the permanent structure on such lot, or within 15 days after the expiration of a building
permit issued for construction on such lot.
5.4 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE OR PUBLIC
Private or public outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs, and similar facilities constructed in, on, or above the
ground shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts subject to those requirements in Section
5.2, and shall comply with all applicable provisions of the State Construction Code for pools and hot tubs and
any other governmental agencies having jurisdiction.
5.5 FRONTAGE ON STREETS REQUIRED.
No dwelling unit shall be built, moved or converted upon a lot having a frontage of less than 20 feet upon a
public street that has been certified for maintenance by the City, or upon an approved private street or other
permanent easement giving access to a public street.
1. No zoning permit shall be issued for any new construction or building additions located on any lot in the
City that does not abut on a public street or highway or have access to a public street or highway.
2. All access to a public street or upon a private street or other permanent easement giving access to a
public street shall be hard surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material, and shall meet the
standards of Section 5.14.
5.6 LOCATION AND NUMBER OF PERMITTED DWELLINGS ON A LOT.
No residential dwelling shall be erected upon the rear of a lot. Principal buildings in the R-1, R-2, and R-3
districts shall be set back no further than the average front setback of 50% of existing buildings upon the
same block on the same side of the street, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. No lot occupied by a
dwelling in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 district may contain more than one principal building or use, unless otherwise
provided by this Chapter.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-28 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.7 CORNER LOT, SIDE YARD WIDTH TO THE SIDE STREET LINE.
The minimum side yard setback for a principal building to the side street lot line of a corner lot shall equal the
minimum front yard setback depth required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. In no case shall
the side yard width be less than the greatest side yard setback allowed under the schedule of regulations.
5.8 UNLAWFUL DWELLINGS.
The use of any portion of the basement of a partially completed building, or any garage or accessory building
for dwelling or sleeping purposes in any zoning district shall be prohibited unless otherwise allowed by this
Chapter. No dwelling unit shall be erected in an industrial district. However, the sleeping quarters of a
watchman or a caretaker may be permitted in an industrial district in conformity with the specific
requirements of the particular district.
5.9 COMPLIANCE WITH YARD REQUIREMENTS.
In determining compliance with the minimum open space requirements of this Chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall include any adjacent area of land owned by the developer that lies within an easement for
a City or county drain. If the development parcel is bisected by a drain, the Zoning Administrator shall include
the entire easement area, provided that such surface area shall not be utilized for permanent structures or
improvements. Areas lying within a drain easement shall not account for more than 20% of the total required
open space.
1. No perimeter yard or other open space required for one building to comply with provisions of this Chapter
shall be used to provide a required yard or open space for any other building.
2. No lot, adjacent lots in common ownership, required yard, parking area or other required open space
shall be created, divided or reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements of this
Chapter. Existing nonconforming lots of record shall not be divided or reduced in dimensions or area so
as to increase its noncompliance with the Chapter.
3. In any residential district, the front and rear yard requirements of a double frontage lot shall be the same
as prescribed for any other lot in the zoning district.
5.10 CORNER CLEARANCE AREA.
1. No structure, fence, wall, hedge, planting, tree or other obstruction to vision shall exceed two feet in
height from grade within a triangular section of land on that part of a corner lot formed by the two street
right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of such street rightof-
way lines. This standard shall not apply to the B-3 (Neighborhood Commercial) district. The Planning
Commission may grant an exception to the height requirement of no more than one foot upon finding
that pedestrian and vehicle safety has not been compromised.
2. In any district branches of trees within such areas shall be trimmed to not less than six feet above the
finish grade except for those branches overhanging into the City right-of-way shall be not less than ten
feet above finish grade.
5.11 BUILDING GRADES AND GRADING OF LAND.
A minimum sloping grade of one foot above the street level, or other grade as established by the City, shall be
required of all buildings having a front yard.
1. No premises shall be filled or grades established so as to discharge the surface runoff on abutting
property in such a manner that will cause inconvenience or damage to adjacent properties.
2. The grade at any lot boundary shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the Michigan
Building Code as amended and subject to inspection and approval.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-29
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.12 PROTECTION OF EXCAVATIONS.
The construction, maintenance or existence within the City of any unprotected, un-barricaded, open or
dangerous excavations, holes, pits or wells that are reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to the
public health, safety or welfare shall be prohibited. This Section shall not prevent any excavation under a
permit issued pursuant to this Chapter or the State Construction Code enforced by the City, where such
excavation is properly protected, warning signs are properly posted, and construction is progressing in a
timely manner.
5.13 FENCE, WALLS, HEDGES OR SIMILAR PLANTINGS, OR STRUCTURES.
Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any yard, or along the edge of any yard, subject to the
following:
1. Maximum height. In a residential district, the height of fences and walls shall not exceed six feet in
height in any side or rear yard. In all districts no fence, wall, planting, or hedge shall be over four feet
along a property line in a front yard or front yard setback.
A. Fences, walls, and hedges within corner visibility areas shall be further regulated by Section 5.10
unless otherwise allowed for in this Chapter.
B. In an industrial district, a fence may be permitted up to eight feet in height along the side or rear lot
line.
C. A maximum of one additional foot for barbed wire is allowed in an industrial district with the yes
facing inside of the lot line.
D. Barbed wire or any other material deemed hazardous shall be prohibited in a residential district.
2. Obstructions prohibited. No fence shall be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct the vision
of motorists exiting driveways. No fence or wall shall be erected within any public right-of-way.
3. Orientation. A finished side of a fence in any yard shall face outwards away from the property on which
they are placed.
4. Exemptions. Electronic fences (such as those used to contain animals) buried beneath the ground shall
not be regulated by this Section or a temporary fence to enclose a garden located in a rear yard only.
5. Trees, shrubs, flowers or plants shall be permitted in any front, side, or rear yard, in conformance with
subsection 1 of this Section or as regulated by Section 5.10.
6. Other specified structures. Walls, driveways, arbors, curbs, retaining walls, mailboxes, name plates, lamp
posts, bird baths, and structures of a like nature shall be permitted in any front, side or rear yard
provided they do not exceed the height allowed in subsection 1 of this Section for front yard fences or
Section 5.10.
7. Other standards. The following additional standards shall apply to all fences, walls, and hedges in any
zoning district:
A. Fences may be placed up to a lot line. No parts of any fences, including foundations, may extend
beyond any lot line unless agreed to in writing by the owner of the adjacent property.
B. If a fence exists in the rear or side yard of an adjacent lot, only one other fence may be placed along
the adjoining boundaries of such adjacent lot. Areas between abutting fences must be maintained
in accordance with this Chapter and the City’s Code of Ordinances.
C. No chain link fence, wire fence, or wire shall be erected in any front yard within a residential district,
unless enclosing a retention pond approved by the Planning Commission.
D. The use of electric current or charge on any fence or part thereof is prohibited.
E. Orange plastic fencing, snow fencing, cyclone fencing, silt fencing, or similar type fencing shall be
prohibited in a residential district unless required during construction to comply with other
governmental agencies or regulations or to enclose a garden and removed upon completing of said
project and for gardens by November 1st of the current year.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-30 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
F. A decorative entry fence of six feet in height, including a light fixture or decorative object is allowed
for a distance of six feet in any direction that gradually slopes to a height of four feet or less, in a
front yard or front yard setback, erected parallel to the property line that abuts a residential walkway
leading up to an entry of a residential building or driveway and complies with Section 5.10 and does
not constitute a traffic hazard.
5.14 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS MANAGEMENT
1. Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the parking, loading, and access of automotive
vehicles in all zoning districts. The number of automobiles presently used in the City by both residents
and visitors, and the probability of future increases make these regulations necessary for public safety,
health, and convenience purposes to ensure that the public streets are preserved primarily for the
movement of vehicles. This subchapter is intended to provide for an appropriate ration of parking and
loading standards to floor space, while minimizing the amount of impervious surface to lessen the
generation of stormwater runoff.
2. Scope. With the exception of areas designated on the official zoning map as being parking exempt, there
shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure,
off-street automobile parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number and character of offstreet
parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to occupancy,
as hereinafter prescribed.
3. Deferment of Required Parking Spaces.
A. The Planning Commission, without proof of unnecessary hardship, may defer the requirements of
this subchapter upon determination from the evidence presented by the property owner that the
intended use will not require parking or loading facilities to the degree required by this subchapter.
The proposed site plan shall show the location and layout of the deferred parking area which shall
remain undeveloped to permit construction of the required parking should the use of the building
change or a change in circumstances indicate that additional parking is required. At that time, a new
site plan shall be submitted pursuant to Section 6.3.2.
B. In addition, the property owner shall sign a development agreement which shall be recorded with the
deed binding on future owners that the open space is retained for future parking and shall not be
developed or sold for development except in conformance with the approved site plan.
C. If a new site plan is submitted to develop the area reserved for deferred parking, the Planning
Commission must evaluate the impact of the new development on existing parking when considering
the new site plan. The Planning Commission may consider the reductions in parking requirements
provided for in Section 5.14.4.C.
4. General Regulations. The following regulations shall apply in all zoning districts.
A. Location of spaces. Off-street parking for other than single-family or two-family residential uses shall
be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the
nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be
shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant during site plan review. The
property owners shall execute an agreement authorizing the use of off-site parking spaces. The
applicant shall provide notice to the City a minimum of 30 days prior to an agreement being
rescinded or modified and a new agreement or site plan in compliance with Section 6.3.2 shall be
submitted for review and approval by the City.
B. Irrevocable use of spaces. All required off-street parking spaces shall be stated in an application for
site plan review and shall be reserved irrevocably for such use, unless otherwise provided in this
Chapter. Minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be displaced by any other use unless
equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere, or the parking requirements of the site change.
C. Reduction of space area. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Chapter in
connection with the operation of an existing use shall not be reduced to an amount less than that
required for a similar new use except as allowed under Section 5.14.3.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-31
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
D. Collective use of spaces. The City recognizes that different types of uses may have different peak
usage times. Therefore, two (2) or more non-residential buildings or uses may collectively provide the
required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking space for the uses
calculated individually may be reduced for the following:
i. Reduction in required spaces.
a. Non-Residential Buildings or Uses. Where peak operating hours do not overlap or patrons
can access more than one use from the parking lot, the Planning Commission may grant a
reduction in the required number of spaces of up to 25% or
b. Institutional uses. Institutional uses shall be permitted to provide for up to 75% of required
off-street parking through the shared use of off-site parking spaces accessory to another
institutional use or other non-residential use with non-overlapping peak operating hours.
Such off-site spaces shall be located within 500 feet of a primary public entrance, as
measured along lines of public access.
ii. Agreement. A signed agreement between all parties concerned shall be provided to the City for
the collective use of parking spaces.
iii. Municipal and community parking areas. The provisions of this subchapter may be met by
participation in a municipal or community parking program designed to serve a larger area,
provided plans for such community parking have been approved by the Planning Commission.
E. Similar use. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking
facilities shall be in accordance with a similar listed use, as determined by the Planning Commission.
F. Screening. Off-street parking areas shall be effectively landscaped, and screened on any side which
adjoins or faces a residential district or street right-of-way, per Section 5.15.8.B.
G. Setbacks. No part of any off-street parking area shall be closer than ten feet to any street right-ofway
line or the lot boundary of any residential, school, hospital, or other institutional use.
H. The number of required off-street parking spaces for new uses or buildings and additions to existing
buildings shall be determined in accordance with the schedule set forth in the Section 5.14.5.D
Schedule of minimum required parking by use. Parking requirements listed in Section 5.14.5.D
Schedule of minimum required parking by use shall not include off-street stacking spaces for drivethrough
facilities as set forth in Section 5.14.7 or loading spaces as set for in Section 5.14.9.
I. Prohibited activities. The storage of merchandise, refuse storage and receptacles, or other materials,
and the storage or repair of unregistered or unlicensed vehicles or inoperable vehicles or other
machinery shall be prohibited in areas serving as parking spaces. No repairs, service or display of
vehicles for purposes of sale shall be permitted, and no motor vehicle shall be parked or stored for
longer than 48 hours within a parking lot unless otherwise permitted by law.
5. Minimum Number of Spaces Required. The following standards shall apply to the determination of the
required minimum and maximum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use in all zoning districts:
A. Fractional units. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces
result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall
be disregarded and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one parking space.
B. Maximum number of spaces permitted. To minimize excessive areas of pavement that contribute to
higher rates of stormwater runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space requirements of this
Section by more than 20% shall be prohibited. The Planning Commission may waive this provision to
allow additional parking spaces upon determining that such parking is necessary, based on
documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day.
C. Units of measurement. The usable floor area (UFA) shall be used to determine the required number
of off-street parking and loading spaces, unless otherwise noted.
i. Usable floor area (UFA) shall apply to all internal building areas excluding the floor area used for
incidental service, storage, mechanical equipment rooms, heating/cooling systems, lavatories,
and similar uses, and other areas not intended for use by the general public. Where these areas
are not yet defined, leasable floor area shall be considered to be 85% of the gross floor area .
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-32 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
ii. Where the number of spaces required is based on the number of employees, calculations shall
be based upon the maximum number of anticipated employees during the peak shift. An
employee for the purposes of meeting the requirements of this Section shall include hourly,
salaried, and contracted workers.
D. Schedule of minimum required parking by use. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by
type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule:
5.14.5.D Schedule of Minimum Required Parking by Use
Use Minimum Spaces Required
A. Residential
i. Re sidential, one family and two family Two per dwelling unit
ii. M ultiple-family residential
One and one-half per efficiency or one-bedroom
dwelling unit, plus two per unit with two or more
bedrooms
iii. Be d and breakfast inn One per sleeping room permitted within the principal
dwelling
iv. M anufactured housing parks Two per manufactured home site
v. Ho using for the elderly One per two units, plus one per employee
B. Institutional
i. Pl ace of worship One (1) for each four (4) fixed seats or each eight (8)
feet of pews or benches
ii. Go vernment offices One space per 850 square feet of usable floor area
iii. Ho spitals One per bed, plus one per employee on duty based
upon maximum employment shift
iv. Ho mes for the aged and convalescent
homes
One (1) per three (3) beds or two (2) rooms, whichever
is less, plus one per employee on duty based upon
maximum employment shift
v. Lib raries, museums and noncommercial
art galleries One (1) per 250 square feet of usable floor area.
viii.
Elementary and middle schools, senior
high schools, trade schools, colleges and
universities
One (1) per four (4) persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load as established by the
building code
ix. Private clubs or lodge halls
One for each three persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy as established by the building
code
x. Public recreation centers Five (5) per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-33
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.14.5.D Schedule of Minimum Required Parking by Use (continued)
Use Minimum Spaces Required
C. Business and Commercial
i.
Retail use or service establishment
except as otherwise specified herein
One for each 200 square feet of usable floor area, plus
required stacking spaces where drive-thru lanes are
present*
ii. Sh opping centers One per 200 square feet of usable floor area.
iii. Su permarket One per 175 square feet of usable floor area
iv. Be auty parlor or barber shop
Three spaces per of the first two beauty or barber
chairs, plus one space per additional chair
v.
Personal health and beauty service
establishment, including therapeutic
massage, tanning beds, personal fitness
One per 200 square feet of usable floor area
vi. Au tomobile wash (automatic)
One (1) for each employee based upon maximum shift,
plus required stacking and drying spaces*.
vii. Au tomobile wash (self-service or coin
operated)
One (1) for each five (5) stalls, plus required stacking
and drying spaces*.
viii. Au tomotive fueling stations with or
without convenience store
One per on-duty employee based upon maximum
employment shift, plus one per fueling location.
Additional parking shall be provided for any accessory
retail use as required for such use.
ix. Au tomotive service and repair stations
with or without fueling stations
Two per lubrication stall, rack, pit, or service bay; and
one per employee based on the largest shift. Additional
parking shall be provided floor any accessory retail use
as required for such use.
x. Dr y cleaners
One per 500 square feet of usable floor area, plus
required stacking spaces where drive-thru lanes are
present*
xi.
Furniture and appliance, household
equipment, repair shops, showroom of a
plumber, decorator, electrician, or
similar trade, shoe repair and other
similar uses
One per 800 square feet of usable floor area and one
per employee
xii. La undromats and coin-operated dry
cleaners One for each four washing or dry-cleaning machines
xiii. M ortuary establishments and funeral
homes
One per four persons allowed within the maximum
occupancy load as established by the building code
xiv. M otel, hotel or other commercial lodging
establishments
One per occupancy unit, plus one for per employee,
plus parking for restaurants and cocktail lounges,
ballrooms or meeting rooms as required by such use
* See Section 5.14.7.M. for stacking space requirements
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-34 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.14.5 Off-Street Parking Spaces (continued)
Use Minimum Spaces Required
C. Business and Commercial (continued)
xv. Motor vehicle sales and service
establishments
One per 200 square feet of usable floor area of sales
room and one per one service stall in the service room
xvi. Nursery school, day nurseries, or child
day care centers
One for every 5 children of licensed, authorized
capacity, plus one for every 4 employees
xvii. O pen air business establishments One per 500 square feet of lot area for retail sales and
retail uses
xviii.
Recreational vehicle sales and service
establishments, trailer sales and rentals,
boat showrooms
One per 400 square feet of usable floor area of the
sales room
xix. Restaurants, carry-out only
One per 150 square feet of usable floor area, with a
minimum of six parking spaces, plus required drivethru
stacking spaces*
xx. Restaurants, fast-food One per 85 square feet of usable floor area, plus
required drive-thru stacking spaces*
xxi.
Restaurants, dine-in; and other
establishment for sale and consumption
on the premises of beverages, food or
refreshments
One per four seats, based upon the maximum seating
capacity, plus one per on-duty employee based upon
maximum employment shift
xxii.
Studios, dance, health, music and other
similar places of instruction and
recreation
One per four persons allowed within the maximum
occupancy load as established by applicable fire,
building or health codes
xxiii. B allrooms, catering halls, exhibition halls
or assembly halls without fixed seating
One for each forty-five (45) square feet of usable floor
area
xxiv. Service establishments, except
otherwise specified One per 400 square feet of usable floor area
D. Offices
i. Banks and other financial institutions One per 250 square feet of usable floor area
ii. Business offices or professional offices One per 300 square feet of usable floor area
iii. Im mediate care medical facility / clinic
Two per examination room, plus one space per
laboratory or recovery room, plus one space per
employee on duty based upon maximum employment
shift
iv. Professional offices of doctors, dentists,
or similar professions
One for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in
waiting rooms and one for each examining room,
dental chair or similar use
v. Veterinary clinics or hospitals One per 215 square feet of usable floor area
* See Section 5.14.7.M. for stacking space requirements
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-35
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.14.5 Off-Street Parking Spaces (continued)
Use Minimum Spaces Required
E. Recreation and Entertainment
i. Batting cages One per cage, plus one per employee
ii. Driving ranges One per four tees, plus one per employee
iii. Golf courses open to the general public
Four per one golf hole and one per employee, plus
spaces required per accessory use, such as a
restaurant or bar
iv. Miniature or “Par-3" golf courses Three per hole plus one per employee
v. Bowling alleys Four per bowling lane plus spaces for accessory food
service, office, and retail uses
vi. Health, fitness, and exercise centers One per four persons allowed within the maximum
occupancy load as established by the building code
vii. Marinas, public or private One and one-half per moor or slip
viii. M ovie theaters One per four seats , plus one per two employees
ix. Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs,
tennis clubs, or other similar uses
One per four persons allowed within the maximum
occupancy load as established by applicable fire,
building or health codes
x. Swimming pools
One per four persons allowed within the maximum
occupancy load as established by applicable fire,
building or health codes
xi. Tennis or racquet clubs
Four per court, plus one per employee, if a spectator
area is provided, one space per three seats shall be
required
F. Industrial
i.
Industrial, research or laboratory uses
not otherwise specified herein, where
established for a known user
Five, plus one per employee based upon the maximum
number of employees per shift or overlapping shifts
plus one per 275 square feet of usable floor area for
office areas
iii.
Research and development facilities,
laboratories, and technical centers
One per 425 square feet of usable floor area for the
research/laboratory uses, plus one per 300 square
feet of usable floor area for any offices or other
accessory uses
iv. Self-storage or mini-warehouses
Two for the caretaker’s dwelling, plus one per 275
square feet of usable floor area in the principal
building
v.
Warehouses and wholesale
establishments and related accessory
offices
Five, plus one per employee in the largest working
shift
ii.
Industrial, research or laboratory
buildings established on speculation, or
where the end user or number of
anticipated employees is not known
Five, plus one per 2,000 square feet of GFA for the
industrial, research or laboratory uses, plus one per
275 square feet of usable floor area for office areas
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-36 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
6. Barrier-Free Parking Requirements. Barrier-free parking spaces signed and striped shall be provided at
conveniently accessible locations within each parking lot, in accordance with the Michigan Building
Code.
7. Stacking Spaces for Drive-Through Facilities. Off-street stacking spaces shall be provided on the same
zoning lot for any use that includes an accessory drive-through lane or facility or otherwise serves
customers in their automobiles, subject to the following:
A. Required waiting spaces shall be provided on the same zoning lot for any use that includes an
accessory drive-through lane or facility or otherwise serves customers in their automobiles.
B. Drive-through lanes shall be separate from the circulation roads and lanes necessary for ingress to
and egress from the property.
C. Drive-through lanes shall not use any space that is necessary for adequate access to parking
spaces.
D. Drive-through lanes where vehicle stacking and waiting occur shall not be permitted in the front
yard.
E. Drive-through lanes and associated by-pass lanes shall be setback at least 10 feet from the side
and rear lot lines.
F. Drive-through lanes located adjacent to a street shall be buffered by a minimum 10 foot wide
landscaped planting adjacent to the right-of-way as specified in Section 5.15.8.
G. Drive-through lanes shall provide one (1) by-pass lane to allow unobstructed travel for vehicles to
pass those waiting to be served.
H. Drive-through lanes shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet.
I. Drive-through lanes shall have a minimum length of twenty (20) feet per required vehicle stacking
space.
J. Drive-through lanes shall have a minimum centerline turning radius of twenty-five (25) feet.
K. Drive-through lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated.
L. Drive-through lanes shall have a minimum stacking space in accordance with the following
standardards:
M. Drive-Through Stacking Space Requirements
i. Restaurant with drive-thru. Eight (8) spaces per service lane, at least five (5) of which must be in
advance of the ordering station.
ii. Financial institutions. Four (4) spaces per service lane, inclusive of the vehicle at the window
iii. Drug stores, dry cleaners, and other commercial uses. Three (3) vehicles inclusive of the vehicle
at the window.
iv. Vehicle wash (coin/hand held wand stall. Three (3) vehicles in advance of the washing bay and
one (1) vehicles beyond the washing bay for drying.
v. Vehicle wash (automatic). Six stacking spaces per service lane, plus two upon exiting each
conveyor system for post-washing detail.
vi. Other uses For uses not listed, the planning commission shall make a determination of the
minimum required stacking at the time of site plan review, based upon review of information
submitted by the applicant, city staff, and consultants.
N. Such spaces shall be located entirely within a non-residential zoning district, and shall not include
the use of any public space, street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way.
8. Off-Street Parking Layout, Construction, and Maintenance Standards. Plans for the layout of off-street
parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-37
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
PARKING LAYOUTS
©clearzoning
Parallel
90 Degree
60’
20’
Min.
20’
9’
Two-way
60 Degree
56’
16’
Min.
One-way
45 Degree
One-way
49’
12’
Min.
24’
12’ 8’
20’
One-way
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-38 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.14.8 Minimum Off-street Parking Dimensions
Parking
Pattern
Maneuvering
Lane Width
Parking
Space
Width
Parking
Space
Length
Width of
Maneuvering
Lane Plus
Two Rows
0 parallel parking 12' 8' 24' 40'
45 12' (one-way) 9' 20' 49'
60 16' (one-way) 9' 20' 56'
90 20' (two-way) 9' 20' 60'
A. Backing directly onto a street, backing into an access drive, or requiring the use of the street for
maneuvering between parking rows shall be prohibited.
B. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined maneuvering
lanes and access drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Entrance to such area shall be only from a
public street, an adjoining principal use or an adjoining alley.
C. Ingress and egress to a parking lot accessory to a non-residential use shall not be across land in a R-
1, R-2 or R-3 district.
D. Ingress and egress to a parking lot accessory to a non-residential use shall be set back at least 25
feet from the boundary of any residential district.
E. All maneuvering lanes shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90 degree pattern may
permit two-way movement.
F. The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this
Chapter shall be provided with a dust-free surfacing of concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material
according to the requirements of this Chapter and the Marshall City Code.
G. Parking areas must be landscaped in accordance with Section 5.15.8.
H. Necessary curbs or other protection for the public and for the protection of adjoining properties,
streets and sidewalks shall be provided and maintained. Where parking areas abut public sidewalks,
a curb at least six inches high shall be placed thereon to prevent vehicle encroachment.
I. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of accumulated surface water without
drainage onto adjacent property or toward buildings.
J. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so designed, located, and shielded
to prevent glare onto adjacent properties and prevent adverse impacts on motorist visibility.
i. The source of illumination shall not be more than 15 feet above the parking surface in any
residential district, or the B-2 (Local Business), B-3 (Central Business) or PSP (Public/Semi-Public
Services) districts.
ii. The source of illumination shall not be more than 20 feet above the parking surface in the POSD
(Professional Office Service) district, B-2 (Local Business) District, and B-4 (Regional
Commercial) district.
iii. The source of illumination shall not be more than 25 feet above the parking surface in the I-1
(Research and Manufacturing) district and I-2 (General Industrial) district.
K. All illumination for such parking facilities shall not exceed one foot-candle at any lot or property line,
nor shall is exceed 0.5 foot candles at a lot line adjacent to a single family residential district. The
average to minimum foot candle ratio over the parking lot, drives, walkways, and similar illuminated
areas shall not exceed 4:1.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-39
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
L. Upon a determination by the Planning Commission that it is necessary due to the size and
configuration of the lot, off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front
yard, provided that a minimum setback of ten feet shall be maintained between the nearest point of
the off-street parking area and the right-of-way line. The ten-foot setback shall be unobstructed
except for landscaping plant materials. Access driveways may extend through this setback. This
provision applies to all non-residential development with front yard parking in all districts, as well as
all multi-family development with front-yard parking in all districts.
9. Loading Space Requirements. For every building or addition to an existing building erected or occupied by
a use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and
maintained on the same premises adequate off-street loading spaces, as follows:
A. Each such loading space shall be at least ten feet in width, 50 feet in length, and 14 feet in height.
No such space shall be located closer than 50 feet to any lot in any residential district unless wholly
within a completely enclosed building or enclosed on all sides by a wall, or a greenbelt, berm, or
buffer strip.
B. Lights used to illuminate loading areas shall be arranged so as to reflect away from adjacent
properties.
C. Loading spaces shall not be provided in the front yard, the front side of any building, or on any side
facing and directly visible to a public street, unless the Planning Commission determines such a
location is necessary due to the building’s location or placement or existing street patterns.
D. Access to the loading area shall be designed in such a manner as to allow trucks to enter and leave
the loading area without having to back from or onto the public street.
E. Loading spaces shall be covered with a pavement of concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material,
and shall be graded and drained to a storm sewer so as to dispose of surface water in accordance
and conformity with the requirements of the City.
F. The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for off-street loading spaces for existing
buildings within a B-3 (Neighborhood Commercial) district under the following circumstances:
i. The rear of the building is built to the rear lot line and directly abuts a public alley.
ii. The layout and size of the existing building and parking area preclude the placement of a loading
space within the site.
10. Parking in Residential Districts. Off-street parking for permitted principal uses in residential districts shall
conform to the following regulations:
A. Required residential off-street parking for single-family or two-family residential uses shall be in
accordance with § 70.008 of the City Code of Ordinances.
B. Driveways and driveway approaches shall meet the requirements of § 70.008 of the City Code of
Ordinances.
5.14.9 Off-Street Loading Spaces
GROSS FLOOR AREA (square feet) MINIMUM LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE
REQUIRED
10,000 - 20,000 One space
20,001 - 50,000 Two spaces
50,001 - 100,000 Three spaces
100,001 + One additional space for each additional 100,000
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-40 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
11. Access Management Standards. The purpose of this Section is to provide access standards which will
facilitate through-traffic operations, ensure public safety along roadways, and protect the public
investment in the street system, while providing property owners with reasonable, though not always
direct, access. The standards are specifically designed for streets whose primary function is the
movement of through traffic, as opposed to local streets whose primary function is access to adjacent
properties.
A. Application of standards. The standards of this Section shall be applied to streets classified as major
traffic routes or arterials in the City’s Master Plan or by county or state road authorities, as follows:
i. The standards shall be required in addition to, and where permissible shall supersede, the
requirements of the Michigan Department of Transportation and Calhoun County.
ii. The following traffic routes are under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of
Transportation: I-94 Business Loop from exit 112 to I-69 and M-227 (S. Kalamazoo from
Industrial Drive South and Industrial Drive from S. Kalamazoo to the I-94 Business Loop).
iii. The standards shall apply to all uses, except permitted single-family and two-family dwelling
units.
iv. For expansion or redevelopment of existing sites where the Planning Commission determines
that compliance with all the standards of this Section is unreasonable, the standards shall be
applied to the maximum feasible extent.
v. The Planning Commission may approve suitable alternatives that substantially achieve the
purpose of this Section may be accepted by the Planning Commission, provided that the
applicant demonstrates all of the following apply:
a. The size of the parcel is insufficient to meet the dimensional standards.
b. The spacing of existing, adjacent driveways or environmental constraints prohibit adherence
to the access standards at a reasonable cost.
c. The use will generate less than 500 total vehicle trips per day or less than 75 total vehicle
trips in the peak hour of travel on the adjacent street, based on rates developed by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).
d. There is no other reasonable means of access.
B. Number of driveways. Access to a parcel shall consist of a minimum of either one two-way driveway
or a pair of one-way driveways for separate ingress and egress.
i. Where parcel frontage is insufficient to provide a driveway meeting the minimum driveway width
and radii, a shared driveway or other means of access may be required.
ii. Two access points may be permitted for a corner lot where there is at least 100 feet of frontage
on both streets and upon recommendation by the City Engineer or other governmental agency
that the additional access point is required for traffic and pedestrian safety.
iii. The Planning Commission may allow an additional access point where the property has
continuous frontage of over 300 feet, provided that the applicant can demonstrate that
additional access is necessary to support the use and upon a recommendation by the City
Engineer or other governmental agency.
iv. Where the property has continuous frontage of over 600 feet, a maximum of three driveways
shall be allowed, provided that at least one such driveway shall be limited to right-turn-in/rightturn-
out only.
C. Shared access, joint driveways, parking lot connections and rear service drives. Shared use of
access between two or more property owners shall be encouraged through use of driveways
constructed along property lines, connecting parking lots, and rear service drives.
i. The Planning Commission may require provision of shared access facilities as a condition of site
plan approval under any of the following circumstances:
a. Sites within one-quarter mile of major intersections.
b. Sites having dual frontage.
c. Sites where frontage dimensions are less than 300 feet.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-41
1 Purpose and
Introduction
2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
d. Locations with sight distance problems.
e. Locations along roadway segments experiencing congestion or accidents. In such cases,
shared access of some type may be the only access design allowed.
ii. Where a site is adjacent to a parking lot of a compatible use, or a rear service drive, a
connection to the adjacent facility may be required by the Planning Commission.
iii. Where a site is adjacent to undeveloped property, the site shall be designed and constructed to
accommodate future shared access, as determined by the Planning Commission.
iv. The applicant shall provide the City with letters of agreement or access easements from all
affected property owners.
D. Adequate sight distance. Requirements for minimum intersection or corner sight distance for
driveways shall be in accordance with American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) guidelines. The Planning Commission may adjust driveway location where there is
a concern regarding adequate sight distance.
E. Driveway spacing from intersections. Driveway spacing from intersections shall be measured from
the centerline of the driveway to the extended edge of the intersecting street’s right-of-way line. To
preserve intersection operations and safety, the minimum distance between a driveway and an
intersecting street right-of-way shall be based on the following:
i. For locations in the vicinity of intersections experiencing congestion [defined as peak hour
operations below level of service (LOS) “C” for one or more movements] or a significant number
of traffic accidents (five or more annually), the Planning Commission may require that access be
constructed along the property line furthest from the intersection.
ii. For locations within 200 feet of any intersection, driveways shall be spaced a minimum of 100
feet to the centerline of the driveway. Where this spacing cannot be provided, driveways limited
to right-turn-in/right-turn-out only movements shall be permitted.
F. Driveway spacing from other driveways. Driveway spacing from other driveways shall be measured
from the centerline of each driveway at the point where it crosses the street right-of-way line.
Minimum driveway spacing from other driveways along the same side of the street shall be
determined based on posted speed limits along the parcel for each particular frontage, as follows:
G. Offsets. Driveways shall be directly aligned with those across the street or, where offset, the
minimum driveway spacing from driveways across the street shall be 100 feet, excluding when one
or both driveways are limited to right-turn-in/right-turn-out only.
H. Traffic impact studies. The Planning Commission may require a traffic impact analysis to determine
compliance with this Section and Chapter, for any use or development projected to generate more
than 100 vehicular trips per day.
Posted Speed Limit (mph) Minimum Driveway Spacing
25 mph 50 feet
30 mph 50 feet
35 mph 75 feet
40 mph 75 feet
45 mph 100 feet
50 mph 125 feet
55 mph 150 feet
5.14.11.F Minimum Driveway Spacing
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-42
1 Purpose and
Introduction
2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
12. PRIVATE ROAD STANDARDS. The City discourages the use of private roads, but may allow private roads
as a use subject to special conditions in accordance with Section 6.2 and this Section. The regulations
for private roads contained herein shall not apply to platted subdivisions regulated by Chapter 155 of the
City’s Code of Ordinances, or internal access drives to parking within approved site plans for multiplefamily,
industrial, or commercial developments. The following requirements shall apply to all private
roads regulated by this Section:
A. Before approving a private road, the City Engineer shall determine that there are unusual conditions
or circumstances that would prevent the construction of a public road.
B. Existing private roads, previously in a township brought into the City, shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Section.
C. An easement shall be provided of not less than 66 feet in width for roads and utilities. This
easement shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds office, and a copy of the recorded easement
provided to the Zoning Administrator.
D. Lot frontage on an approved private road shall conform to the minimum requirements for the zoning
district where the lot is located. All building construction and development on such lots shall
conform to the standards of this Chapter.
E. The maximum length of any private road shall not exceed the City standard for public roads.
F. The surface, base material, and street signage shall be approved by the City.
G. Issuance of a zoning permit for the placement of structures on lots on a private road shall not be
considered a guarantee or warranty that adequate access is available for emergency vehicles. The
City assumes no responsibility for the maintenance of or improvements to private roads.
H. The applicant shall submit a joint maintenance agreement or master deed in recordable form that:
i. Runs with the land;
ii. Binds benefitting parcels; and
iii. Allows the City to make any repairs or conduct any maintenance it deems necessary and charge
the property owners or homeowners association served by the private road for such service.
I. The applicant shall provide a recorded statement running with the land informing purchasers that the
access road is private.
J. All private roads shall be maintained in accordance with the standards of this Section and all
conditions of approval.
5.15 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
1. Intent. The intent of this subchapter is to establish minimum standards for the design, installation, and
maintenance of landscaping along public streets, as buffer areas between uses, on the interior of a site,
within parking lots, and adjacent to buildings. Landscaping is a critical element contributing to the
aesthetics, development quality, stability of property values, and the overall character of the City. The
standards of this subchapter are intended to provide incentives to preserve quality mature trees, screen
headlights to reduce glare, integrate various elements of a site, ensure compatibility between land uses,
assist in directing safe and efficient traffic flow at driveways and within parking lots, and minimize
negative impacts of storm water runoff and salt spray.
2. Scope. The standards of this subchapter are considered the minimum necessary to achieve the above
intent. Applicants are encouraged to provide additional landscaping to improve the function,
appearance, and value of their property. The standards of this subchapter shall apply to all uses, lots,
and sites altered, developed or expanded after the effective date of this Chapter subject to site plan
review under Section 6.3.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-43
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
3. Requirements and Timing of Landscaping. All landscape plans, plant installations, and required plant
materials shall conform to the following standards:
A. Plan required. A separate landscape plan shall be included with any site plan application reviewed by
the City, subject to the following:
i. The plan shall be prepared at a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet.
ii. The plan shall show the location, type, size, and spacing of all existing and proposed plant
materials, and details and specifications describing planting techniques, installations, planting
mixtures, mulch, material depths, seed blends, and other necessary information.
iii. Existing and proposed contours shall be shown at intervals not to exceed two (2) feet.
iv. Existing and proposed utilities shall be shown.
v. All required and proposed walls, fencing, berms and other screening treatments shall be shown
on the plan.
vi. Protection measures for preserved trees during construction shall be shown in accordance with
City standards.
vii. The Planning Commission shall require landscape plans to be reviewed and sealed by a State of
Michigan licensed landscape architect for parcels of one acre or more in size and may require it
for other projects that may have a significant impact on surrounding residential districts.
B. Installation methods. Landscaping shall be installed in a manner consistent with the standards of the
American Nurserymen & Landscape Association (ANLA) and generally accepted planting procedures.
Tree stakes, guy wires and tree wrap are to be removed after one year.
C. Timing of installation. Required landscaping or screening shall be planted within 180 calendar days
from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and shall be maintained in accordance with
the standards of this subchapter and the approved landscape plan.
D. Performance guarantee. The Zoning Administrator may require a performance guarantee to cover
the cost of landscaping installation for development activity or construction completed in an offplanting
season.
i. Such guarantees shall be submitted to the City prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
to ensure installation of required landscaping in the next planting season.
ii. The Zoning Administrator shall conduct an inspection of plant materials within three months of
written notification of installation before releasing the performance guarantee.
E. Maintenance. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in
appearance, and free from refuse and debris.
4. Special Provisions for Existing Sites.
A. Special provision shall be made for applying these standards to developed sites that existed prior to
the City adopting landscaping requirements. When an existing site is undergoing improvement, a
change in use or expansion, the objective of these standards shall be to gradually bring the site into
compliance with the minimum standards of this subchapter in proportion to the extent of the
expansion or improvement.
B. Upgrades to landscaping or screening on an existing site shall conform to the following guidelines:
i. Landscaping requirements for building expansions equal to or less than 300 square feet of
gross floor area and/or projects that that do not propose any additional hard surfaced area for
parking, may be limited to areas outside of the internal parking lot and site landscaping.
ii. Landscaping along the street and as a buffer between adjacent land uses shall take priority over
parking lot and site landscaping. Where parking lot landscaping cannot be provided, additional
landscaping along the street or in the buffer areas shall be considered.
5. Public Street Plantings - Street trees. On every site involving new development or redevelopment,
deciduous street trees shall be provided along the fringe of the street right-of-way in conformance with §
99.06 of this Code of Ordinances.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-44 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
6. Interior Landscaping. For every new development, except single-family detached dwellings and any use in
the MHPD (Manufactured Housing Park) district or B-3 (Neighborhood Business) district, interior
landscaping areas exclusive of any other required landscaping shall be provided, consisting of at least
5% of the total lot area. This landscaped area should be grouped near building entrances, along building
foundations, along pedestrian walkways, and along service areas. All interior landscaping shall conform
to the following:
A. One deciduous, ornamental tree or evergreen tree shall be provided for every 400 square feet of
required interior landscaping area.
B. One shrub shall be provided for every 250 square feet of required interior landscaping area.
C. The interior landscaping area shall contain grass or other suitable living groundcover.
7. Parking Lot Landscaping. The following standards shall apply to all proposed parking lots with ten or
more parking spaces, any existing parking lot containing ten or more parking spaces that is proposed to
be expanded, and any existing parking lot on an existing site subject to Planning Commission review of a
site plan per Section 6.3:
A. Perimeter screening. Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side that adjoins
or faces a residential district, existing residential use or street right-of-way, per Section 5.15.8.
B. Landscaping within parking lots. Landscaping shall be provided and maintained within off-street
parking lots, as follows:
i. Landscape island endcaps and midpoint. Landscaping islands shall be required at the end of
any row of parking. There shall be at least 20 square feet of landscape island per parking space.
For parking areas in excess of 40,000 sq. ft., at least one midpoint landscape island, a minimum
of fifteen feet deep, shall be placed in a parking row.
5.15.7 Landscape Islands
For parking lots over 40,000
sq .ft in area, a landscape
island fills one row of parking
in the midpoint of the lot and
has a depth of fifteen feet.
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-45
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
ii. Landscaping Island Standards. Landscaping islands shall have a minimum width of ten feet and
a minimum area of 180 square feet, and shall be two (2) feet shorter than any adjacent parking
space.
iii. Minimum Landscaping Required. A minimum of one deciduous canopy tree shall be provided
within the boundaries of the parking lot for every ten parking spaces. The required trees shall
be planted in landscaping islands within the parking lot. Up to 33% of parking lot trees may be
planted within 15 feet of the back of curb or edge of a parking space and shall not be utilized to
satisfy other requirements. Landscaping islands, in addition to the canopy tree, shall be planted
with lawn, perennials, ornamental grasses, or shrubs with a maximum height of 30 inches.
Planting materials shall cover a minimum of 25% of the island area with mulch shall be used
around plantings where appropriate.
C. A parking space overhang of two feet may be used to widen a perimeter landscaped area and
reduce the length of a parking space by two feet less than required by this Chapter.
D. Landscaping shall not obscure traffic signs or lighting, obstruct access to fire hydrants or interfere
with adequate motorist sight distance.
E. Landscaped areas within and around parking lots shall be protected with concrete curbing.
F. Adequate area shall be provided for snow storage within the parking lot.
8. Methods of Screening. One or more of the following screening options shall be required on land abutting
City street rights-of-way, and where otherwise required by this Chapter for screening purposes. The
Planning Commission may also require one or more of the following screening methods to be used to
screen or separate unlike land uses or to otherwise meet the intent of this subchapter or Chapter:
A. Greenbelt. Required greenbelts shall meet the following standards:
i. Width. The minimum greenbelt width shall be ten feet. The Planning Commission may reduce
the required width to accommodate existing conditions or maintain the character of the zoning
district. In such cases, the greenbelt requirement may be met through the provision of street
trees per § 90.06 of the City Code of Ordinances.
ii. Required plantings. At least one deciduous tree and four shrubs per 40 lineal feet of street
frontage.
a. The Planning Commission may permit one additional canopy tree in place of four required
shrubs.
b. The greenbelt area shall contain grass or other suitable living groundcover.
B. Parking lot screening. All parking lots shall be separated from a public thoroughfare by a planted
hedgerow or by a decorative masonry wall with planting strip or berm a minimum of thirty (30) inches
high. The Planning Commission may accept existing vegetation to meet this requirement. The
Planning Commission may also accept a combination of masonry posts, decorative fencing, shrubs
and other plantings, when the design provides sufficient screening. When a hedge is proposed, it
shall be planted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and maintained so as to form a
continuous visual screen. The size and plant spacing shall be configured so that a continuous visual
screen will be established within three (3) years of planting.
i. Hedgerow. Where headlights from parked vehicles will shine into the roadway, the Planning
Commission may require use of a totally obscuring hedge with a minimum height of 24 inches
and a maximum height of 36 inches.
ii. Decorative wall or fence with planting strip. This method shall consist of a planting strip
abutting the base of a decorative brick wall, ornamental fence or wall and fence combination,
subject to the following:
a. The decorative wall or fence shall have a minimum height of thirty (30) inches, and shall not
exceed three feet in height above grade. Decorative posts shall be allowed to extend a
maximum of six inches above the top of the fence
b. The planting strip shall abut the base of the wall or fence, and shall have a minimum width
of six feet and a maximum height of 36 inches.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-46 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
c. A mixture of trees and shrubs shall be planted along the entire length of the planting strip, at
a minimum concentration of one tree and five shrubs per each 30 linear feet of planting
strip or plantings determined by the Planning Commission to meet the screening
requirements.
iii. Berms. Required berms shall consist of a combination of a raised earth mound and plantings
meet the following standards:
a. Minimum height of two feet with a crest at least three feet in width. The height of the berm
may meander if the intent of this subchapter is met and an appropriate screen is provided.
b. The exterior face of the berm shall be constructed as an earthen slope, with a slope not to
exceed one foot of vertical rise to three feet of horizontal distance (1:3 ratio). The interior
face of the berm may be constructed as an earthen slope or retained by means of a wall,
terrace, or other means that shall not exceed 30
c. At least one deciduous tree shall be provided for each 30 feet of berm length.
d. At least one shrub shall be provided for each 100 square feet of berm surface area, as
calculated from a plan view.
C. Screening between B-3, Neighborhood Business and residential uses. The purpose of this method is
to provide a low level, obscuring screen or barrier, without significantly inhibiting visibility, light, or
safety, as a barrier to provide a separation between the residential district in the Neighborhood
Business Commercial district and general public, and similar uses or conditions where the
predominant impacts are at or below eye level. This method shall consist of a planting strip abutting
the base of a decorative brick wall, ornamental fence or wall and fence combination, subject to the
following:
i. The decorative wall or fence shall have a minimum height of thirty (30) inches , and shall not
exceed four feet above grade. Decorative posts shall be allowed to extend a maximum of six
inches above the top of the fence
ii. The planting strip shall abut the base of the wall or fence, and shall have a minimum width of ten
feet.
iii. A mixture of trees and shrubs shall be planted along the entire length of the planting strip, at a
minimum concentration of one tree and five shrubs per each 30 linear feet of planting strip.
D. Evergreen screen or buffer strip. A buffer strip may be required where a use abuts residential or
other less intensive uses. The intent of the buffer strip is to have a minimum five foot high obscuring
area along side or rear lot lines, and an appropriate landscaped strip along front lot lines. A buffer
strip shall meet the following requirements:
i. Minimum width of ten feet.
ii. This method shall consist of closely spaced evergreen trees with year-round screening
characteristics. Such trees shall be planted in accordance with the plant spacing requirements
of this Section. A staggered planting pattern is encouraged.
iii. The buffer planting area shall contain grass or other suitable living groundcover.
iv. A mixture of the following species or alternatives approved by the Planning Commission shall be
incorporated into the evergreen screen or buffer strip:
E. Screen walls. Screen walls shall meet the following standards:
i. A solid masonry wall, ornamental on both sides and not less than six feet in height above grade.
Such walls shall be constructed of the same materials as that of the main building, or be faced
with either brick, decorative block, or pre-cast concrete formed into a decorative pattern and
painted in the same color scheme as that of the main building.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-47
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.15.8.D Evergreen Screen or Buffer Strip Planting Materials
Common Name Plant Spacing
(on-center in feet)
Emerald Green Arborvitae Thuja o. “Emerald Green” 5
Sea Green Juniper Juniperus c. “Sea Green” 5
Spartan Juniper Juniperus c. “Spartan” 5
Black Hills Spruce Picea g. “Densata” 20
Norway Spruce Picea abies 20
Serbian Spruce Picea Omorica 15
White Fir Abies Concolor 15
White Pine Pinus Strobes 20
Botanical Name
ii. Where vehicles, open-air displays, waste receptacles, or other site features exceed a six foot
height, the wall shall be increased to a height adequate to completely screen such features, not
exceeding ten feet.
iii. Where required walls are provided on the business side of public alleys, wall requirements may
be waived to provide necessary entrance to or exit from required off-street parking and loading
areas. The required wall shall be stepped down to a three foot level for a minimum of ten feet
on each side of the opening.
iv. Such walls shall be erected and maintained along the interior lot line or residential zoning district
boundary line except where underground utilities interfere or where there is a desire to install
landscaping in order to break up the wall. Where separated from the residential district by an
alley, then the required wall shall be located along the alley lot line opposite the residential
district.
v. Such walls shall be protected from possible damage inflicted by vehicles using the parking area
by, a four foot green space or low level plantings with concrete curbing.
vi. Where there is an established wall height and material acceptable to the City on abutting lots,
the wall shall be continued on the subject site.
vii. Such walls shall be constructed of durable, weather resistant, rustproof materials.
viii. Masonry walls may be constructed with openings that do not in any square section exceed 20%
of the surface. Where walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the
obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height requirement.
9. Screening of Residential Districts and Uses. To provide adequate protective screening for residential
areas adjacent to or near non-residential uses or districts, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Where a business or industrial district abuts directly upon a residential district unless provided for in
Section 5.15.14, a landscaped greenbelt or other screening meeting the standards of Section 5.15.8
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-48 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
shall be provided and maintained along the entire district boundary length by the users of the
business or industrially zoned property.
B. For those use districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides
abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring wall, fence, or landscaping as required in
the table below unless provided relief under Section 5.15.14.
C. The Planning Commission may approve an alternative screening method using one or more the
methods in Section 5.15.8 upon finding the alternative will provide a similar screening effect or upon
review wave the screening requirement when no good purpose would be accomplished by having
such a screening.
10. WASTE RECEPTACLE AND MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREENING. Waste receptacles such as dumpster
(s) and ground mounted mechanical equipment excluding air conditioning units of four tons or less shall
be located, screened, and secured in accordance with Section 5.15.4, except if a fence is used it shall be
six feet in height, or as provided for in any other City Code of Ordinance.
11. PLANT MATERIAL VARIETY, SIZE, AND SEPARATION STANDARDS. Required landscaping shall comply with
the following minimum plant material and plant variety standards. The Planning Commission may vary
these standards when these established minimums will not serve the purpose and intent of this
subchapter.
A. Species variety. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 33% of any one species.
The use of a mixture of trees from the same species association shall be encouraged.
B. Plant size specifications. Required landscaping shall comply with the following minimum size
standards at planting:
i. Deciduous canopy trees. Two and one-half inch caliper minimum trunk measurement at four feet
off the ground, with a minimum eight feet in height above grade when planted.
ii. Evergreen trees. Six feet in height, with a minimum spread of three feet. The size of the root ball
shall be at least ten times the caliper of the tree measured six inches above grade.
iii. Deciduous ornamental trees. One and one-half inch caliper minimum at three feet off the
ground, with a minimum height of six feet above grade when planted.
iv. Shrubs. Minimum 30 inches in height above planting grade.
v. Groundcovers. Planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably
complete coverage after one complete growing season.
a. Grasses, other than ornamental types, shall consist of species normally grown as permanent
lawns in the region.
5.15.9.B Screening of Residential Districts and Uses
Use Required Height
Off‐street parking areas in any district Six foot
Any use in the B‐2, B‐3, B‐4, I‐1 or I‐2 districts Six to eight foot
Open storage areas, loading or unloading areas or
service areas in any district
Six to eight foot
Automobile washes, drive‐in or drive‐through restaurants
Six foot
Hospitals (ambulance and delivery areas) Six foot
U􀆟lity buildings, sta􀆟ons or substa􀆟ons Six foot
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-49
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
b. Rolled sod, erosion reducing net or suitable mulch shall be used in swales or other areas
subject to erosion. Groundcovers shall be clean and free of weeds, noxious pests, and
disease.
c. Steel, aluminum, or black plastic edging shall be used for any planting beds.
vi. Mulch material. Minimum of two and a maximum of four inches of biodegradable mulch or
equivalent for planted trees, shrubs, and vines.
C. Suggested plant material. The plant material listed in Table 5.15.11.C is commonly available in
hardiness Zone 5. The list of suggested plant material is to be used as a general guideline for plant
selection but is not meant to be limiting.
5.15.11.C Suggested Plant Material
Evergreen Trees:
Fir
Pine
Spruce
Douglas Fir
Hemlock
Narrow Evergreen Trees:
Red Cedar
Juniper
Arborvitae
Large Deciduous Trees:
Oak
Tulip Tree
Beech
Lindens
Pear (Bradford, Chanticleer)
Hard Maple
Ginko (male only)
Honeylocust (seedless and thornless)
Small Deciduous Trees:
Flowering Dogwood
Hawthorn
Redbud
Magnolia
Hornbeam
Flowering Crabapple (disease resistant)
5.15.11.C Suggested Plant Material (cont.)
Large Shrubs - Deciduous:
Dogwood (Red Osier, Grey)
Spiraea (Van Houtte)
Large Shrubs - Evergreen:
Yew (Irish, Hicks)
Juniper (Pfitzer, Sea Green)
Mungo Pine
Small Shrubs - Deciduous:
Compact Burning Bush
Privet (Lodense)
Sumac (Fragrant)
Cottoneaster (cranberry)
Potentilla
Spiraea (Little Princess)
Small Shrubs - Evergreen:
Yews
Mungo Pine
Low Juniper
Bayberry
Pyracantha
Sumac (Staghorn)
Sargent Crabapple
Forsythia
Privet (Amur, Regal)
Lilac
Honeysuckle
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-50 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
D. Specifications for specific locations. The following species shall be used within specified landscaped
areas to ensure long-term health and growth:
5.15.11.C Suggested Plant Material (cont.)
Ground Cover:
Pachysandra
Spreading Juniper
Periwinkle
English Ivy
5.15.11.D Specifications for Specific Locations
Trees and Shrubs for Parking Lots:
London Plane Tree
Snowdrift Crabapple
Sweetgum
Linden
Spirea
Junipers (Spreading)
Dwarf Callery Pear
Hawthorns
Honey Locust (thornless and seedless)
Species comparable to those above
Trees and Shrubs for Greenbelt and Interior
Landscape Areas:
Amur Maple
Sweetgum
Goldenrain Tree
Hawthorns
London Plane Tree
Scarlet Oak
Pin Oak
European Linden
Honey Locust (thornless and seedless)
Little Leaf Linden
Zelkova
Junipers
Border Privet
Gingko
5.15.11.D Specifications for Specific Locations
(cont.)
Trees and Shrubs for Greenbelt and Interior
Landscape Areas:
Mugo Pine
Serbian Spruce
Mockorange
Euonymus
Cotoneaster
Snowdrift Crabapple
Hedge Maple
Bayberry
European Hornbeam
Viburnum
Dense Yew
Hicks Yew
Sugar Maple
Red Maple
Dwarf Callery Pear (Bradford)
Species comparable to those above
Pinus Nigra
Sweetgum
Black Locust
Juniper (sp.)
Bayberry
Honey Locust (thornless and seedless)
Species comparable to those above
Salt Resistant Trees and Shrubs:
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-51
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
E. Prohibited plant materials. The following plant materials shall not be used for landscaping purposes,
except where specified below:
i. The following plant materials shall not be used for landscaping purposes under any
circumstances because of susceptibility to storm damage, disease, insect infestation, fruit
bearing or other undesirable characteristics: Ash varieties, American Elm, Aspen, Ailanthus, and
European Barberry.
ii. The following tree species shall not be permitted except where appropriate for the ecosystem,
such as in a wetland environment not in proximity to any existing or proposed structures: Box
Elder, Poplars, Willows, Horse Chestnut (nut bearing), Tree of Heaven, Catalpa, Buckthorn, and
European Alder.
F. Plant material spacing. Plant materials species grouped together shall meet the following on-center
spacing requirements:
5.15.11.D Specifications for Specific Locations (cont.)
Trees and Shrubs for Shady Areas:
Euonymus
Arborvitae (sp.)
Honey Locust (thornless and seedless)
Mahonia Aquifolium
Alpine Currant
Dogwood
Amelanchier
Mountain Laurel
Viburnum
Cotoneasters
Species comparable to those above
Plant Material Types
Evergreen
Trees
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees
Large
Deciduous
Trees
Small
Deciduous
Trees
Large
Shrubs
Small
Shrubs
Evergreen
Trees
min. 10’
max. 20’
min. 12’ min. 20’ min. 12’ min. 6’ min. 6’
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees
min. 12’
min. 5’
max. 10’
min. 15’ min. 10’ min. 5’ min. 4’
Deciduous
Trees
min. 20’ min. 15’
min. 20 ‘
max. 30’
min. 15’ min. 5’ min. 3’
Ornamental
Trees
min. 12’ min. 10’ min. 15’
min. 8’
max. 15’
min. 6’ min. 3’
Large
shrubs
min. 6’ min. 5’ min. 5’ min. 6’
min. 4’
max. 6’
min. 5’
Small
shrubs
min. 5’ min. 4’ min. 3’ min. 3’ min. 5’
min. 3’
max. 4’
5.15.11.F Distance Between Plant Materials (in feet)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-52 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
12. General Layout and Design Standards. Plant materials shall conform to the American Standard for
Nursery Stock of the American Nurserymen & Landscape Association (ANLA), and the following:
A. Plant quality. Plant materials shall be hardy to the climate of the central lower Michigan area, free of
and resistant to disease and insects, and nursery grown with orderly growth characteristics.
B. Replacement required. Any plant material required by this Chapter that dies or becomes diseased
shall be replaced within 30 days of written notice from the Zoning Administrator or within an
extended time period as specified in said notice.
C. Protection of landscaped areas. Landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment
by use of curbing. Landscaped areas shall be elevated above surrounding driveways or parking lots
to a minimum height of six inches to protect plant materials from snow removal operations, salt, and
other hazards.
D. Salt-resistant species. Cul-de-sacs, site entrances, parking lots, street tree areas, and boulevard
medians shall be landscaped with species tolerant of roadside conditions.
E. Irrigation. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and acceptable water
supply.
F. Clearance and visibility. Landscaping materials and arrangement shall ensure adequate sight
visibility for motorists, and adequate clearance for pedestrians and vehicles in accordance with
Corner Clearance under Section 5.10 and the following:
i. Required landscaping and screening elements shall not inhibit access to fire hydrants. Plantings
within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller than six inches.
ii. Landscaping within the site shall provide adequate overhead clearance, maintain visibility to
approved signs of adjacent uses, and preserve sight lines from rights-of-way and public property
to streams, lakes, and other waterways.
13. Incentives to Preserve Existing Trees. The City encourages the preservation of quality and mature trees by
providing credits toward the required trees for greenbelts, buffer strips, interior landscaping, and within
parking lots. Preserved trees shall be protected during construction through use of a fence around the
drip line, with protection measures noted on the landscape plan.
A. To obtain credit, a tree survey shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to clearing the
site. The survey shall identify the tree by species, location, and caliper on the landscape plan.
B. The preserved trees shall be of a high quality and at least two and one-half inches caliper.
C. Trees to be preserved shall be counted for credit only if they are located on the developed portion of
the site, as determined by the Planning Commission. Trees over 12 inches in caliper to be removed
shall be noted on the landscape plan.
D. Preserved trees receiving credit that are lost within two years after construction shall be replaced by
the land owner with trees otherwise required.
E. The credit for preserved trees shall be as follows.
5.15.13.E Credit for Preserved Trees
Caliper of Preserved Tree Numbers of Trees Credited
Over 12 inches 3
8 to 12 inches 2
2 ½ to 8 inches 1
Note: Caliper measurement for existing trees is the diameter at a height of four and one-half feet above the
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-53
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
F. The following existing trees are not eligible for preservation credits:
14. Waiver of Modification of Standards. The Planning Commission may determine existing landscaping or
screening intended to be preserved, or a different landscape design, would provide all or part of the
required landscaping or screening to meet the intent of this subchapter and Chapter. In making such a
determination to waive or reduce the landscape or screening requirements of this subchapter, the
following circumstances shall be considered:
A. Extent that existing natural vegetation provides desired screening.
B. There is a steep change in topography that would limit the benefits of required landscaping.
C. The presence of existing wetlands.
D. Existing and proposed building placement.
E. The abutting or adjacent land is developed or planned by the City for a use other than residential.
F. Building heights and views.
G. The adjacent residential district is over 200 feet away from the subject site.
H. Similar conditions to the above exist such that no good purpose would be served by providing the
landscaping or screening required.
5.16 SIDEWALKS
1. Intent. The intent of this subchapter is to protect and promote public health, safety, and welfare by
specifying standards for design, development, and maintenance of a comprehensive non-motorized
system to allow for enhanced access. Sidewalks, walkways and pathways shall be designed to provide
convenient access to all properties and shall connect to the City-wide sidewalk system.
2. Site Plan Review. For all developments requiring site plan review, the proposed sidewalk or pathway
shall be shown on the site plan, which shall be reviewed in accordance with the site plan review
procedures set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Sidewalks (public ROW). Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets of all subdivision
plats, condominiums, and multiple-family developments. Sidewalks shall also be required along all local,
collector and arterial streets as defined in Section 2.2, Street. Sidewalks may be required in other
locations as part of site plan review where the planning commission determines that they are needed for
pedestrian traffic, safety or connectivity.
5.15.13.F Trees not Eligible for Preservation
Credits
Type of Tree:
Box Elder
Ash varieties
Apple
Willows
Hawthorn
Poplars
Malus (sp.)
Hackberry
Silver Maple
Locust (sp.)
Autumn Olive
Scotch Pine
Buckthorn
Red Pine
European Alder
Norway Maple
5.15.13.F Trees not Eligible for Preservation
Credits (cont.)
Type of Tree:
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-54 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
A. Location. Sidewalks shall be installed one foot from the property line, within the dedicated street
right-of-way, private street access easements or special easement where grades or other factors
prevent placement within the right-of-way or access easement. Sidewalks shall align horizontally and
vertically with existing sidewalks on adjacent lots. The Planning Commission has discretion to waive
or modify the location of the sidewalk when it is not practical or an alternate design is necessary due
to the existing site conditions.
4. Sidewalks (internal). Pedestrian access and connectivity from public rights-of-way shall be required for all
new site plans. 
A. Accessways shall be provided between public sidewalks and principal building entrances, except one
-family residential dwelling units.
B. Accessways shall provide pedestrian access through parking lots from public sidewalks to building
entries in a safe and efficient manner. Walkways shall be located and aligned to directly and
continuously connect areas or points of pedestrian origin and destination, and shall not be located
and aligned solely based on the outline of a parking lot configuration unless such a configuration
allows for direct pedestrian access.
C. Pedestrian accessways may be included in the calculation of open space required by this Ordinance.
D. Where the primary pedestrian access to the site crosses drive aisles or internal roadways, the
pedestrian crossing shall emphasize pedestrian access and safety.
E. All designated pedestrian areas which pass through a parking or circulation area shall be clearly
marked through pavement striping, alternative paving material or a stamped pattern or texture in the
pavement.
F. Walkways shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width and installed in accordance with the City’s
engineering design standards.
G. Pedestrian scale lighting fixtures no greater than 15 feet in height shall be provided along walkways
to provide ample lighting during nighttime hours. This may be waived when street or parking lot
lighting fixtures are deemed by the Planning Commission to be sufficient to adequately illuminate
adjacent walkways.
H. Pedestrian access points at property edges and to adjacent parcels shall be coordinated with existing
development to provide pedestrian circulation between developments, where feasible.
5.16.4 Pedestrian Access and Connectivity from Public Rights-of-Way
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-55
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
I. Planning commission has discretion to waive or modify this requirement when it is not practical or
may not result in any pedestrian activity.
5. Pathways. An off-road shared use, non-motorized path, with paved surface or boardwalk, separate from
the public road, may be required by the Planning Commission when a wider multi-surface use is desired,
there are environmentally sensitive areas that require an alternate type of construction and/or the
pathway would serve as a connection to an existing trail system shall be provided where required by the
non-motorized transportation plan or designated open space
6. Construction Standards. All sidewalks shall be concrete, at least five (5) feet wide and constructed to the
specifications of the Department of Public Works. Pathways shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, or as
designated by the City.
7. Crosswalks. An inclined approach shall be required where sidewalks and pathways intersect curbs for
barrier free access. Crosswalk pavement markings and signs may be required at intersections.
8. Modification. The Planning Commission may modify these width and location requirements upon finding
that another location would be more appropriate because of the location of utilities, existing landscaping
or trees, the location of connecting sidewalks or pathways on adjacent parcels, or other site
considerations.
9. Maintenance. It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain and keep clear of obstructions public
sidewalks or pathways on or adjoining property.
10. Deferment. A deferment for the installation of sidewalks may be granted by the City Council when
topographic conditions exist that make the sidewalk installation difficult or when the installation of the
sidewalk is premature. Where the installation of a sidewalk is deferred by the City Council, an agreement
will be executed between the property owner/developer and the City of Marshall that will ensure the
future installation of the sidewalk. The deferment agreement will be accompanied by a cash escrow,
letter of credit or other form of acceptable financial security to cover the cost of the installation of the
sidewalk.
11. Performance Guarantees. The City may request performance guarantees in accordance with Section 7.10
Performance Guarantees.
12. Installation of Residential Sidewalks. Required sidewalks may be installed for a residential lot in a new
residential subdivision or condominium after construction of the dwelling unit if the developer has posted
a performance guarantee to cover the cost of all sidewalk installation. A certificate of occupancy for the
dwelling shall not be issued until the required sidewalk is installed.
5.17 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
Subject to the provisions set forth herein, open space and recreational uses, all non-single family residential
parking areas, walkways, driveways, building entryways, off‐street parking and loading areas, and building
complexes with common areas shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and the
safety of persons using such public or common areas.
1. Permitted Lighting. Only downward-directed, fully shielded, concealed-source lighting shall be permitted.
Lighting shall be placed and shielded so as to direct the light onto the site and away from adjacent
properties. The lighting source shall not be directly visible from adjoining properties. Lighting shall be
shielded so that it does not cause glare or interfere with the vision of motorists. Fixtures attached to
canopies or eaves of a building or structure shall be recessed and flush with the surface of the structure.
Low voltage, upward-directed lighting for flags, landscaping or other decorative feature, with the
exception of searchlights, may be permitted by the Planning Commission.
2. Required Conditions:
A. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so designed, located, and shielded
to prevent glare unto adjacent properties and prevent adverse impacts on motorist visibility.
B. Soffit or canopy lighting shall be installed so the lens cover is recessed and the fixture is flush with
the building.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-56 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
C. The following illumination levels shall act as standards for all exterior lighting. Lighting will be
governed by the four to one (4:1) ratio of average to minimum illumination of surface being lit.
Illumination levels shall not exceed one foot-candle at any residential zoned or used lot or property
line, nor ten foot-candle at any point within the site.
D. Height. Light fixtures shall be mounted in accordance with the following table. Fixture height shall be
measured from the grade of the illuminated surface to the bottom of the fixture.
3. Sign lighting. Sign illumination shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in Section 5.1, Signs.
4. Subdivision Entrances. All subdivision and site condominium development road entrances shall be lighted
and shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission.
5. Site Plan Requirements
A. All lighting, including ornamental lighting, shall be shown on site plans in sufficient detail to allow
determination of the effects of such lighting upon adjacent properties, traffic safety, and overhead
sky glow. The objective of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-site effects.
B. A detail of the lighting fixture, including manufacturer’s specifications for shielding, wattage and
illumination, shall be provided on a site plan. The location and height of all fixtures shall be noted on
the site plan.
C. A photometric plan shall be required showing all lighting levels and averages to determine
compliance.
6. Modifications. The Planning Commission may modify the requirement for existing developed sites seeking
modest expansions to bringing all lighting into compliance with these lighting standards based on
consideration of the following: the position and height of buildings, other structures, and trees on the site;
the potential off-site impact of the lighting; the character of surrounding land use; and the extent of the
proposed change in floor area and/or land use.
5.17.2.D Height to Top of Light Source
District Height in feet
B‐3, PSP 15
POSD, B‐4 20
I‐1, I‐2 25
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-57
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5.17 PUMP ISLAND CANOPY LIGHTING
Example of recessed lighting in canopy
Recessed Lighting
Note: lighting fixtures
to be recessed inside
canopy body
Canopy Column
Pump
Island
(typ.)
LIGHTING FIXTURE ORIENTATION AND SHIELDING
Property Line
Maximum
Illumination
at property
line: 1.0
Concealed source fixture to
prevent light trespass
©clearzoning
©clearzoning
Amended through
March 1, 2019
5-58 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
(Intentionally Blank)
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-1
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 6.0
Development Procedures
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-2 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 6.0 Development Procedures
6.1 Condominium Development Standards
6.2 Special Land Uses
6.3 Site Plan Review
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-3
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
6.0 Development Procedures
6.1 CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
1. The purpose of this Section is to regulate projects that divide real property under a contractual
arrangement known as a condominium. New and conversion condominium projects shall conform to the
requirements of this Chapter, all other applicable City regulations, and the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of
1978, as amended). Each condominium project shall be reviewed in a manner consistent with
equivalent projects within the zoning district.
A. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended),
condominium subdivision plans shall be regulated by this Chapter as site condominiums, and shall
be considered equivalent to a platted subdivision for the purposes of enforcing the City’s site
development standards. The intent of this Section is to ensure that condominium subdivisions are
developed in compliance with all applicable standards of this Chapter and the City’s Code of
Ordinances, except that the review procedures of this Section and Chapter shall apply.
B. The intent of this Section is to provide regulatory standards for condominiums and condominium
subdivisions similar to those required for projects developed under other forms of ownership. This
Section is not intended to prohibit or treat a proposed or existing condominium project different than
a project or development under another form of ownership. The condominium-related definitions
contained in Section 2.2 are intended to make comparison possible between the definitions of this
Chapter and the City’s Code of Ordinances.
2. Application and authority. The following review process shall apply to all condominium projects within the
City.
A. Concurrently with notice required to be given to the City pursuant to Section 71 of the Condominium
Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended), a person, firm, corporation or other legal entity intending to
develop a condominium project shall file with the City Clerk the following information with respect to
the projects:
i. All names, addresses, and telephone numbers of:
a. Person, firms, corporations or other legal entity with an ownership interest in the land on
which the project will be located together with a statement that the entity is a fee owner or
land contract purchaser;
b. All engineers, attorneys, architects, and licensed land surveyors, involved in the
condominium project; and
c. The developer or proprietor of the project.
ii. The total gross and net land area; and the legal description of the land, including tax
identification numbers.
iii. The intended use, including the number of lots, units or gross floor area of each use to be
developed.
iv. A copy of the proposed master deed.
B. Condominium projects shall contain all information required by the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of
1978, as amended).
C. The information shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at the time the information is filed with
the City Clerk, and shall be kept current.
3. Approval of plans. All condominium plans shall be subject to Planning Commission review and approval
in accordance with Section 6.3. In making a determination, the Planning Commission shall consult with
City staff and attorney regarding the adequacy of the master deed, deed restrictions, utility systems,
streets, project design and layout and compliance with the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as
amended).
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-4 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
4. Development and use standards. All condominium development shall conform to the requirements of
this Chapter and the following:
A. Streets.
i. Internal streets within condominium projects shall comply with all street requirements adopted
by the City.
ii. To ensure a well-integrated local street network, the City may require all internal condominium
development streets to be dedicated to the public. The Planning Commission shall require stub
streets be provided for future extension to adjacent parcels.
B. Easements. The condominium plan shall include all necessary public utility and public service
easements granted to the City for the purpose of providing or maintaining public utility infrastructure
and structures, pursuant to the adopted City engineering standards.
C. Relocation of boundaries. The relocation of boundaries as defined in Section 148 of the
Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended) shall conform to all setback requirements of the
district in which the project is located, and shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review
and approval. These requirements shall be made a part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the
master deed.
D. Common elements. After construction of a condominium unit, the undeveloped area of a unit site
shall become a common element.
E. Encroachment. A condominium project shall not be constructed in a manner that intentionally
creates an encroachment.
F. Conformance with subdivision regulations and construction standards. All condominium project
plans shall conform to the plan preparation requirements, design layout, and construction standards
as established within this Chapter or within the City’s Code of Ordinances or within any adopted
construction standards.
G. Water and wastewater. The condominium project shall comply with and meet all federal, state,
county, and City standards for a fresh water system and waste water disposal.
H. Expansion and conversion. Expansion or conversion of a condominium project to additional land and
new phase shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission.
I. Master deed. The project developer shall furnish the City with one copy of the proposed
condominium master deed, one copy of bylaws and two copies of the condominium site plan.
i. The proposed plan shall be reviewed for compliance with this Chapter and the City’s Code of
Ordinances.
ii. An assessment mechanism shall be included in the master deed to guarantee adequate
maintenance of common elements.
iii. Master deeds submitted to the City for review shall not permit contraction withdrawal from
responsibility for maintenance of common elements without re-submittal of the master deed to
the City for review and approval.
iv. Fees for these reviews shall be established by the City Council.
J. As-built plan and occupancy. Submission of an as-built plan for a condominium unit shall be
required prior to occupancy. The Building Official may allow occupancy of the project before all
required improvements are installed, provided that a cash bond, letter of credit, or escrow fund is
submitted to the City to provide for the installation of improvements without expense to the City.
K. Final bylaws, consolidated master deed and site plan. Upon approval of the development the
applicant shall furnish the City a copy of the approved bylaws. A copy of the master deed and proof
of recording with the Calhoun County Register of Deeds office shall also be provided to the City. The
approved site plan shall be provided in a paper format and electronic format acceptable to the City
for incorporation into the City’s geographical information system.
L. Compliance with other statutes and ordinances. All condominium projects shall comply with federal,
state and local laws, statutes and ordinances.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-5
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
6.2 SPECIAL LAND USES
1. Purpose.
A. Special land uses include those uses that serve an area, interest or purpose that extends beyond the
borders of the City, create particular problems of control in relation to adjoining uses or districts,
have detrimental effects upon public health, safety or welfare, or possess other unique
characteristics that prevent such uses from being classified as principal permitted uses in a
particular zoning district.
B. This subchapter sets forth review procedures and standards for review and approval of special land
uses. These procedures are instituted to provide an opportunity to use land or structure(s) for one or
more activities that, under usual circumstances, could be detrimental to other permitted land uses.
Such uses may be permitted under circumstances particular to the proposed location, subject to
specific conditions or limitations that provide protection to adjacent land uses.
C. These procedures are adopted to provide a consistent and uniform method for review of special land
use applications, ensure full compliance with the standards contained in this Chapter, achieve
efficient use of land, prevent adverse impacts on neighboring properties and districts, preserve the
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare, and facilitate development in accordance with the
land use objectives of the master plan.
2. Applications for Special Use Approval. Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property
may file an application for one or more special land use permits, as provided for in this subchapter and
the zoning district in which the parcel is situated. Application shall be submitted through the Zoning
Administrator to the Planning Commission on a special form for that purpose. Each application shall be
accompanied by the payment of a fee, in accordance with the duly adopted schedule of fees to cover
costs of processing the application.
3. Required Information. Every application shall be accompanied by the following information and data:
A. Application and ownership information:
i. The applicant’s name and address.
ii. A statement that the applicant is the owner of the property, acting on the owner’s behalf, or a
statement as to the nature of the applicant’s interest in the property.
iii. The name, address and current phone number of the owner of record, if the applicant is not the
owner of record.
iv. The address and parcel number of the property.
B. Submittal of a site plan with any special use application, subject to the standards of Section 6.3. For
developments less than an acre in size which do not abut residential property and do not propose
any expansion of parking areas or building areas, staff may permit a site plan with reduced
information requirements. In those cases, the applicant shall submit a scaled drawing accurately
depicting the following minimum information:
i. Property boundary and accompanying legal description.
ii. Existing structures and uses thereof.
iii. Location of all abutting streets, easements and similar public areas.
iv. Existing zoning on the parcel and adjacent parcels.
C. A detailed use statement describing all proposed activities for which the building and lot will be used,
including proposed hours of operation, building capacity, and other characteristics of the use(s).
D. The Planning Commission may require an analysis of the planning implications of the proposed use
(s) or development. The analysis shall be carried out by planning, design, engineering and appraisal
professionals and shall include, but need not be limited to the following topics:
i. An analysis of the potential impacts of the proposed use(s) on abutting uses and the surrounding
neighborhood, along with a description of proposed mitigation measures to address these
impacts.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-6 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
ii. Estimated population holding capacity and a brief analysis of the age structure of the estimated
population for any residential land uses to be included in the proposed development, and a
general description of the scope of any impacts on community facilities such as schools and
parks.
iii. A traffic analysis that relates the trip-generating capacity of the proposed development to
existing and projected traffic volumes and patterns on surrounding streets.
iv. An environmental assessment.
v. An analysis of project impact on municipal services and public utilities, including capacity in
relation to proposed development, improvements necessitated by development and proposed
means of financing needed improvements.
4. Planning Commission Public Hearing. The Planning Commission shall review the application for a special
land use at its regular meeting upon publishing a notice and notifying property owners pursuant to
Section 103 (General Provisions) of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006).
5. Planning Commission Action. The Commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
denial of the application based upon materials received and testimony recorded at the public hearing.
Any motion by the Commission shall include a record of the recommended conditions to be imposed on
the use, and the underlying findings supporting the Commission’s determination. The conditions shall
remain unchanged, unless an amendment to the special land use permit is approved in accordance with
this subchapter. The Planning Commission recommendation shall then be forwarded to the City Council
for final action.
6. City Council Action. Upon receiving the Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall
consider and take final action on the special land use application. Any action by the City Council shall
include a record of conditions imposed on the use, and the underlying findings supporting the final
action.
7. Effect of Denial. No application for a special land use permit which has been denied by the City Council
shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of denial, except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the Zoning Administrator.
8. Issuance of Permit and Compliance by Applicant. Upon approval of the application for the special land
use permit by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a special land use permit. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for ensuring that any conditions attached to the approval of the
special land use permit are followed and enforced. An applicant who is granted a special land use permit
shall comply with the site plan review procedures contained in this subchapter.
9. Validity of Special Land Permit. Approval of a special land use permit shall be valid regardless of change
of ownership, provided that the new owner complies with all terms and conditions. Said permit shall be
placed on file with the Zoning Administrator.
A. Where development authorized by a special land use permit has not commenced within one year of
issuance, the permit shall automatically become null and void, and all rights hereunder shall
terminate. Upon written application filed 30 days prior to the termination of the one year period, the
Commission may authorize a single extension of the time limit for a further period of not more than
one year.
B. Any use for which a special land use permit may be granted shall be deemed a use permitted in the
district in which such use is located, provided:
i. Such permit was issued in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter;
ii. Such permit shall be deemed to affect only the lot or portion thereof for which such permit shall
have been granted.
10. Standards for Special Use Approval. Special land uses shall conform to all applicable requirements of this
subchapter and Chapter. Approval of a special condition use shall be based upon the determination that
the proposed use complies with all applicable requirements of this Chapter, and all of the following
standards as deemed applicable to the use by the Planning Commission:
A. The proposed use shall be in accordance with the City Master Plan and the intent and purpose of this
subchapter.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-7
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B. A documented and immediate need exists for the proposed use within the community.
C. The use is compatible with adjacent uses and the existing or intended character of the surrounding
neighborhood, and will not have an adverse impact upon or interfere with the development, use or
enjoyment of adjacent properties, or the orderly development of the neighborhood.
D. The proposed use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible
with the use of adjacent lands.
E. The proposed use shall be compatible with the natural environment.
F. The proposed use shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services, such as
highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewage
facilities and schools.
G. The proposed use shall not involve activities, processes, materials and equipment or conditions of
operation that will be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare by reason of excessive
production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
11. Conditions, Safeguards and Performance Bond. Prior to granting any special land use permit, the City
Council, on advice from the Planning Commission, may impose any additional conditions or limitations
upon the establishment, location, design, construction, maintenance or operation of the use authorized
by the special land use permit deemed necessary for protection of the public interest.
A. Said conditions and limitations may be for the purpose of:
i. Ensuring that public services and facilities can accommodate increased demands caused by the
land use.
ii. Protecting the natural environment, conserving natural resources, and promoting the
conservation of energy.
iii. Promoting uses of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
iv. Ensuring compatibility with adjacent land uses.
B. Conditions imposed may include those which will:
i. Protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare and the social and economic well being
of those who will use the land under consideration, adjacent landowners and the community as
a whole.
ii. Be related to a valid use of State of Michigan enabling legislation.
iii. Be related to purposes impacted by the land use.
iv. Be necessary to meet the purpose of this subchapter.
v. Be related to standards contained in this subchapter.
vi. Be necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this subchapter.
C. In authorizing a special land use permit, the City Council may require that the developer furnish a
performance bond, letter of credit or other financial guarantee in a form and amount acceptable to
the City Attorney.
D. All plans, specifications and statements submitted with the application for a special land use permit
shall become, with any changes ordered by the City Council, shall be considered part of the
conditions of any special land use permit approval.
12. Compliance Required. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property and the operator of the
use for which special land use approval has been granted to develop, improve, operate and maintain the
use, including the site, structures and all site elements, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
and all conditions of special land use approval until the use is discontinued.
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subchapter shall be a violation of the use provisions of
this Chapter and shall be subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use violation.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall make periodic investigations of developments authorized by the
special land use permit to determine compliance with all permits and ordinance requirements.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-8 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
13. Rescinding Approval. Approval of a special land use may be rescinded by the City Council upon
determination that the use has not been improved, constructed or maintained in compliance with this
Chapter, approved permits, site plans, or conditions of special land use approval. Such action shall be
subject to the following:
A. Public hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held in accordance
with Section 103 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006) at which time the owner of
an interest in land for which special land use approval was sought, or the owner’s designated agent,
shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to rescission.
B. Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the City Council with regard to the
rescission shall be made and written notification provided to the owner or designated agent.
14. Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to consider appeals of special land use
determinations. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council in the granting or denying a
special land use permit shall have the right to appeal said decision to the Circuit Court of Calhoun
County.
15. Amendment of a Special Land Use Permit.
A. Any person or agency that has been granted a special land use permit shall notify the Zoning
Administrator of any proposed amendment to the special land use permit. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the Planning Commission in writing of the amendment. A copy of said amendment shall
be placed in the original special use permit file. Amendments to a special land use permit shall be
subject to the same review and approval procedures and standards as a new application for special
land use approval.
B. A major amendment to a special land use permit shall comply with the filing procedures contained in
sections herein. An expansion or increase in intensity of use shall constitute a major amendment to
a special land use permit. A major amendment to a permit may consist of, but shall not be limited to,
the following actions:
i. The addition of land to the legal description of original permit;
ii. The establishment of another use or uses; and/or
iii. The addition of more dwelling units.
6.3 SITE PLAN REVIEW
1. Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedures and standards that provide a
consistent method for review of site plans, and to ensure full compliance with the standards contained in
this Chapter and other applicable codes and ordinances. It is the further purpose of this subchapter to
protect natural, cultural and civic resources, minimize adverse impacts on adjoining or nearby lots and
uses, encourage cooperation and consultation between the City and the applicant, and facilitate
development in accordance with the City’s Master Plan.
2. Scope. In accordance with the purpose of this subchapter and prior to a building permit being issued, a
site plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning Commission for the following types
of uses and development-related activities:
A. Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this
Chapter.
B. All uses subject to special land use approval.
C. Any use or development for which off-street parking areas are required under Section 5.14, except
for single- and two-family dwelling units on a single lot
D. All permitted use, new construction, development, or any change of use of land or structure(s) in any
zoning district lying contiguous to or across the street from a single- or two-family residential district.
E. All residentially related uses permitted in a one-family district such as, but not limited to institutional
uses or public facilities.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-9
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
F. Any new use, building addition, or accessory structure that requires additional off-street parking to
that already provided on the site in accordance with Section 5.14.
G. Site plans for subdivisions and site condominium developments.
H. All uses not otherwise included within a specific use district.
I. Any use or development for which the Zoning Administrator determines that Planning Commission
review of a site plan is necessary to determine compliance with the requirements and standards of
this Chapter, in accordance with the purpose of this subchapter.
3. Minimum Site Plan Information Required. Every site plan submitted to the Planning Commission shall be
in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter and shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator
prior to submission to the Planning Commission for compliance with the minimum standards of this
Chapter. The following information shall be included on the site plan:
A. Plans submitted for site plan review shall be stamped by a design professional licensed by the State
of Michigan such as a landscape architect, architect, or civil engineer.
B. Site plans shall be drawn to an engineer’s scale appropriate for a sheet size of at least 24 inches by
36 inches, not to exceed one inch equals 50 feet. If a large development must be depicted in
sections on multiple sheets, then an overall composite sheet shall be provided.
C. Date, north arrow scale, existing zoning, zoning of adjacent properties, legal description of the
property, easements, and the names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer, or civil
engineer responsible for the preparation of the site plan.
D. The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to
abutting properties and a boundary survey of the parcel.
E. The location, height and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property
and all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject property.
F. A finished floor elevation and exterior building elevation drawing shall be submitted with the site
plan.
G. The location of all existing and proposed drives, walks and parking areas.
H. The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys.
I. The location and size of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines, water lines, and storm
drainage facilities must be shown.
J. The location and size of all existing and proposed electric, natural gas, telephone, cable TV and solid
waste disposal facilities must be shown.
K. The location, height area of illumination and fixture details of all existing and proposed lighting shall
be provided. All lighting shall be located and oriented to have minimal impact on adjacent
properties.
L. The size, height, location and illumination of all existing and proposed signs shall be provided to
insure ordinance compliance.
M. The location of existing natural features such as wooded areas, floodplains, wetlands, drainage
courses, and a topographic survey of spot elevations of the site.
N. Other information as requested by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to verify that the
site and use are in compliance with this Chapter.
O. The Planning Commission may waive any of the foregoing requirements determined unnecessary for
site plan review purposes.
4. Site Plan Review Procedure. Site plans shall be reviewed in accordance with the following:
A. Pre-application meetings. To minimize time, costs and interpretation of City development
requirements, applicants are encouraged to meet informally with the Zoning Administrator and other
City officials to discuss a conceptual site plan, site issues and application of Chapter standards, prior
to submitting site plans for formal review.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-10 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
i. Any person may also request that a conceptual site plan be placed on a regular Planning
Commission meeting agenda as a discussion item for review and comment. The conceptual
plan shall have sufficient detail to permit the Planning Commission to determine relationships of
the site to nearby land, adequacy of landscaping, open space, access, parking, and other
facilities.
ii. Comments and suggestions by the City regarding a conceptual site plan shall constitute neither
an approval nor a disapproval of the plan, nor shall the City be bound in any way by such
comments or suggestions in preparing for formal submittal or review of a site plan.
B. Application submittal requirements. The owner of an interest in land for which site plan approval is
sought, or the owner’s designated agent, shall submit a completed application form and sufficient
copies of a site plan to the City. The site plan shall contain all of the information and site details
required by Section 6.3.3. Any application or site plan that does not satisfy the information
requirements of this Section shall be considered incomplete, and shall be returned to the applicant.
C. Technical review. Prior to Planning Commission consideration, the site plan and application shall be
distributed to appropriate City officials and staff for review and comment. The Zoning Administrator
may also submit the plans to applicable outside agencies and designated City consultants for review
and comment.
D. Planning Commission consideration of the site plan. The Planning Commission shall review the site
plan, together with any reports and recommendations from City officials, staff, consultants, and
other reviewing agencies and any public comments. The Planning Commission shall then make a
determination based on the requirements of this Chapter and the standards of Section 6.3.12. The
Planning Commission is authorized to postpone, approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the
site plan as follows:
i. Postponement. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a site plan is not
sufficiently complete for approval or denial, or upon a request by the applicant, the Planning
Commission may postpone consideration until a later meeting.
ii. Denial. Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with the standards of this Chapter
or would require extensive revisions to comply with such standards, the site plan may be denied.
If a site plan is denied, a written record shall be provided to the applicant listing the reasons for
such denial. Failure of the applicant or the applicant’s designated representative to attend two
or more meetings shall be grounds for the Planning Commission to deny site plan approval.
iii. Approval. Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance with the standards and
regulations set forth in this Chapter, the site plan shall be approved.
iv. Approval subject to conditions. The Planning Commission may approve a site plan, subject to
any conditions necessary to address minor required modifications, ensure that public services
and facilities can accommodate the proposed use, ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses
or otherwise meet the intent and purpose of this Chapter. Such conditions may include the
need to obtain variances or approvals from other agencies.
E. Recording of site plan action. Planning Commission action on the site plan shall be recorded in the
Planning Commission meeting minutes, stating the name and location of the project, the proposed
use, the most recent plan revision date, and the conditions or grounds for the Planning
Commission’s action. The Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission Chair or Secretary shall mark
and sign at least two copies of the site plan “APPROVED” or “DENIED” as appropriate, with the date
that action was taken and any conditions of approval. At least one copy shall be kept on file in the
City, and one shall be returned to the applicant.
5. Outside Agency Permits or Approvals. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary
permits or approvals from applicable outside agencies, prior to construction plan approval.
6. Construction Plans. When detailed construction or engineering plans are required by the City, county or
other agency with jurisdiction, the applicant shall submit copies of such plans to the City for review and
approval. The Zoning Administrator or designated consultant shall verify that the site design and
improvements shown on the construction or engineering plans are consistent with the approved site
plan, except for changes that do not materially alter the approved site design, or that address any
conditions of site plan approval.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-11
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
A. Where construction or engineering plans are not consistent with the approved site plan, the Zoning
Administrator or designated consultant shall direct the applicant to revise the plans to conform to the
approved site plan.
B. Where specific engineering requirements or conditions require an alteration from the approved site
design, such construction or engineering plans shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Commission as an amended site plan, prior to the start of development or construction on
the site.
7. Approval of Phased Developments. The Planning Commission may grant approval for site plans with
multiple phases, subject to the following:
A. The site design and layout for all phases and outlots be shown on the site plan to ensure proper
development of the overall site.
B. Improvements associated with each phase shall be clearly identified on the site plan, along with a
timetable for development. Development phases shall be designed so that each phase will function
independent of any improvements planned for later phases.
C. Each phase shall be subject to a separate plan review by the Planning Commission. Any revisions to
the approved site plan shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 6.3.11.
8. Site Plan Resubmission. A site plan that has been denied may be modified by the applicant to address
the reasons for the denial and then resubmitted for further consideration. Upon determination that the
applicant has addressed the reasons for the original denial, the Planning Commission shall review the
amended site plan as if it were a new application, per Section 6.3.4.
9. Site Plan Expiration. Site plans shall expire 365 calendar days after the date of approval, unless the
construction plan for the project has been submitted to the City for review. Upon written request received
by the City prior to the expiration date, the Planning Commission may grant one extension of final
approval for up to 365 calendar days, provided that site conditions have not changed in a way that would
affect the character, design or use of the site, the approved site plan remains in conformance with all
applicable provisions of this Chapter and any required fees have been paid.
10. Rescinding Approval of Site Plans. Site plan approval may be rescinded by the Planning Commission
upon determination that the site has not been improved, constructed or maintained in compliance with
approved permits, site plans, or conditions of site plan or special land use approval. Such action shall be
subject to the following:
A. Public hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held in accordance
with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006), at which time the owner of an interest in
land for which site plan approval was sought, or the owner’s designated agent, shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence in opposition to rescission.
B. Determination. Subsequent to the hearing, the decision of the Planning Commission with regard to
the rescission shall be made and written notification provided to the owner or designated agent.
11. Revisions to Approved Site Plans.
A. The Zoning Administrator may administratively review and approve minor modifications to approved
site plans that will not significantly alter or will conflict with the conditions of the site plan approval,
materially alter the approved site design, increase the intensity of use or alter anticipated demand
for public services. The Zoning Administrator shall provide a copy of any approved, minor
modifications to the Planning Commission.
B. Revisions to an approved site plan not considered by the Zoning Administrator to be minor shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission as an amended site plan, per Section 6.3.4. A revised plan will
be reviewed the same as a new application.
12. Standards for Site Plan Approval. The Planning Commission shall consider the following standards in the
process of reviewing any site plan for approval:
A. Adequacy of information. The site plan information is complete, accurate, and in an understandable
form that accurately depicts and describes the proposed development.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
6-12 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B. Site appearance and preservation. The site layout promotes the normal and orderly development of
surrounding lots, and the development layout preserves, to the extent feasible, the site’s natural,
cultural, and historical features, such as but not limited to significant buildings, wetlands,
topography, and woodlands.
C. Pedestrian access. Existing and proposed sidewalks or pedestrian pathways connect to existing and
planned public sidewalks and pathways in the area, and comply with applicable barrier-free access
standards.
D. Vehicular circulation. Drives, streets, parking, site access and other vehicle-related elements are
designed to minimize traffic conflicts on adjacent streets, and to promote safe and efficient traffic
circulation.
E. Parking and loading. Off-street parking lots and loading areas are arranged and located to
accommodate the intensity of proposed uses, minimize conflicts with adjacent uses, and promote
shared-use of common facilities where feasible.
F. Building composition. Building design and architecture are harmonious with the surrounding
neighborhood with regard to scale, mass, proportion, and materials.
G. Screening. Adequate screening elements have been provided to buffer or separate unlike or
conflicting land uses, and to screen off-street parking, mechanical appurtenances, loading and
unloading areas and storage areas from abutting residential districts and street rights-of-way.
H. Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures are designed and arranged to minimize glare and light
trespass, prevent vision impairments, and maximize security.
I. Impact upon public services. The impact upon public services (including utilities, streets, police and
fire protection, emergency access, and public sidewalks and pathways) will not exceed the existing or
planned capacity of such services.
13. Compliance with an Approved Site Plan. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, and the owner
or operator of the use(s) for which site plan approval has been granted, to develop, improve and maintain
the site, including the use, structures and all site elements in accordance with the approved site plan and
all conditions of approval, until the property is razed, or a new site plan is approved.
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Section shall be a violation of this Chapter, and shall be
subject to the penalties specified under this Chapter.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall make periodic investigations of developments for which site plans
have been approved. Noncompliance with the requirements and conditions of the approved site
plan shall constitute grounds for the Planning Commission to rescind site plan approval.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-1
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 7.0
Administration, Appeals and
Enforcement
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-2 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
Article 7.0 Administration, Appeals and
Enforcement
7.1 Amendments
7.2 Use of Buildings and Land
7.3 Permits Required for Excavations; Bonds
7.4 Moving of Buildings
7.5 Ownership of Two-Family Residential
Buildings
7.6 Withholding of Approval
7.7 Nonconforming Uses, Lots, and
Structures
7.8 Zoning Board of Appeals
7.9 Administration and Enforcement
7.10 Performance Guarantees
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-5
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
9. Amendment in conformance with a court decree. Any amendment for the purpose of conforming to a
decree of a court of competent jurisdiction shall be adopted by the City Council and published, without
necessity of a public hearing or referral thereof to any other board or agency.
7.2 USE OF BUILDINGS AND LAND.
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building
or land be used, designed or arranged, for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the
building or land is located. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally
altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the building is located.
7.3 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATIONS; BONDS.
1. The use of land for the excavation, removal, filling or depositing of any type of earth material, topsoil,
gravel, rock, garbage, rubbish or other wastes or by-products is not permitted in any zoning district,
except under a permit issued by the agency having jurisdiction. Such uses of land shall be in accordance
with a topographic plan, approved by the City, which shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 50 feet
equals one inch, and shall show existing and proposed grades, topographic features, and such other data
as required by the City.
2. Such permits may be issued by the City, upon the filing with the application of a cash bond or letter of
credit sufficient to rehabilitate the property upon default of the applicant. This regulation shall not apply
to normal soil removal for minor excavations related to basement, foundation, swimming pool or similar
work, provided approvals or permits have been secured.
7.4 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
No structure that has been wholly or partially erected on a lot shall be moved to or placed upon any other lot
in the City until in compliance with § 150.095 of the City Code of Ordinances and the State Construction
Codes or Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings and all fees are paid.
7.5 OWNERSHIP OF TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
Ownership of any two-family residential building shall be required to be retained under single ownership.
Ownership of the building may not be divided, except through condominium approval in accordance with
Section 6.1 and the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended). If more than one owner shall own the
two-family building, each individual owner shall be responsible for the entire building and use thereof.
7.6 WITHHOLDING OF APPROVAL.
The Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or City Council may withhold granting of approval of any
use, site plan, planned unit development, special land use, variance, or other approval required by this
Chapter for which they are authorized to approve, pending the approval of any other governmental agency as
authorized by law.
7.7 NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS, AND STRUCTURES
1. Intent.
A. It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this Chapter and subsequent
amendments, lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this Chapter
was passed or amended that would be prohibited or regulated under the terms of this or future
amendments.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-3
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
7.1 AMENDMENTS.
Amendments or supplements to the text of this Chapter or the boundaries of zoning districts shown on the
official zoning map may be made from time to time by ordinance of the City Council in the manner provided
by this Section and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006).
1. Amendment procedure. Amendments may be initiated by the City Council on its own motion, by the
Planning Commission, or by petition of a property owner or their designated representative. The
procedure to be followed for initiating and processing an amendment shall be as follows.
2. Application. Each petition by one or more persons for an amendment shall include a complete and
accurate application, along with the required fee established by City Council. For amendments to the
official zoning map, the following information shall accompany the application and fee:
A. A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a survey and location
map identifying the subject property in relation to surrounding properties.
B. The name and address of the owner of the subject property, and a statement of the applicant’s
interest in the subject property, if not the owner in fee simple title.
C. The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject property and surrounding
properties.
D. A written description of how the requested amendment meets the criteria stated in this Section.
3. Community impact assessments. The Planning Commission or City Council may require submission of
a general impact assessment by the applicant for any rezoning to assist in determining whether the
proposed zoning change would have a negative impact upon traffic, public facilities, street capacity,
neighborhoods, the downtown business district, historic structures, utilities, natural characteristics,
populations density, or other concerns. The City reserves the right to hire experienced professionals to
evaluate the impact assessment and prepare additional analyses, with the cost borne by the
applicant. The minimum contents of this impact assessment shall be the following:
A. Qualifications of preparer. Name(s) and address(es) of person(s) or firm(s) responsible for
preparation of the impact assessment, and a brief statement of their qualifications.
B. Site description. An area plan or aerial photograph illustrating the entire site and nearby
properties, overlaid with illustrations of adjacent land uses, zoning, public roads, utilities,
significant woodlands, soil types, 100-year floodplains, drains and general topography. The area
described shall be within one-quarter mile for sites up to 20 acres, and within one mile radius for
larger sites.
C. Conceptual site plan. Illustration of the general layout and phasing of proposed uses upon which
the impact analysis is based.
D. Land use impacts. Description of the types of proposed uses and other man made facilities,
including any project phasing, and an indication of how any proposed uses conform or conflict
with existing and planned development patterns, neighborhoods, the downtown business district,
historic structures, population density, and other land use concerns.
E. Environmental impact. Description of any expected environmental impacts on site and area
natural features, including any increases in light, noise or air pollution which could negatively
impact adjacent properties. Conceptual mitigation or replacement measures under consideration
shall be described. The study shall also describe general measures to control drainage, soil
erosion, and sedimentation during and after construction. Documentation by a qualified wetland
specialist shall be required wherever regulated wetland may be impacted by the proposed project.
F. Impact on public facilities and services. Describe the number of expected employees, visitors or
residents and the anticipated impact on police and fire protection. In particular, describe the
relationship of the use to area fire stations and the need for any new facilities or equipment.
Letters from the appropriate agencies should be provided.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-4 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
G. Utility impacts. Describe proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities, including any improvements or
off-site extensions needed to serve the long-range development on the site. For sites served with
sanitary sewer and public water, general calculations for water flows and water demands shall be
provided in comparison with sewer line capacity.
H. Other impacts. The Planning Commission or City Council may modify the scope of any community
impact assessment, upon determining that certain information is not necessary for review or that
additional information is needed to make a determination on the particular rezoning request.
4. Public hearing. A notice shall be given pursuant to Section 103 and Section 202 of the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act (110 of 2006).
5. Planning Commission recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review each proposal in terms of
particular factors related to the individual proposal and in terms of the most likely effect on the
community’s physical development. Following review, the Planning Commission shall submit their
recommendation and findings to the City Council.
6. City Council consideration. The City Council will act upon the request by granting approval, disapproval,
or referral to the Planning Commission for additional study. Upon presentation of a protest petition
meeting the requirements of this subsection, the proposed chapter amendment shall be passed only by a
two-thirds vote of the City Council. The protest petition shall be presented to the City Council before final
legislative action on the amendment and shall be signed by one of the following:
A. The owners of a least 20% of the area of land included in the proposed change.
B. The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet
from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change.
7. Effect of denial. No amendment application that has been wholly or in part denied shall be resubmitted
until the expiration of one year or more from the date of denial, except on the grounds of newly
discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be sufficient to justify reconsideration.
8. Rezoning criteria. For amendment requests to change, create, extend or reduce a mapped zoning
district, the Planning Commission and City Council shall use the following as a guide:
A. The proposed zoning district is more appropriate than any other zoning district, or more appropriate
than adding the desired use as a special land use in the existing zoning district.
B. The property cannot be reasonably used as zoned.
C. The proposed zone change is supported by and consistent with the goals, policies and future land
use map of the adopted City Master Plan. If conditions have changed since the plan was adopted, as
determined by the Planning Commission, the consistency with recent development trends in the area
shall be considered.
D. The proposed zone change is compatible with the established land use pattern, surrounding uses,
and surrounding zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of
use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values, and is
consistent with the needs of the community.
E. All the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district are compatible with the site’s physical,
geological, hydrological and other environmental features.
F. The change would not severely impact traffic, public facilities, utilities, and the natural characteristics
of the area, or significantly change population density, and would not compromise the health, safety,
and welfare of the City.
G. The rezoning would constitute and create an isolated and unplanned district contrary to the City
Master Plan which may grant a special privilege to one landowner not available to others.
H. The change of present district boundaries is consistent in relation to existing uses, and construction
on the site will be able to meet the dimensional regulations for the proposed zoning district listed in
the schedule of regulations.
I. There was a mistake in the original zoning classification, or a change of conditions in the area
supporting the proposed rezoning.
J. Adequate sites are neither properly zoned nor available elsewhere to accommodate the proposed
uses permitted in the requested zoning district.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-6 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B. It is the intent of this subchapter to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue
until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this
subchapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which they are located. It is
further the intent of this Chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district.
C. A nonconforming use of a structure, a land, or combination thereof shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this Chapter by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to
be seen from off premises, or by addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted
generally in the district involved.
D. It is recognized that some pre-existing nonconforming uses or structures, while not in conformance
with the requirements of the zoning district in which located, are not detrimental to the neighborhood
where the activity or structure has been in use for many years and long accepted. An extension or
expansion of such uses may, in some cases, not be detrimental to the neighborhood. Further, it is
recognized that the continuation of a pre-existing nonconforming use as it presently exists may be
quite detrimental to the neighborhood, but could be voluntarily changed to some other use by the
property owner which, although not a use allowable in the zoning district, would be considerably less
offensive than the present use; and, therefore, a desirable goal for improvement of the community.
E. Accordingly, it is the expressed intent of this Chapter to authorize wide latitude to the Planning
Commission to aid in reviewing and resolving problems associated with nonconforming uses and
structures, and to grant to the Planning Commission discretionary authority to provide for the
reasonable resumption, restoration, reconstruction, extension or substitution of nonconforming uses
or structures as legal special land uses when the requirements and standards set forth hereafter are
satisfied.
2. General Standards. The following general standards shall apply to all nonconformities.
A. Structure and land in combination. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of
the land.
B. Unlawful uses or structures. Any use that is not a conforming use in the district where it is located, or
determined to be a nonconforming use, shall be considered an unlawful use established in violation
of this Chapter. Those uses or structures that cannot be proven conclusively to have been in
existence prior to the date of the enactment or amendment of this Chapter shall be declared
unlawful, and shall be immediately discontinued and removed.
C. Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of
any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
D. Acquisition of nonconforming uses. To accomplish the elimination of nonconforming uses and
structures which constitute a nuisance or are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare,
the city, pursuant to Section 208(3) of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006), may
acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, private property for the purpose of removal of the
nonconformity.
E. Application to previously filed plans. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Chapter shall be
deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Chapter and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual
construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing
building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such demolition or removal shall be
deemed to be actual construction, provided work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the
building involved, provided it is completed within one year of such date.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-7
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
F. Safety repairs. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared unsafe by an official charged with protecting
pubic safety, upon order of such official. However, if a nonconforming structure, or any portion of a
structure containing a nonconforming use, becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to a lack of
repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the City to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical
condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
3. Nonconforming Lots.
A. Any nonconforming lot shall be used only for a use permitted in the district in which it is located. In
any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other restrictions of this Chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record (as defined in Section 2.2) at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet
requirements for lot area or lot width, provided that the yard, lot and structures shall otherwise
conform to the regulations of the district in which such lot is located.
B. If two or more lots or combination of lots with contiguous frontages in single ownership are of record
at the time of adoption or amendment of this Chapter, and if all or part of the individual lots do not
meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lots shall be considered one parcel for
the purposes of this Chapter. No portion of said parcel shall be used, occupied, or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements of this Chapter, nor shall any
division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area less than the requirements of
this Chapter. These provisions shall not apply to contiguous lots in single ownership where each of
the lots is occupied by a dwelling unit.
C. Upon application, the Zoning Administrator may permit the combination, in whole or in part, of
nonconforming lots of record into building sites less than the size requirements established by this
Chapter, provided that the combination of lots reduces the degree of nonconformity and results in a
parcel which is capable of accommodating a structure that is in conformance with the building area,
setback, and side yard requirements of this Chapter.
4. Nonconforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Chapter that could not be built under the terms of this Chapter by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on
the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following
provisions:
A. Alterations. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.
Such structures may be enlarged or altered in a way that does not increase its nonconformity.
B. Relocation. Should such structure be moved for any reason or for any distance whatsoever, it shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after is relocated or moved.
C. Repairs. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repair, or restoration and the
continued use of any nonconforming structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, acts of God or
acts of public enemy, subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter.
i. Any nonconforming building which has been damaged substantially or destroyed may be
repaired, rebuilt or replaced within 12 months of such damage or destruction, provided that
such repairs or rebuilding or replacement does not extend or expand the previously existing
nonconforming structure and the repairs have commenced within six months of the date the
structure was damaged.
ii. Where pending insurance claims require an extension of time, the Zoning Administrator may
grant a time extension provided that the property owner submit a certification from the
insurance company attesting to the delay. Until such time as the debris from the damaged
structure is fully removed, the premises shall be fenced and secured from pedestrian or
unauthorized access.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-8 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
5. Nonconforming Uses. If a lawful use of a structure, or use of structure and land in combination, exists at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter, that would not be permitted in the district
under the terms of this Chapter, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject
to the following provisions:
A. Alterations. No nonconforming use of land, except residential dwellings, shall hereafter be enlarged,
extended, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered beyond its present building confines. A
nonconforming use of land may, however, be expanded or extended within its present building
confines. Furthermore, a residential nonconforming use may be expanded or extended up to 25% of
the ground floor area of the existing residence.
B. Extension throughout building. Any nonconforming use may be extended through any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of
adoption or amendment of this Chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any additional
land outside such building.
C. Change of use. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use may be changed to
another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification, subject to the following:
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case,
shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than
the existing nonconforming use.
ii. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require conditions and safeguards
in accordance with the purpose and intent of this subchapter.
iii. Where a nonconforming use is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not
thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
D. Replacement by a conforming use. When a nonconforming use is replaced by a permitted use, all
uses of the land or structure(s) shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district, and
the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.
E. Discontinuance or termination. When a nonconforming use is discontinued or ceases to exist for
365 calendar days, the use shall not thereafter be re-established or renewed except in conformance
with the regulations of the district in which the land or structure is located.
i. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision.
ii. Appeals for continuation of such uses shall be taken to and determined by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
a. The owner of the property upon which the nonconforming use is located shall be entitled to
submit proof of intent to the Zoning Board of Appeals to continue the use to rebut the
presumption of abandonment; however, the burden of such proof shall rest upon the
property owner.
b. If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the owner did not intend to abandon the
right of continuation of the nonconforming use, the owner shall be entitled to resume the
use previously made.
F. Repairs to a nonconforming use. Work may be done on any building devoted in whole or in part to
any nonconforming use, including ordinary repairs, improvement, or modernization, or on repair or
replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to correct deterioration, obsolescence,
depreciation or wear. Such activities shall not increase the gross floor area, height, and ground floor
area of the existing building. Repairs shall be in accordance with an approved and valid building
permit, and the work has continued without interruption to completion.
G. Compliance with other applicable standards. Nonconforming uses shall be maintained in
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations and codes,
other than the specific use regulations for the zoning district where the use is located.
i. The owner, operator or person having beneficial use of land or structures occupied by a
nonconforming use shall be responsible for demonstrating compliance with this requirement.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-9
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
ii. Failure to do so, or failure to bring the use into compliance with current laws, ordinances,
regulations and codes within 180 days of their effective date, shall constitute grounds for the
City to seek court approval to terminate or remove the use at the owner’s expense.
6. Nonconforming Use Determinations. This Section is intended to provide reasonable standards for
determining whether a use is nonconforming, and whether a nonconforming use has been removed,
discontinued or otherwise ceased to occupy the land or structure in question. When there is a question
or dispute about the status of a particular use, such determinations shall be made by the Zoning Board
of Appeals, with specific findings identified and a copy of the written record of the determination placed
in the property file. Such determinations shall be subject to the following:
A. Standards for determining that a use is nonconforming. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine that a use is nonconforming upon finding that the following three statements are true:
i. The use does not conform to the purpose and use regulations of the district where it is located.
ii. The use is in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances,
regulations and codes.
iii. Evidence from a minimum of three of the following sources demonstrates that the use was
lawfully established prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter:
a. Local, county or state government files or records, including but not limited to permits,
inspection reports, dated photographs or notarized statements of government officials,
agents, representatives or employees.
b. Dated telephone directories, or similar dated records that provide information about the
occupants or uses located on a street by address or lot number.
c. Utility records, including but not limited to providers of water, sewer, electric, natural gas or
telecommunications service.
d. Dated advertising or other information published in a newspaper or magazine including but
not limited to advertisements, articles, features or photographs that address the use of the
land in question.
e. Dated aerial photos from local, county, regional, state or federal government sources, or
other sources accepted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
f. Other relevant information, including but not limited to date-stamped photographs, diary or
log entries, affidavits or notarized statements.
B. Standards for determining that a nonconforming use has ceased. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine that a nonconforming use has been removed, discontinued or otherwise ceased to occupy
the land or structure in question upon finding that a minimum of three of the following six
statements are true:
i. Local, county or state government files or records show that the nonconforming use has ceased.
Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to permits, inspection reports, dated
photographs or notarized statements of government officials, agents, representatives or
employees.
ii. Dated telephone directories, or similar dated records that provide information about the
occupants or uses located on a street by address or lot number, show that the nonconforming
use has ceased. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to entries that show the
address associated with the use as vacant or occupied by another use, or show the telephone
number associated with the use as disconnected or in use at another location.
iii. Utility records, including, but not limited to providers of water, sewer, electric, natural gas or
telecommunications service, show that the nonconforming use has ceased. Such evidence may
include, but shall not be limited to records indicating that the address of the use is vacant or
occupied by another use, the utility service associated with the use has been disconnected or
the business, organization or individual associated with the use has moved to another location.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-10 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
iv. Dated advertising or other information published in a newspaper or magazine show that the
nonconforming use has ceased. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to
advertisements, articles, features or photographs that address the use of the land in question.
v. Dated aerial photos show that the nonconforming use has ceased. Such evidence may include,
but shall not be limited to aerial photos from local, county, regional, state or federal
government sources, or other sources accepted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
vi. Other relevant information shows that the nonconforming use has ceased. Such evidence may
include, but shall not be limited to date-stamped photographs, diary or log entries, affidavits or
notarized statements.
7.8 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
1. Creation and Membership. There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), which shall
perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Article VI of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act
(P.A. 110 of 2006), and in such a way that the purposes and objectives of this Chapter shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
A. Membership. The ZBA shall consist of five members and two alternate members appointed by the
City Council. The compensation of the appointed members of the ZBA may be fixed by the City
Council. Appointments shall be as follows: One member appointed for a period of one year; two
members appointed for a period of two years; and two members appointed for a period of three
years, respectively; thereafter each member to hold office for the full three year term.
i. The alternate members shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years. One of the two
alternates may be a member of the City Council.
ii. Any vacancies in the ZBA shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the remainder of
the un-expired term.
B. Organization. The ZBA shall annually elect its own Chair to preside over meetings, along with a Vice-
Chair and a Secretary.
C. Alternate. The alternate member may sit as a regular member of the ZBA in the absence of a
regular member, with the same voting rights as the regular member, except shall not serve as chair.
The alternate may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of
reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of
interest. Having been appointed, the alternate member shall serve in the case until a final decision
has been made.
2. Meetings. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall be held at the call of the Chair and at
such times as such ZBA may determine. All hearings conducted by the ZBA shall be open to the public.
The City Clerk or designated representative shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also
keep records of its hearings and other official action. Four members of the ZBA shall constitute a
quorum for the conduct of its business. The ZBA shall have the power to subpoena and require the
attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files,
and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it.
3. Applications, Procedures and Jurisdiction. All applications and appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals
(ZBA) and actions by the ZBA shall be in accordance with the following:
A. Applications. Applications to the ZBA shall be filed with the City, with payment of the appropriate
review fee established by City Council. At a minimum, applications shall include the following:
i. The applicant’s name, address, and contact information; and the address and location of the
property involved in the request.
ii. Zoning classification of the subject parcel(s) and all abutting parcels.
iii. A plot plan of the site, drawn to scale with a north-arrow, showing all lot lines, street rights-ofway,
easements, structures, setback dimensions, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks and
other site improvements.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-11
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
iv. A letter from the applicant stating the reasons for the request, and addressing the applicable
review criteria specified in this subchapter for the type of request.
v. Any additional information deemed necessary by the ZBA to make a determination on the issue
in question.
B. Hearings. The ZBA shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give
due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable
delay. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent
or attorney.
C. Written record. Each decision shall include a written record of the specific findings and
determinations made by the ZBA in the case.
D. Concurring vote required. The concurring vote of a majority of the total ZBA membership (three out of
five members) shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an
administrative official or body; to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter upon which the ZBA is
required to act; and to grant a variance from any non-use or dimensional standard of this zoning
ordinance. The concurring vote of a two-thirds super-majority of the total ZBA membership (four out
of five members) shall be necessary to grant a use variance from the use provisions of this Chapter.
E. Notices.
i. For a variance requested under Section 7.8.7 notice shall be given pursuant to Section 103 of
the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006) as follows:
a. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
b. Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the property owners for which approval is
being considered and to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the
property in question and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property
regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. If the
tenant’s name is not known, the term “occupant” may be used.
c. The notice shall do all the following:
(1) Describe the nature of the request.
(2) Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing
all existing street address within the property.
(3) State when and where the request will be considered.
(4) Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
ii. Upon receipt of a written request seeking an interpretation of the zoning ordinance or an appeal
of an administrative decision under Section 7.8.4 or Section 7.8.5. A notice shall be given
pursuant to Article VI, Section 602(5) of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006) as
follows:
a. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City not less
than 15 days before the public hearing.
b. Notice shall be sent to the person requesting the interpretation not less than 15 days before
the public hearing.
c. In addition, if the request for an interpretation or appeal of an administrative decision
involves a specific parcel, written notice stating the nature of the interpretation request and
the time, date and place of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail or personal
delivery to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of
the property in question and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the
boundary of the property in question. If the tenant’s name is not known, the term
“occupant” may be used.
F. Fees. The City Council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution reasonable fees to
be charged to applicants for appeals to the ZBA. At the time the notice for appeal is filed the fee(s)
shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-12 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
G. Jurisdiction. The ZBA shall have power to act on those matters where this Chapter provides for
review. Such powers shall include:
i. Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the Zoning
Administrator or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provision of this
Chapter, subject to the provisions of Section 7.8.4.
ii. Interpretation of zoning ordinance provisions. To hear and decide requests for interpretations of
zoning ordinance provisions or the official zoning map, subject to the provisions of Section 7.8.5
and 7.8.6.
iii. Variances. To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions
of this Chapter, subject to the provisions of Section 7.8.7.
iv. Exceptions and other actions. To hear and decide requests for exceptions and other matters
upon which this Chapter or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006) specifically
authorize the ZBA to act, subject to the provisions of Section 7.8.8.
4. Administrative Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is error of principle in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
person or body charged with administration or enforcement of the zoning ordinance. Consideration of
administrative appeals shall be subject to the following:
A. Standing to appeal. Such appeals may be taken to the ZBA by any person, firm or corporation; or by
any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such
appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the ZBA by general rule, by filing
with the Zoning Administrator and the ZBA a notice of appeal, specifying the ground thereof. The
Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the ZBA all of the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the ZBA after notice of appeal has been filed that, by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
cases, the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order issued by a court of
record.
C. Review criteria for administrative appeals. The ZBA shall reverse an administrative decision only
upon determining that the order, requirement, decision, or determination:
i. Constituted an abuse of discretion;
ii. Was arbitrary or capricious;
iii. Was based upon an erroneous finding of a material fact; or
iv. Was based upon an erroneous interpretation of the zoning ordinance.
D. Actions. After making such a determination, the ZBA may reverse or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as, in its determination, ought to be made under the provisions of this Chapter. In
doing so, the ZBA shall exercise all authority granted by this Chapter to the person or body from
whom the appeal is taken.
5. Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. Where an ambiguity exists as to zoning district boundaries,
the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the power to interpret the zoning map in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the City Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan. The following rules shall
apply to such interpretations:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, alleys,
watercourses, lot lines, or municipal boundaries shall be construed to follow such lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines or utility easements shall be construed to be midway
between the main tracks, or along the centerline of such easements.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-13
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
C. Boundaries that parallel or are extensions of features indicated in this Section shall be so construed.
D. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the
map.
E. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
official zoning map, the ZBA shall interpret the district boundaries.
6. Interpretation of Zoning Ordinance Provisions.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the power to hear and decide requests for
interpretations of zoning ordinance provisions in such a way as to preserve and promote the
character of the zoning district in question, and carry out the intent and purpose of this Chapter and
master plan.
B. Further, in recognition that every potential use cannot be addressed in this Chapter, the ZBA shall
have the authority to determine whether a proposed use not listed in this Chapter is similar to a
principal or special land use permitted by this Chapter, subject to the following:
i. Prior to making such a determination, the ZBA must find that the principal or special land use
closely resembles the proposed use in terms of characteristics, intensity, nature and other
applicable common elements of such uses.
ii. The ZBA may determine that the use is (or is not) similar to a use listed in this Chapter, or may
recommend to the City Council that the proposed use be addressed through an amendment to
this Chapter.
iii. If it is determined that there is no similar use listed in this Chapter, the use shall be prohibited.
iv. If it is determined that the proposed use is similar to a use listed in this Chapter, the proposed
use shall comply with any conditions or special land use standards that apply to the listed use.
v. The ZBA may impose additional conditions or limitations upon the proposed use necessary to
satisfy the intent and purposes of this Chapter, to protect the health, safety, or welfare, or to
preserve the social and economic well being of adjacent residents and landowners, or the City as
a whole.
7. Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the authority to grant variances from specific
requirements of this Chapter in accordance with Article VI of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110
of 2006) and the provisions of this subchapter. The ZBA shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the
granting or denying of a variance, and may consider lesser variances than that requested by an applicant.
In granting a variance, the ZBA may impose conditions or limitations as it may deem reasonable in
furtherance of the intent and purposes of this Chapter.
A. Dimensional variances. The granting of a variance from particular area, setback, frontage, height,
bulk, density or other dimensional (non-use) standards of this Chapter shall require a finding of
practical difficulties, based upon the following criteria:
i. Strict compliance with the specified dimensional standard(s) will deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other property owners in the same zoning district, create an unnecessary
burden on the applicant, or unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a
permitted purpose.
ii. The variance will do substantial justice to the applicant, as well as to other property owners, and
a lesser variance than requested will not give substantial relief to the applicant or be consistent
with justice to other property owners.
iii. The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the land or structures
involved, that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district.
iv. The problem and resulting need for the variance has not been self-created by the applicant or
the applicant’s predecessors.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-14 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
v. The variance will not cause significant adverse impacts to adjacent properties, the neighborhood
or the City, and will not create a public nuisance or materially impair public health, safety,
comfort, morals or welfare.
vi. The alleged hardship and practical difficulties that will result from a failure to grant the variance
include substantially more than mere inconvenience, or an inability to attain a higher financial
return.
B. Use variances. The granting of a variance from the use provisions of this Chapter shall require a
finding of unnecessary hardship, based upon the following criteria:
i. The current zoning ordinance prohibits the property owner from securing any reasonable
economic return or making any reasonable use of the property. Under this standard, the ZBA
must find that the property (land, structures and other improvements) is not suitable for uses
permitted in the zoning district.
ii. The landowner’s plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to
general neighborhood conditions. Circumstances common to the larger neighborhood may
reflect the unreasonableness of the zoning itself, which should be addressed through a rezoning
or other legislative action.
iii. The use variance, if granted, would not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. This
standard requires consideration of whether the intent and purpose of the chapter and zoning
district will be preserved, and the essential character of the area will be maintained.
iv. The hardship is not the result of the applicant’s actions. Under this standard, the ZBA must
determine that the hardship that led to the use variance request was not self-created by the
applicant. Purchase of a property with a pre-existing hardship does not constitute a self-created
hardship. Financial hardships that would prevent reasonable use of the property shall be
considered, but shall not be the only determining factor in granting a use variance.
8. Exceptions. The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the authority to hear and decide requests for
exceptions on which this Chapter specifically authorizes the ZBA to pass. Any exception shall be subject
to such conditions as the ZBA may require to preserve and promote the character of the zone district in
question and otherwise promote the purpose of this Chapter, including the following:
A. Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
B. Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the
particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such
requirements.
C. Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to secure an
appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape, or so located with relation to surrounding
development or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without
such modification.
D. Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped sections of
the City, and for periods not to exceed 180 calendar days in developed sections.
E. Permit, upon proper application, temporary uses that do not require the erection of any capital
improvement of a structural nature and are not otherwise permitted in the zoning district. This shall
also exclude those temporary uses regulated by Section 5.3 and Section 4.55. The ZBA, in granting
permits for the above temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions:
i. Such temporary permits shall not exceed 365 calendar days. The ZBA may, upon written
request, grant one extension of up to an additional 365 calendar days, provided that the use has
been maintained in accordance with all conditions of approval, and that the City receives the
request prior to the permit expiration date.
ii. The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses
permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted.
iii. The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to
time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the
termination of said temporary permit.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-15
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
iv. All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered
in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the City, shall be made at the discretion of the ZBA.
v. In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the ZBA shall determine that they are
either de-mountable structures related to the permitted use of land; recreation developments
such as, but not limited to golf driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do
not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections.
vi. The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district.
vii. No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent
property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this
Chapter. Further, the ZBA shall seek the review and recommendation of the Planning
Commission prior to the taking of any action.
9. Limitations of Authority. The following specific limitations shall apply to the authority of the Zoning Board
of Appeals:
A. Expiration of approval. No order of the ZBA permitting the erection or alteration of a structure, or use
of a structure or land, shall be valid for a period longer than 365 calendar days, unless a building
permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period, or the use is lawfully established
within such period.
B. Limitations on review. The ZBA shall not have the authority to consider appeals of any decisions by
the Planning Commission or City Council regarding amendments to this Chapter, special land uses or
planned unit developments (PUD).
C. Code changes prohibited. The ZBA shall not have the authority to alter this zoning ordinance or Map.
7.9 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
1. Administration. Authority and responsibility for the administration and enforcement of all provisions of
this Chapter shall be as follows:
A. City Manager authority and responsibilities. The City Manager, as chief administrative official for the
City, shall have the ultimate responsibility for administrative oversight and enforcement of this
Chapter.
B. Zoning Administrator responsibilities. The Zoning Administrator and any other City officials or agents
duly authorized administrative or enforcement officials shall have the responsibility of carrying out
such administrative and enforcement duties as specified in this Chapter, as delegated by the City
Manager or as directed by the City Council for the purpose of implementing these regulations.
i. Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Administrator authorize changes to, vary from or ignore
the terms of this Chapter in carrying out designated duties. The Zoning Administrator shall be
required to administer and enforce the zoning ordinance precisely as written.
ii. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to approve zoning permits and take other
actions as authorized by this Chapter, and to make inspections of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out the administrative and enforcement duties of this Chapter.
iii. It shall be unlawful for the Zoning Administrator to approve any plans or issue any permits or
other approvals under this Chapter unless such plans have been determined to conform to all
applicable provisions of this Chapter.
iv. The Zoning Administrator shall not refuse to approve a zoning permit upon determination that
the permit applicant has complied with all conditions imposed by this Chapter, despite violations
of private contracts, covenants or private agreements that may occur upon the approval of the
permit.
2. Zoning Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for any structure, commence
the erection, addition, alteration or repair of any structure or parking area, or repair or move any
structure. No land use shall be commenced until a zoning permit has been secured from the Zoning
Administrator. Except upon written order of the Zoning Board of Appeals, no such zoning permit shall be
issued for any structure or use would be in violation of any provision of this Chapter.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-16 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
A. Zoning permit application. Application for a zoning permit shall be filed in writing with the City signed
by the person, firm, co-partnership or corporation requesting the same or by the duly authorized
agent of such person, firm, co-partnership or corporation. Prior to submitting an application for new
construction, all corners of the property and the corners of the proposed structure(s) shall be staked.
There shall be submitted with all applications for zoning permits one copy of a site or plot plan, giving
accurate dimensions on either a scale drawing or a reasonably dimensioned sketch. All applications
shall include the following information:
i. Legal description.
ii. Existing and intended use of the structure.
iii. Lines and dimensions of the lots to be used.
iv. Location upon the lot of all existing and proposed structures and any streets bordering the
property.
v. Evidence of ownership of all property affected by the coverage of the permit.
vi. Evidence that all required federal, state and county licenses or permits have been secured where
deemed necessary for zoning permit approval.
vii. Evidence that any public infrastructure complies with the City’s construction standards.
viii. Written approval of the water supply and sewage disposal extensions, leads or facilities, when
required, from the Calhoun County Health Department or the City Water and Waste Water
Department.
ix. The Zoning Administrator may require additional information deemed necessary to determine
compliance with provisions of this Chapter, and may waive portions of the foregoing
requirements deemed unnecessary for such purposes.
B. Standards. The following standards shall apply to all zoning permits:
i. No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Administrator has received notification of final
approval of a site plan, special land use or other necessary zoning approval, including any
conditions of approval.
ii. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning permit within ten business days after
determination that the proposed work conforms to all applicable provisions of this Chapter.
iii. It shall be unlawful for the Zoning Administrator to issue a zoning permit for proposed work that
fails or has not been determined to conform to all applicable provisions of this Chapter. When
the Zoning Administrator refuses to issue a permit, the cause and reasons for such refusal shall
be provided in writing to the applicant.
iv. The Zoning Administrator may revoke a zoning permit in the case of failure or neglect to comply
with any of the provisions of this Chapter, or in the case of any false statement or
misrepresentation made in the application for the permit. The Zoning Administrator shall notify
the owner of such revocation in writing.
v. Zoning permits shall not be issued for lots or parcels with frontage on undeveloped major, local
or private streets. The unimproved street shall be improved to City street standards prior to
seeking permit approval to build on abutting lots.
vi. Any permit required by this zoning ordinance shall be displayed face out, within 24 hours of its
issuance by placing the same in a conspicuous place on the premises facing the nearest street
and shall be continuously so displayed until all work is completed.
C. Validity. Zoning permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
D. Exempt from zoning permit requirements. The following shall be exempted from zoning permit
requirements: Fascia alterations; installation of siding, windows, doors and shingles; and
replacements of existing or deteriorated materials, and ordinary maintenance repairs made on all
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-17
1 Purpose and
Introduction 2 Definitions Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
7 Enforcement
City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
structures and outbuildings. This exemption does not eliminate the necessity for compliance with
zoning ordinance provisions and other county, state, or federal permitting requirements.
3. Fees. The City Council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend, by resolution, reasonable fees to be
charged to applicants seeking any zoning review or approval required under this Chapter. Before the
application can be processed or considered by the City, applicants subject to these requirements shall
deposit the required fee with the City Treasurer.
4. Certificate of Occupancy. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any structure or premises
hereafter altered, extended or erected, until the Building Official or designated representative shall have
made an inspection of the premises and shall have approved the same for occupancy.
5. Enforcement. The standards and requirements of this Chapter reflect obligations to the community at
large, and violations of this Chapter shall be considered a nuisance per se. The City’s zoning official(s)
shall, upon determining that any provision of this Chapter has been violated, take such necessary actions
authorized by this Chapter to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Inspection of violation. The Zoning Administrator or designated enforcement official or agent shall
investigate each alleged violation, and shall order a correction for all conditions found to be in
violation of this Chapter.
B. Correction period. All violations shall be corrected within 30 days following the receipt of an order to
correct from the Zoning Administrator or designated enforcement official or agent. The Zoning
Administrator or designated enforcement official or agent may grant an extension of up to 180 days
upon determining that the additional time is necessary for correction. The Zoning Administrator or
designated enforcement official or agent may require the immediate correction of a violation upon
determining that the violation presents an imminent peril to life or property.
6. Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to those remedies
pursuant to § 10.99 of the City Code of Ordinances, as amended, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each violation. Repeat offenses under this Chapter shall be subject to increased fines, as provided for in
§ 10.99 of the City Code of Ordinances, as amended.
A. Each day on which any violation of this Chapter occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense,
subject to separate sanctions. The paying of a fine or sanctions under this Chapter shall not exempt
the offender from meeting the requirements of this Chapter.
B. The Zoning Administrator and those public servants authorized by § 10.10 of the City Code of
Ordinances are hereby designated as the authorized City officials to issue appearance tickets for
violations of this Chapter.
C. A violation of this Chapter is deemed to be a nuisance, per se. In addition to any remedies available
at law, the City may bring an action for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain,
prevent or abate any violation of this Chapter.
7.10 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
1. Intent and Scope of Requirements. To insure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any
conditions imposed there under, the Planning Commission or City Council may require that a
performance guarantee be deposited with the City to insure faithful completion of improvements, in
accordance with Section 505 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as
amended. Improvements for which the City may require a performance guarantee include landscaping,
berms, walls, lighting, driveways and parking, streets, acceleration/deceleration lanes, traffic control
devices, storm drainage, sidewalks, exterior lighting and utilities and land reclamation activities, and
other features and actions necessary to protect natural resources and health, safety, and welfare of the
community. The performance guarantee shall not cover the principal building(s).
2. General Requirements. The performance guarantee shall meet the following requirements:
A. The performance guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable bank letter of credit, cash escrow,
or other form acceptable to the City.
Amended through
March 1, 2019
7-18 1
Purpose and
2 Definitions Introduction Zoning
3 Districts Use
4 Standards Site
5 Standards Development
6 Procedures Admin and
Enforcement 7 City of Marshall Zoning Ordinance
clearzoning® i
B. The performance guarantee shall be submitted to the City at the time of issuance of the building
permit authorizing the activity or project. If appropriate, based on the type of performance guarantee
submitted, the City Treasurer shall deposit the funds in an interest-bearing account in a financial
institution with which the City regularly conducts business.
C. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be sufficient to cover the estimated cost of the
improvements for which the performance guarantee is required. The applicant shall provide an
itemized schedule of estimated costs to complete all such improvements to be covered by the
guarantee, and such estimate shall be verified as to amount by the City staff. The exact amount of
the performance guarantee shall be determined by the City staff or Building Official. The form of the
guarantee shall be approved by the City and Attorney.
D. The City shall determine the means of releasing portions of the deposit in proportion to the amount
of work completed on the covered improvements. All required inspections for improvements for
which the guarantee is held shall have been completed before any release shall be made.
E. A performance guarantee shall be required for all projects for which site plan review is required,
except that in the case of a minor site plan amendment the Zoning Administrator shall determine
whether a performance guarantee is needed.
F. If the applicant shall fail to provide any site improvements according to the approved plans within
the time period specified in the guarantee, the City Council shall have the authority to have such
work completed, including administrative costs, by appropriating funds from the deposited security.
G. An amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the total performance guarantee may be retained for a
period of at least one (1) year after installation of landscape materials to insure proper maintenance
and replacement, if necessary. This amount shall be released to the applicant upon certification by
the Zoning Administrator that all landscape materials are being maintained in good condition.
3. Unsatisfactory Completion of Improvements. Whenever required improvements are not installed or
maintained within the time stipulated in the guarantee, according to the approved plans, or in
accordance with the standards set forth in this Ordinance, the Township may complete the necessary
improvements itself or by contract to an independent contractor, and assess all costs of completing said
improvements, including administrative costs, against the performance guarantee. Prior to completing
said improvements, the City shall notify the owner, site plan review applicant, or other firm or individual
responsible for completion of the required improvements.
Amended through
March 1, 2019 
 
 
 
 




 


