Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 1
Adopted April 1, 1968
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF MANISTEE, MICHIGAN
ADOPTED APRIL 1, 1968
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF MANISTEE, MICHIGAN, IN ORDER TO SECURE THE
BENEFITS OF EFFICIENT SELF-GOVERNMENT AND TO PROMOTE OUR COMMON
WELFARE, DO HEREBY ENACT AND ESTABLISH THIS CHARTER.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chap. 1 Incorporation and Powers
Chap. 2 Council (Amended 11-5-96.)
Chap. 3 Elections
Chap. 4 Legislation
Chap. 5 Administration
Chap. 6 Justice Court (Repealed 4-68)
Chap. 7 Finances, Budget, Contracts
Chap. 8 Taxation
Chap. 9 Special Assessments
Chap. 10 Borrowing
Chap. 11 Utilities, Franchises and Permits
Chap. 12 Retirement System (Repealed 2-16-88)
Chap. 13 Miscellaneous
Chap. 14 Schedule
Appendix 1 Boundary: City of Manistee, Michigan
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 2
Adopted April 1, 1968
CHAPTER 1
INCORPORATION AND POWERS
Section 1-1 Incorporation
The Municipal corporation now existing and known as the "City of Manistee" as its limits are
now or may hereafter be established, shall be and continue a Municipal corporation under the
laws of the State of Michigan.
Section 1-2 Boundaries
The City shall embrace the territory constituting the City of Manistee, on the effective date of this
Charter as described in Appendix 1 attached hereto and made a part hereof by this reference,
together with such annexations thereto and less such detachments therefrom as may be made
from time to time. Upon annexation or detachment of territory, the boundaries shall be deemed
thereby changed without amendment of this section. The Clerk shall maintain and keep available
in his or her office for public inspection and distribution an official description of the current
boundaries of the City.
Section 1-3 Powers
The City of Manistee is hereby vested with and may exercise any and all powers which cities are
now, or may hereafter be, required or permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters as
fully and completely as though said powers were specifically enumerated herein, except for such
limitations and restrictions as are provided in this Charter, which shall be held to be exclusive. All
powers herein granted to the City or its officers shall be exercised only in conformance with all
validly applicable constitutional, statutory and decisional laws and regulations.
Section 1-4 Construction
The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, and
specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way
the general power stated in this chapter.
Section 1-5 Intergovernmental Relations
The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the
authorized financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or
more states or political subdivisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency
thereof.
CHAPTER 2
COUNCIL
Section 2-1 Powers
There is hereby created a City Council which shall have full authority, except as otherwise provided
herein or by general law, to exercise all of the powers conferred upon the City, to adopt all
ordinances, resolutions, or other measures relating to its Municipal concerns, and to otherwise
govern its affairs.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 3
Adopted April 1, 1968
A. The City Council shall not sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any Lake Michigan beach front
property or access thereto without an affirmative vote by the majority of the electors of the
City voting thereon.
B. The City Council shall not spend, loan or otherwise obligate any oil or gas royalty income of any
of the principal in the Oil and Gas Fund without an affirmative vote by the majority of the
electors of the City voting thereon. (Amended 11-3-92.)
C. The City Council shall not sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any Memorial Park property, North
Duffy Park property, Douglas Park property or Red Szymarek Park property, Man-Made Lake
Property without an affirmative vote by the majority of the electors of the City voting thereon.
(Amended 11-5-96) (Amended by adding Man-Made Lake Property 11-4-97 by vote of the general electorate)
Section 2-2 Composition
The Council shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be the Mayor and six (6) Councilpersons
elected as provided hereafter.
Section 2-3 Qualifications
No person shall be eligible to the office of City Councilperson unless he or she has been a
registered elector of the City or any area annexed thereto for not less than two (2) years
immediately preceding the filing deadline and unless he or she shall be at least twenty-five (25)
years of age on such date. No member of the City Council shall during his or her term of office
hold any other City office or employment unless otherwise provided in this Charter.
Section 2-4 Mayor
Each year, at the first meeting of the City Council, following the regular Municipal elections, after
the newly elected members have been sworn and assume their duties of office, the Council shall
elect a Mayor by a majority vote of its members. The Mayor shall preside at Council meetings and
shall be considered the executive head of the City. He or she shall be considered a member of the
Council and shall have a voice and vote on all issues but no veto power.
Section 2-5 Election
At the regular City election held in November of odd numbered years Councilpersons shall be
elected from the 2nd, 4th and 6th districts and in even numbered years Councilpersons shall be
elected from the 1st, 3rd, 5th and 7th districts, all from one (1) non-partisan ballot as provided in
Chapter 3 for terms of two (2) years each.
Section 2-6 Vacancies
Any vacancy occurring in the office of Council person shall be filled within thirty (30) days by
appointment of a resident of the district involved by a majority vote of the remaining Council
persons. If there is any vacancy in the office of Mayor, the vacant Council seat shall first be filled
and then the Council as so reconstructed shall select from among its members a Mayor to fill the
unexpired term. If the Council has not filled the vacancy within thirty (30) days, then a special
election shall be called in accordance with Chapter 3 to fill the unexpired term. If there is a
vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall serve until after the special election and
then the Council as so reconstructed shall select from among its members a Mayor to fill the
unexpired term. No vacancy need be filled if it occurs within one hundred and twenty (120) days
preceding a City election.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 4
Adopted April 1, 1968
A vacancy shall be deemed to occur upon the death, resignation, recall, loss of residence in the
City district involved, conviction of a felony, interest disqualification as provided in Section 2-9, or
upon finding of mental incompetence by a court having jurisdiction thereof, or failure to qualify by
taking an oath of office within seven (7) days after notice of election has been either handed to
him or her or sent to him or her by registered or certified mail. (Amended 11-5-96)
Section 2-7 Oath
Before assuming office every Councilperson shall publicly subscribe an oath in writing promising
before the Clerk to uphold and defend the Constitutions and laws of this nation and State and the
Charter of the City of Manistee.
Section 2-8 Compensation 1
Each Councilperson shall receive as compensation for his or her services as such the sum of up
to $500.00 per year payable quarterly. The Mayor shall receive an additional amount up to
$100.00 per year payable quarterly. Such compensation is to be fixed by the Council. The said
Mayor and Councilpersons shall be reimbursed for any authorized actual and itemized out of
pocket expenses incurred while on duly authorized City business, provided, however, that this
shall not constitute or include any lost wages, salaries, commission, etc.
Section 2-9 Conflict of Interest
No member of the City Council or other officer of the City shall be interested directly or
indirectly beyond a trivial extent, in the profits or any contract, job or work or in the sale to or
by the City of any land, materials, supplies, or services, other than official services. Any
member of the City Council or other officer of the City violating this provision shall, upon
conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit his or her office. The
prohibitions of this section shall not apply if the City Council shall declare upon its records by a
two-thirds vote of the members thereof, other than the member so interested, that the best
interests of the City are served notwithstanding said personal interest.
Section 2-10 Restrictions
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall require the appointment, discipline or removal
of any City administrative employees whom the Manager or any of his or her subordinates are
empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with
the Manager anything pertaining to appointment, discipline, and removal of such employees.
Section 2-11 Judge of Qualifications
The Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members and of the grounds for
forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct
1 MCL 117.5c replaces Section 2-8 when a Home Rule City by ordinance establishes a compensation commission
consisting of 5 registered electors of the city, which meets in odd years and determines the salary of elected
officials. The determination of the compensation commission is effective 30 days following the filing of its
determination with the city clerk, unless 2/3rds of the elected councilmembers reject the determination. The City
of Manistee adopted an Ordinance establishing pursuant to MCL 117.5c the City of Manistee Compensation
Commission (Chapter 272 of the City of Manistee Codified Ordinances).
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 5
Adopted April 1, 1968
constituting grounds for forfeiture of his or her office shall be entitled to public hearing on
demand, and notice of such hearing if demanded shall be published in one (1) or more
newspapers (published and/or circulated) in the City at least one (1) week in advance of the
hearing. Decisions made by the Council under this section shall be subject to review of court.
Section 2-12 Nepotism
Relatives by blood or marriage of any Councilperson or the City Manager within the second
degree of consanguinity or affinity may not enter upon employment with the City during the
term for which the said Councilperson was elected, or during the tenure of said Manager. This
prohibition shall not apply if the Council shall declare upon its record by unanimous vote of the
members elect thereof, other than the member involved, that the best interests of the City are
served notwithstanding said relationship.
Section 2-13 Organization and Procedure
The City Council shall meet at 7:30 o'clock p.m. on the Tuesday night following the completion of
the official canvass, at which time the members shall be sworn and assume the duties of their
office. They may establish rules of procedure and policy which shall be made public, they shall
meet in public session at least twice each month at such times as may be prescribed by the rules2,
and a public journal of every session of their proceedings shall be kept by the Clerk in the English
language. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, Manager, or any two (2) Councilpersons
on reasonable notice, the time and manner of which shall be defined in the Council rules. The
City Council shall select from its members, in addition to the Mayor, a Mayor Pro Tem who shall
act in the Mayor's absence or disability and whose term shall expire at the next annual
organization meeting of the Council. A majority of the members elect shall constitute a quorum.
The affirmative vote of a majority of the members elect shall be required to adopt an ordinance,
and the vote thereon shall be recorded, provided, however, that five (5) votes shall be required to
pass any measure granting a franchise or authorizing a bond issue. All sessions of the City Council
and records of the City shall be public.
Section 2-14. Appointments
The Council shall appoint and may remove a City Manager, Clerk, Attorney and Assessor for the
City, all to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Council shall fix the compensation to be paid
such officers of the City.
Section 2-15 City Manager Attendance
The City Manager shall have a seat in the Council sessions and may take part in all its proceedings
and deliberations on all matters subject to such rules as the Council shall from time to time
prescribe but without the right to vote.
Section 2-16 Compelling Attendance
The City Council may enforce the attendance of any Councilperson, officer or employee at its
meetings in such a manner as shall by ordinance be prescribed.
2 See Council Policy CP–10.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 6
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 2-17 Voting
On all questions other than those involving financial interest of a member of the Council or his or
her own conduct, each member who is present shall vote when his or her name is called, unless
excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present and a member refusing to
vote except when so excused shall be guilty of a violation of this Charter.
Section 2-18 Board of Supervisors 3
The City shall have the maximum number of representatives on the Manistee County Board of
Supervisors to which it is entitled by law. The City shall be represented on the Board of
Supervisors by the Assessor, one (1) person elected from and by each City district for a two (2)-
year term and such other persons as shall be appointed by the City Council who shall serve at the
Council's pleasure. Any City representative may retain the fees or compensation payable for such
service. In case any City member of the Board of Supervisors is unable to attend the meetings of
the Board for any reason, the City Council may appoint a qualified person to discharge the duties
of such office during such regular supervisor's inability to attend.
CHAPTER 3
ELECTIONS
Section 3-1 Wards and Precincts
The City of Manistee, including any area annexed thereto, shall constitute one (1) ward. The City
shall be divided into seven (7) approximately evenly populated districts for the purpose of
nominating residents thereof for the seven (7) offices of Councilpersons to be elected at large and
for nominating and electing one (1) resident as supervisor from each district. The districts shall
consist of the areas set forth in Exhibit B-1 through Exhibit B-7 attached to the original Charter,
until such time as the City Council shall re-define such districts.4 The City Council shall by
resolution establish convenient election precincts. Until the Council shall otherwise determine,
the precincts shall continue as now established. The inhabitants of the City having the
qualifications of electors under the constitution and general laws of this State shall be the
electors therein.
Section 3-2 Annual and Special Elections
A regular non-partisan City election shall be conducted on the first Tuesday after the first Monday
of November in each year. The registration of voters, the preparation of ballots or machines, and
the conduct of elections in the City of Manistee shall be in accordance with the terms of this
Charter and the State election laws to every reasonably practicable extent and shall be under the
general supervision of the City Clerk. Special elections shall be held when called by resolution of
the City Council at least forty (40) days in advance of such election, or when required by this
Charter or the general laws of the State5. Such resolution shall set forth the purpose of the
3 This section is effectively repealed as the result of the repeal of MCL 117.27.
4 Districts have been re-defined. See Appendix 2 for current district boundaries
5 MCL 168.646a requires that ballot questions be certified to the City Clerk no later than the fourteenth Tuesday
before the election and certified to the Manistee County Clerk no later than 4 p.m. on the twelfth Tuesday before
the election.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 7
Adopted April 1, 1968
election and the question to be voted upon with reasonable clarity. (No primary election is
contemplated by this Charter.)
Section 3-3 Election Commission
The Election Commission of the City of Manistee shall consist of the City Clerk, as Chairperson,
the City Attorney and the City Assessor and, in cases of vacancy in such office or inability to act, a
substitute shall be appointed by the Council to serve until the disability is removed. The Election
Commission shall have such duties as may be prescribed by State law. Until otherwise provided,
they shall determine disputes as to the adequacy of petitions, determine the qualifications of and
appoint inspectors of election and prescribe the procedure to be followed. The City Council shall
fix the rate of compensation for inspectors.
Section 3-4 Nominations-Petitions
Any legally qualified person may have his or her name placed in the regular election ballot for any
elective office of the City by filing with the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the fifth Friday preceding
such election6, a petition signed by not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than fifty (50)
registered electors of the district of the City to be represented and it shall be the duty of the Clerk
to provide uniform nomination petition blanks for that purpose. No person shall sign his or her
name to a greater number of petitions for any one (1) office than there are persons to be elected
to said office. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than he or she is
so permitted to sign, the signatures bearing the most recent dates shall be invalidated. If it shall
appear to the Clerk that such petition has been signed by the required number of electors of the
City, nominating such person for such office, it shall be the duty of the Clerk to place such name
on the regular City election ballot in the same manner and form as any other name on the ballot.
Incumbency shall not be indicated unless required by State law. Any candidate may withdraw by
filing a signed statement to such effect with the City Clerk not later than Tuesday noon following
the deadline for filing the original petition.7
Section 3-5 Voting Hours
The polls for all elections shall be open as provided by State law.
Section 3-6 Board of Canvassers
A Board of Canvassers shall be appointed and maintained as required by law.8
Section 3-7 Recall
Any elective officer may be removed by the qualified voters of the City at the time and in the
manner provided by general law.
6 Provision replaced by state law. Odd Year Election: MCL 168.644e requires filing of Petition by 4 p.m. on the
fifteenth Tuesday before the general election. Even Year Election: MCL 168.646a (amended 2018) requires filing of
a Petition no later than 4 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the general November election.
7 MCL 168.322a changed the requirement for a candidate to withdraw. To withdraw a candidate must file a
written notice of withdrawal with the city clerk not later than 4:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, the third day after
the last day for filing the nomination petition.
8 Provisions for the establishment of a City Board of Canvassers were repealed (MCL 168.30a, 168.30b, 168.30c,
168.30d and 168.30e. Board of Canvassers are now a County Board.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 8
Adopted April 1, 1968
CHAPTER 4
LEGISLATION
Section 4-1 Legislative Power
The legislative power of the City is fixed exclusively in the City Council, except as otherwise
provided by law. All official action of the City Council shall be by ordinance, resolution or motion.
Section 4-2 Prior Legislation Preserved
All ordinances, resolutions and rules of the City and of each administrative agency of the City
which are in force on the effective date of this Charter, to the extent that they are consistent with
the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in full force until repealed. All such ordinances,
resolutions and rules may be amended by the City Council and shall continue in effect as
amended. A numbering system shall be established for all preserved ordinances within one (1)
year after the adoption of this Charter.
Section 4-3 Ordinance Enactment
A. Form. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The enacting
clause on all ordinances passed by the City Council shall be "The City of Manistee Ordains."
Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title, when adopted.
B. Enactment and Effective Date. Ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of a
majority of the membership of the City Council. No ordinance shall be enacted at the same
meeting at which it is introduced unless it is an emergency ordinance. All ordinances shall
take effect ten (10) days after their enactment.
C. Emergency Ordinances. Ordinances immediately necessary for the preservation of public
peace, health, morals, safety or welfare may be given immediate effect or earlier effect than
ten (10) days after their enactment upon receiving five (5) affirmative votes of the City
Council. The emergency and effective date shall be declared therein.
D. Amendments. Any ordinance may be amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner
provided in this section and no such ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only,
but the section or subsection amended shall be enacted in full.
E. Traffic and Parking Regulations. In any ordinance regulating traffic, parking and one-way
streets, it may be provided that, subject to adequate standards to be set forth therein, the
details of regulating traffic, parking and one-way streets may be promulgated by the City
Manager without formality of ordinance amendment.
F. Repeal of Ordinances. An ordinance may be repealed only by an ordinance passed in the
manner provided in this section, except that the ordinance to be repealed may be referred to
by its number and title only.
Section 4-4 Publication
Within seven (7) days after the enactment of an ordinance the same shall be published by one of
the following methods:
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 9
Adopted April 1, 1968
A. Said ordinance shall be printed in full in any newspaper published and/or widely circulated in
the City of Manistee, or
B. Said ordinance shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk and in two (2) other public places
in the City of Manistee. In case an ordinance is posted rather than printed, a notice of the
enactment of the ordinance giving the subject thereof and the place where the copies have
been posted, and where copies may be obtained at reasonable cost, shall be printed at once
in one (1) newspaper published and/or widely circulated in the City.
Section 4-5 Ordinance Record
All ordinances shall be recorded by the City Clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book",
and it shall be the duty of the Clerk to authenticate such record by official signature but the
failure of the Clerk to do so shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation.
Section 4-6 Enactment by Reference
Ordinances and codes may be enacted by reference to the extent and in the manner provided by
general law.
Section 4-7 Penalties
The City Council may provide in ordinances adopted by it for the punishment of violations
thereof. Such punishment may be a fine of not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for not more
than ninety (90) days9, or both, in the discretion of the court. These maximums shall
automatically increase as permitted by law. The court may order imprisonment until a fine is paid
and it may suspend sentences or establish probationary supervision. Imprisonment for violations
of ordinances may be in the City or County jail. Enforcement by injunction, mandamus, orders of
superintending control or other proceedings may be also authorized.
Section 4-8 Time Limit for Prosecution
No prosecution for the violation of an ordinance shall be commenced after the expiration of two
(2) years after the commission of the offense.
Section 4-9 Initiative and Referendum
An ordinance may be initiated by petition to which all signatures shall be obtained within thirty
(30) days before the date of filing.10 A referendum on an ordinance enacted by the City Council
may be had by a petition signed within twenty-one (21) days after the enactment of the
ordinance. A petition for an initiated ordinance or for a referendum shall be in the form and
manner hereinafter provided.
9 MCL 117.3(k) permits, and the City of Manistee has adopted, the enactment of an ordinance or adoption of the
Michigan vehicle code that includes a penalty of up to 93 days
10 The law of preemption prevents local legislation on a matter that has been addressed under state law. MCL
117.25 provides that the city clerk not count a signature on an initiatory or referendum petition that was signed
more than one year before the filing of the petition.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 10
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 4-10 Signatures Required
An initiatory or a referendum petition shall be signed by registered electors of the City not less in
number than fifteen (15) percent of the registered electors of the City as of the date of the last
regular City election prior to the filing of the petition.11
Section 4-11 Form of Petitions
An initiatory or referendum petition shall be addressed to the City Council. No such petition need
be on one paper, but may be the aggregate of two (2) or more petition papers identical as to
contents, except as to signatures. A referendum petition shall clearly identify the ordinance or
part thereof and ordinance number it proposes to have repealed. An initiatory petition shall set
forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate and no petition shall propose to initiate more
than one (1) ordinance.
Section 4-12 Signing and Circulation of Petition
Each signer shall sign his or her name, and shall place thereon, after his or her name, his or her
place of residence by street and number or put other customary designation and the date of his
or her signing said petition. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit
executed by the circulator of such paper that each signature thereof is the genuine signature of
the person it purports to be, and that such circulator believes each signer to be a duly registered
elector of the City of Manistee. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk.
Section 4-13 Canvass by Clerk
Upon filing with the Clerk of any initiatory or referendum petition, the Clerk shall canvass the
signatures thereon to determine whether said petition contains a sufficient number of signatures
of registered electors of the City. Any signatures obtained more than thirty (30) days before the
filing of such petition with the Clerk shall not be counted. The Clerk shall complete said canvass
within five (5) days from the filing of said petition, and in the event the petition filed is in any
respect deficient, the Clerk shall forthwith so notify the person filing the same. In the case of
initiative or referendum then ten (10) days from such notification shall be allowed for filing of
supplemental petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time
allowed and is in compliance with the provisions of this Charter, the Clerk shall present the
petition to the City Council at its next regular meeting. The filing of a referendum petition shall
suspend effectiveness of the ordinance in question until the issue is determined.
Section 4-14 Council Procedure on Initiatory and Referendum Petitions
Upon receiving an initiatory or referendum petition from the Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty
(30) days, either:
A. If it be an initiatory petition, enact the ordinance as submitted in the petition;
B. If it be a referendum petition, repeal the ordinance or part thereof to which the petition
refers; or
11 The law of preemption prevents local legislation on a matter that has been addressed under state law. MCL
117.25 provides that an initiatory or referendum petition be signed by not less than five (5) percent of qualified
and registered electors of the city.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 11
Adopted April 1, 1968
C. In either case, determine to submit the proposal to the electors.
Section 4-15 Submission to Electors
Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next
election held in the City for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special
election called for that purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if no election is to be held in
the City for any other purpose within one hundred and fifty (150) days from the time the petition
is presented to the Council and the Council does not adopt the ordinance, then the Council shall
call a special election within sixty (60) days from such time for the submission of the initiative
proposal.12 The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon,
except in cases where otherwise required by the general laws of the State of Michigan. If two (2)
or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions
in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern.
Section 4-16 Limitation on Amendment or Repeal of Initiatory or Referendum
Ordinances
An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or
repealed for a period of two (2) years after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and
an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of two (2) years after
the date of the election at which it was repealed.
CHAPTER 5
ADMINISTRATION
Section 5-1 City Manager
A City Manager shall be appointed by a majority of the membership of the City Council to hold
office for an indefinite term and at the pleasure of said majority of the City Council. He or she
shall be the chief administrative officer of the City Government. The Council may designate a
qualified person to perform the duties of Manager during his or her absence, disability, or during
a vacancy in the office.
Section 5-2 Manager's Qualifications
The Manager shall either be a registered engineer or a graduate of a school of public
administration, or have at least five (5) years of experience in city administration or a major
department thereof.
Section 5-3 Manager's Functions and Duties
The functions of the City Manager shall include the following:
A. To supervise and control the administrative affairs of the City and all departments thereof and
to seek quality, economy and efficiency therein.
12 The law of preemption prevents local legislation on a matter that has been addressed under state law. MCL
168.641 mandates that elections be held on the regular election date in May, August or November.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 12
Adopted April 1, 1968
B. To fully advise the Council regarding the policies, affairs, and financial condition and needs of
the City with the right to take part in all discussions relating thereto.
C. To recommend an annual budget or budgets to the City Council and to carry out the policies,
budgets, and directives of the Council.
D. To preserve the public peace, health, and safety of persons and property and see to the
enforcement of the ordinances of this City, this Charter, and general law.
E. To install a system of centralized purchasing, control expenditures, and superintend all
operating units and contracts of the City.
F. To appoint and remove subject to the provisions of this Charter or the administrative code
adopted pursuant hereto, employees of the City, all appointments to be on a basis of fitness,
training and experience and for indefinite terms.
G. To perform such other functions and have such other duties as may be established by general
law, this Charter, any ordinance or resolution of this City, or as may be required of or
accorded to him or her by the Council.
Section 5-4 Appointments
The Manager with Council approval shall appoint and may remove for just cause, a City Finance
Director who shall also be the City Treasurer, a Police Chief, Fire Chief, and such other officers and
heads of departments as may be deemed necessary. The functions and duties of these officers
and heads of departments shall be as prescribed by State law, this Charter and the ordinances of
the City. The Manager with Council approval may delegate appropriate functions and duties to
them. They may appoint deputies of their choice within the administrative service. City officers
shall have the qualification of being registered electors of the City or shall become registered as
an elector within sixty (60) days after appointment unless expressly exempted by the City Council.
Section 5-5 Administrative Code
The administrative service shall be divided into such departments, divisions, and bureaus as may
be provided by ordinance, to be known as the "Administrative Code" to be adopted within one
(1) year following the adoption of this Charter. Pending the passage of such code, the Manager
may establish temporary regulations. Said code may be amended from time to time and may
provide for the consolidation or abolition of departments or the designations and functions of
officers including those mentioned in Section 4 of this chapter unless contrary to general law.
Each officer or department head shall, subject to the approval of the Manager, have supervision
and control of his or her department and shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations for
the conduct thereof, not inconsistent with this Charter or said administrative code. Council
appointees shall be exempt from this section.
Section 5-6 City Personnel
The City Manager shall be Personnel Director with authority to delegate the duties of said office.
All City employment shall be based upon fair and impartial principles with fitness, ability, training
and experience the major considerations. There shall be no discrimination on account of color,
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 13
Adopted April 1, 1968
politics or religion. No City official or employee may solicit political contributions from Municipal
employees and they shall not engage in Municipal political activities on City property or on City
time. The administrative code shall be based on the best general accepted provisions of
personnel programs in business, industry and government and may include the following
subjects: classification of City employees, pay scales, probationary period, order of layoffs,
procedures for suspension or removal, employment procedure, hours of work, vacation, sick
leave, and any other pertinent data relating to employees. A Personnel Advisory Board may be
appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the City Council to make investigations and
recommendations to the City Manager. Decisions of the City Manager on these matters,
however, shall be deemed final.
Section 5-7 Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits
The City Council shall fix by resolution the salary or rate of compensation of all officers and
employees of the City. The Council may also provide other fringe benefits, including insurance
covering life, hospital, health, surgical, accident, medical or similar risks of life and the City may
pay all or such portions of the cost thereof or premiums therefor as the City Council may
determine. Such programs may extend to the immediate families and dependents of City officials
and employees.
Section 5-8 City Attorney
There shall be a City Attorney of the City, appointed by the City Council, who shall serve as chief
legal advisor to the Council, the Manager, and all City departments, offices, and agencies, shall
represent the City in all legal proceedings and shall perform any other duties prescribed by the
Council. The City Attorney shall be and continue to be duly licensed to practice law in the State of
Michigan. The Council may engage one (1) or more special attorneys for specific purposes or
cases.
Section 5-9 City Clerk
A City Clerk shall be appointed by the Council. He or she shall attend all meetings of the Council,
keep its journal, and maintain a record of all actions of the Council at its regular or special
meetings. He or she may delegate his or her duties to one or more deputies on his or her staff.
He or she shall conduct all elections and maintain all registration and election records; he or she
shall have the power to administer all oaths required by law or by the ordinances of the City; he
or she shall be the custodian of the City's seal and affix the same to documents as required and
be the custodian of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the City, together with others
as provided by law; he or she shall give the proper officials ample notice of the expiration or
termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts, agreements, or appointments of the City;
he or she shall require the administration of the oath of office and the furnishing of any required
bond in all appropriate cases and shall report to the City Council the failure of any officer of the
City in these respects; he or she shall authenticate and certify all ordinances and resolutions
adopted by the Council; he or she shall perform such other duties in connection with his or her
office as may be required by law, this Charter, or the ordinances or resolutions of the City.
Section 5-10 Finance Director
The Finance Director shall be appointed by the City Manager with Council approval and shall be
the treasurer and chief financial officer and general accountant of the City. He or she shall
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 14
Adopted April 1, 1968
establish and maintain a uniform system of accounts, keep a record of the assets, receipts,
expenditures, and other funds of the City and keep the Manager and Council continually
informed as to the financial status of the City and its funds. He or she shall certify as to the
sufficiency or sources of funds for all purchases and contracts of the City and that the obligations
are or will be within the ability of the City to finance the same. He or she shall issue such licenses
or permits as are required by the ordinances of the City. He or she shall establish and maintain
systems of internal financial control and have such other duties as the Manager or Council may
prescribe. All moneys due to or collected by the City shall be received and all disbursements shall
be made by the Finance Director. He or she shall have custody of all such money and of all evidences
of value belonging to or held by the City. He or she shall collect all taxes and assessments
collectible by the City or by the County, school district or other agencies within the City. He or
she shall deposit and account for all moneys and funds as required by the Council or by law.
Section 5-11 City Assessor
The Assessor shall possess all of the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties
imposed upon other assessing officers, prepare all regular and special assessment rolls, and
perform such other duties as may be required by the Council or by law.
CHAPTER 6
JUSTICE COURT (REPEALED)
(EDITOR'S NOTE: Chapter 6 of this Charter, was repealed by implication in April, 1968, by State
statute which preempted local authority.)
CHAPTER 7
FINANCES, BUDGET, CONTRACTS
Section 7-1 Fiscal Year
The fiscal and budget year of the City shall be July 1 to June 30 of each year.
Section 7-2 Financial Control
The City Finance Director shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the
City, subject to the general supervision of the City Manager. He or she shall maintain a uniform
system of accounting and control over the finances of the City, make such reports, and perform
such other duties as may be required by this Charter, and by ordinances, or by the City Manager.
He or she shall audit and approve all bills and liquidated claims against the City and shall pay the
same on vouchers duly certified by the Manager or a City official designated by the Council.
Section 7-3 Budget Preparation
At such time as may be fixed by the City Manager, each officer or department head shall submit
to the City Manager an itemized estimate of the expenditures and receipts for the next fiscal year
for the activities under his or her control. After review and revision by the City Manager in
consultation with the Finance Director, the City Manager shall submit the proposed budget to the
City Council on or before the first official meeting of the Council in April of each year.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 15
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 7-4 Budget Hearing and Adoption
A public hearing on the budget shall be held thereon before its final adoption by the City Council
at such time and place as is required by law. Thereafter, but not later than May 15 of each year,
the City Council shall, by resolution, adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year, make
appropriations therefor, and, after realistic consideration of probable other revenues, determine
and declare the amount of money necessary to be raised by property taxation. Should the
Council fail to adopt a budget for the next fiscal year on or before May 15, the budget proposal as
recommended to the Council by the City Manager shall be deemed to have been finally adopted
by the Council, and shall constitute an appropriation of the money needed for Municipal
purposes during the next fiscal year, and shall be deemed legal authority for a levy of the amount
necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property subject to the provisions of
Section 8-1. If any budget adopted in this manner requires an amount to be raised by taxes upon
property in excess of the limitation provided in Section 8-1 the budget and appropriations and
each item thereof shall be adjusted by the City Manager to conform to such limitation.
Section 7-5 Budget Bonds
Any capital improvement items contained in the budget upon five affirmative votes of the
Council, may be financed by the issuance of bonds as a part of the budget system, provided that
the amount of such bonds together with the taxes levied for the same year shall not exceed the
limit of taxation authorized by law.
Section 7-6 Transfer of Appropriations
After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor
shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to a budget
appropriation. The Council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any
portion thereof from one department fund, or agency, to another. The Council may make
additional appropriations during the fiscal year for emergency purposes or for unanticipated and
urgently needed purposes, provided such appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which
actual or anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget,
or expenses are proving less than anticipated, or a combination thereof. The Council may make
additional appropriations from any available and unencumbered funds, although not budgeted.
Section 7-7 Budget Control
At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the
Council, the Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the
estimated and actual income and expense to date, and if it shall appear that the income is
proving insufficient, the Council, on the recommendation of the Manager, may reduce appropriations
for any item or items, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to
such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within income. The Manager may
provide for monthly or quarterly allotments of appropriations to departments, funds or agencies
under such rules as he or she shall prescribe.
Section 7-8 Depository
The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for City funds, and shall provide for the
daily deposit of all City moneys.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 16
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 7-9 Independent Audit and Report
An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City Government at least annually and
more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by certified public
accountants. If a State audit is required by law, the Council, by resolution, may declare that it
takes the place of the audit required in this section. An annual report of the City's business,
including an abstract of the annual audit, shall be made available to the public in such form as will
disclose pertinent facts concerning the activities and finances of the City government.
Section 7-10 Receipts and Payment of Money
All moneys shall be received by the City Finance Director regardless of source. Unless otherwise
provided by law or by ordinance, all moneys drawn from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to
the authority and appropriation of the Council. The Council, upon the recommendation of the
City Manager, where necessary to expedite operating procedures, may authorize, by resolution,
designated officers and employees of the City to make minor disbursements from petty cash
accounts, which disbursements shall be accounted for and shall be audited by the Finance
Director. Checks for the expenditure of City funds shall be signed by the Manager and Finance
Director, or such official as may be designated by the Council. Checks may be issued prior to
authorization by the Council for such purposes and up to such amounts as the Council shall
provide by ordinance. All such checks and the purpose thereof shall be reported to the Council at
its next regular meeting.
Section 7-11 Deferred Payment Contracts
The City may enter into installment or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition or sale of real
or personal property or capital equipment. Each such contract shall not extend over a period
greater than twenty (20) years. All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for
the year in which the installment is payable. The total unpaid principal of all such contracts shall
not exceed one percent of the equalized valuation of all real and personal property in the City
subject to taxation as most recently determined.
Section 7-12 Investment of City Funds
Idle moneys may be invested according to the general laws of the State as the City Council may
determine.
Section 7-13 Purchasing and Contracts
Uniform and centralized purchasing and contracting procedures shall be developed and
maintained by the City Manager with the approval of the Council. Competitive bids shall be
required by the Council where practical and contracts awarded when deemed in the best
interests of the City. Power shall be reserved, however, to reject any or all bids. The Council may
authorize the construction or repair of public improvements by the City work force. The power to
contract on behalf of the City is hereby vested in the City Council, but the City Manager shall have
power to bind the City as to routine or operational items. No contract shall be made with any
person, firm or corporation who is in default to the City and not contesting such status.
Section 7-14 Improvement Funds
The City may establish and maintain funds, including revolving funds, for special assessment
projects or other improvements, for the purpose of accumulating moneys to be used for
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 17
Adopted April 1, 1968
financing, making, acquiring, extending, altering, or repairing public improvements. Moneys so
accumulated may be transferred, encumbered or otherwise disposed of only for the purpose for
which accumulated unless otherwise determined and declared by formal resolution of the City
Council, and then only for the purpose of making some other public improvement.
CHAPTER 8
TAXATION
Section 8-1 Power, Limitation and Subjects of Taxation
The City shall have the power to assess taxes and to levy and collect rents, tolls, and excises, and
including all powers now or hereafter granted to cities by the State of Michigan. Exclusive of any
levies authorized by law to be made beyond Charter tax rate limitations, the annual ad valorem
tax levy shall not exceed 2.0 percent of the equalized assessed value of all real and personal
property of the City. The subjects of ad valorem taxation for Municipal purposes shall be the
same as for State, County, and school purposes under the general laws. Except as otherwise
provided in this Charter, City taxes shall be assessed, levied, collected and returned in the manner
provided by statute. No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required
or permitted by law.
Section 8-2 Assessment Roll
Between tax day and the first meeting of the Board of Review in each year, the City Assessor shall
make and complete an assessment roll in the manner and form provided in the general tax law.
Section 8-3 Board of Review
The Board of Review shall consist of three (3) taxpaying electors of the City who are owners of
property assessed for taxes in the City and, at the time of their appointment, are not either
elected or appointed officials of the City. They shall be appointed by the Council to serve three
(3)-year staggered terms subject to the pleasure of the Council. Each term shall commence as of
January 1. The Board shall select its own Clerk, who may be the City Assessor. They shall meet
and complete their work as required by law. Their compensation shall be fixed by Council.
Section 8-4 Notice of Meeting
The Assessor shall cause notice of the date, time and place of the annual meeting of the Board of
Review to be published at least one (1) week prior thereto in a newspaper widely circulated in the
City. In each case in which the assessed value of real property is increased or decreased from the
previous year, the Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owner shown on the assessment roll
by regular mail not later than the second day following the first meeting of the Board, giving the
time and place of its second meeting. Failure to give or receive the notices provided in this
section shall not invalidate the roll or any assessment thereon.
Section 8-5 Duties and Procedures of Board of Review
The Board of Review shall have power to correct or amend said assessment roll and to increase or
decrease any assessment or valuation of taxable property, may strike therefrom any property
wrongfully listed or add any property rightfully taxable, either on its own motion or at the request
of any person. Any person considering himself or herself aggrieved by reason of any assessment
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 18
Adopted April 1, 1968
may complain thereof either verbally or in writing or by authorized representative to said Board.
The Board may establish reasonable regulations for the conduct of its hearings, require the filing
of a brief written statement of the arguments by those appealing to it, require the appellant to
appear in person and otherwise provide for the expediting of its work. The concurrence of a
majority of the membership of said Board shall be necessary to decide any question. The Assessor
shall make any changes, additions, or corrections to said roll directed by the Board of
Review. Thereupon said Board shall complete and adopt the roll and a majority thereof shall
endorse the same as provided by law. When so endorsed, said roll shall be conclusively
presumed by all courts to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes mentioned in the
general laws. The omission of the endorsement or any other formality herein prescribed shall not
affect the validity of the roll. A summary report of the assessment roll shall be delivered to the
City Council by the Assessor immediately thereafter.
Section 8-6 Assessment of Taxes
The Assessor shall take said roll, thus completed and adopted, and prepare a "City Tax Roll" by
spreading thereon rateably to each person or property assessed the funds required to be raised
by property taxation by the terms of the annual appropriation resolution adopted by the City
Council or by the terms of other valid procedures.
Section 8-7 Warrant
Upon delivering said City tax roll to the Finance Director, the Assessor shall annex thereto his or
her warrant over his or her signature, commanding the Finance Director to collect from the
several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein and enforce payment as
provided herein or by general law.
Section 8-8 Lien and Persons Liable
All taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due the City as provided by general law and, as of July
1 of the year of assessment, the said taxes with any applicable charges, fees or penalties shall
become a lien, paramount to all other claims, encumbrances or liens, upon the property against
which they are assessed until paid.
Section 8-9 Statement to Taxpayers
Upon receipt of said City tax roll, the Finance Director shall proceed to collect the taxes. He or
she shall prepare and mail to each taxpayer, at his or her last known address on the tax roll, a
statement or billing showing the description of the property, the assessed valuation, and the tax
payable, but the failure to send or receive such statement shall not prejudice the validity of the
tax on the right and duty to collect or enforce payment thereof.
Section 8-10 Collection Fees and Interest
The City taxes provided for by this chapter shall be assessed and levied prior to July 1, in each
year, shall become payable on that date, and shall be collected on or before the 20th day of
August in each year, and if so paid no collection fee shall be charged. As of August 21 of each
year a collection fee of four (4) percent shall be charged, and on the 21st day of each month
thereafter an interest charge and penalty of one (1) percent in addition shall be charged, and
when paid said charges shall be placed in the General Fund of the City. The City Council may, by
ordinance, establish a system for the installment collection of said taxes extending not more than
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 19
Adopted April 1, 1968
one year and provide for the collection of reasonable interest or collection fees thereon and of
penalties for the late payment thereof.
Section 8-11 All Taxes Other Than City
For the purpose of assessing and levying taxes in the City for all purposes other than City taxes,
the City shall be considered the same as a township and, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, all provisions for State law relative to the collection of such taxes, the accounting thereof
to the appropriate taxing units, and the returning of delinquent taxes to the County Treasurer for
collection shall apply and the City Finance Director shall have all of the powers and duties in
connection therewith of township treasurers.
Section 8-12 Failure to Pay Personal Property Tax
If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal property tax
assessed to him or her or them, the Finance Director shall collect the same by seizing the personal
property of such person, firm or corporation to an amount sufficient to pay such tax and
applicable fees together with charges for subsequent sale costs, wherever the same may be
found in the State, and from such seizure no property shall be exempt. He or she may sell the
property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with
general law. If otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, the Finance Director may
sue therefor the person, firm or corporation to whom it is assessed.
Section 8-13 Jeopardy Assessment of Personal Property Taxes
Whenever the proper conditions exist, the Finance Director shall accelerate the date on which
personal property taxes shall be collected, as provided by general law.
Section 8-14 Failure to Pay Real Estate Taxes
All City taxes, including assessments, interest or other charges, upon real property remaining
uncollected by the Finance Director on March 1st following the date when said amounts became
payable, or one year thereafter in case an installment collection ordinance applies thereto, shall
be subject to one of the following procedures:
A. The real property against which such taxes, assessments, interest or other charges have been
assessed shall be subject to sale and redemption for the enforcement and collection thereof
in the manner which may be provided by ordinance. The Council is hereby empowered to
adopt an ordinance providing for the sale and redemption of real property for such unpaid
taxes, assessments, interest and other charges by sale conducted by the City Finance Director,
with a redemption period as provided for sales by county treasurers, and foreclosure of the
lien and perfection of the sale by petition duly filed in the Circuit Court for Manistee County,
followed by a decree or order thereof.
B. If no such ordinance is adopted and in effect, then such taxes, assessments, interest and other
charges shall be returned to the County Treasurer in the manner provided by law for returns
by township treasurers for township, County and school taxes, and the same shall be
collected in the same manner by the County Treasurer, and shall remain a lien upon the
property against which they are assessed or chargeable until paid.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 20
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 8-15 Inequitable Assessment or Tax
If it shall be found, at any time, that any property has been subjected to a substantially
inequitable assessment or tax, as by reason of errors so that the same amounts to a constructive
fraud upon the taxpayer, and if the City Attorney shall prepare and file a written memorandum
indicating that, under current statutes and case law, relief would be granted by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then the City Council may so determine and declare by resolution without
requiring the commencement of court proceedings, and any necessary adjustment may be taken
from the General Fund of the City.
Section 8-16 Tax Clearances
No warranty deed for the transfer of real estate or any interest therein shall be received or
recorded by the Register of Deeds for the County of Manistee unless all City taxes and
assessments on the property described therein, then due and payable, have been paid. It shall be
the duty of the City Finance Director or such other agency as the City Council may designate,
upon request and after the payment thereof, to furnish a certificate that all such taxes and
assessments have been paid, and such certificate shall be filed with the Register of Deeds when
the document is submitted for record. A fee to be fixed by the City Council may be charged for
issuing the certificate.
CHAPTER 9
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section 9-1 Power to Assess
The City Council shall have the power to determine, with or without a petition therefor, that the
whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement or repair shall be defrayed by special
assessment upon the parcels or property especially benefitted and so declare by resolution. Such
resolution shall state the estimated cost of the improvement, what portion of the cost shall be
paid by special assessment, what portion, if any, shall be a general obligation of the City, the
number of installments in which assessments may be paid, and the interest to be charged, and
designate the districts or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied.
Section 9-2 Procedure Ordinance
The City Council shall prescribe by general ordinance the complete special assessment procedure
to be used, including the preparing of plans and specifications, estimating costs, conducting a
public hearing on construction necessity following at least ten (10) days notice, the preparation,
hearing, correction and confirmation of the special assessment roll, the collection of special
assessments, the assessment of single lots or parcels, the apportionment of assessments if land is
divided, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special
assessment method. Said ordinance shall authorize additional assessments if the prior
assessment proves insufficient to pay for the improvement and costs incident thereto or in case
of invalidity in whole or in part, and it shall provide for the refund of excessive assessments,
provided that if the excess is less than five (5) percent of the total cost it may be placed in the
General Fund of the City.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 21
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 9-3 Assessment Lien
From the date of confirmation of any assessment or reassessment roll the same shall constitute a
lien upon the respective lots or premises assessed and shall also be a charge against the person to
whom assessed until paid, and, in case of delinquency, may be enforced by addition to any later
return to the County Treasurer of regular taxes or by suit against such person.
Section 9-4 Contest of Assessment
No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or
enjoining the collection of any special assessment or reassessment (a) unless, within thirty (30)
days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the City Clerk
for attention of the City Council indicating an intention to file such suit or action and stating the
grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal and (b) unless such suit or action shall be
commenced within sixty (60) days after the confirmation of the roll. If the City Attorney submits a
written opinion finding said roll illegal, in whole or in part, the City Council may revoke its
confirmation, correct the illegality if possible, and reconfirm the same as amended, provided that
no property which is not involved in the illegality shall be assessed more than was imposed upon
the original confirmation without further notice.
CHAPTER 10
BORROWING
Section 10-1 General Power
Subject to the provisions of this Charter and to the applicable provisions of law as the same are
now or may hereafter be enacted, the City may borrow money for any purpose within the scope
of its powers, and may issue bonds or other evidence of indebtedness therefor. Such bonds or
other evidence of indebtedness shall include but not be limited to:
A. General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith and credit of the City for the payment
thereof.
B. Special assessment bonds which are issued in anticipation of the payment of special
assessments for public improvements in a special assessment district or combination thereof,
which bonds may be either an obligation of the special assessment districts or district, or both
an obligation of such district and a general obligation of the City.
C. Revenue bonds as authorized by law.
D. Mortgage bonds for acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving or operating of
any public utility which the City is authorized by law to finance in this manner, or for such
other purposes as may be authorized by law.
E. Tax anticipation notes as authorized by law.
F. Calamity bonds issued in case of fire, flood or other calamity as authorized by law.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 22
Adopted April 1, 1968
G. Bonds for the City's share of the cost of local improvements, which bonds may be issued as a
part of, or independently of, any issue of special assessment bonds which are issued for the
same improvement or improvements.
H. Bonds for refunding indebtedness of the City.
I. Budget bonds as authorized elsewhere herein.
J. Time-purchase contracts as authorized elsewhere herein.
The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten
(10) percent of the equalized assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the City as
defined and computed pursuant to general law. All limitations, procedures and approvals
required by general law shall be faithfully followed.
Section 10-2 Use of Borrowed Funds
Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement of the purpose
for which the same is issued and no officer of the City shall use the proceeds thereof for any other
purpose, except that, whenever the proceeds of any bond issue, or part thereof, is unexpended
and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the City Council may
authorize the use of such unexpended and unencumbered fund in the following order:
First, for an additional extension or improvement of the facility or project for which the bond
issue was made.
Second, for the retirement of such bond issue.
Third, if such bond issue has been fully retired or funds are segregated which are adequate for
such purpose, then for the retirement of other bonds or obligations of the City.
Fourth, if there is no other indebtedness, or funds are segregated which are adequate for such
purpose, then for such other purposes as may be permitted by law.
Section 10-3 Special Assessment Collections
All collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls, in anticipation of which
bonds have been issued, shall be set apart in a separate fund (but not necessarily a separate bank
account) and shall be used for the purpose for which levied and for the payment of the principal
of and interest on such bonds. If there is any deficiency in a special assessment fund to meet the
payment of the principal and interest to be paid therefrom, moneys shall be advanced from the
General Fund of the City to meet such deficiency and shall be replaced in the General Fund when
the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor.
Section 10-4 Execution of Bonds
All bonds issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, and
shall bear the corporate seal of the City. Said signatures may be by facsimile if permitted by law.
Any attached coupons may be signed with the facsimile signature of the City Clerk.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 23
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 10-5 Bond Record
The City Clerk shall keep a detailed record of all bonds and other evidence of indebtedness. Upon
payment of the same the Clerk shall mark them "cancelled" and keep them until their destruction
is permitted by general law.
CHAPTER 11
UTILITIES, FRANCHISES AND PERMITS
Section 11-1 General Powers of City Respecting Utilities
The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by law to
acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, maintain, encumber, convey,
dispose of, or sell, either within or without its corporate limits, public utilities, including but not
by the way of limitation, aeronautical facilities, hospitals and public utilities for treating and
supplying water and for supplying light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, garbage disposal,
public transportation and facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles and marina, port and
harbor facilities for boats and ships, or any of them; and also to sell and deliver the products or
services thereof, both within and without its corporate limits. The power to supply said utility
services as herein possessed and reserved, shall include the power to extract, process,
manufacture, transport or purchase the same from others. No public utility owned and operated
by the City may be sold unless the proposition shall first have been approved by a majority vote
of the electors voting thereon.
Section 11-2 Rates
The City Council shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such rates and other charges as
may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the City and others with such public
utility services as the City may provide. Higher rates may be charged for service outside the
corporate limits of the City.
Section 11-3 Collection-Utility Rates and Charges
The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of
the City. Such ordinance may provide at least:
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, the City shall have as security for the collection of such
utility rates and charges a lien upon the real and personal property supplied by such utility,
which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and
shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance.
B. The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of
delinquency in paying such rates or charges.
C. That suit may be instituted by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection
of such rates or charges.
D. With respect to the collection of rates, the City shall have all the powers granted to cities by
any statute of the State.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 24
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 11-4 Accounts and Finances
Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned and operated by the City. Such
accounts shall be classified and made in accordance with generally accepted municipal utility
accounting practice. Charges for all services furnished to, or rendered by, other City departments
or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial
position of the utility and the results of its operations, which report shall be on file in the office of
the City Clerk for inspection.
Section 11-5 Granting of Public Utility Franchise
All irrevocable public utility franchises and all renewals and extensions thereof and amendments
thereto shall be granted by ordinance only. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than
thirty (30) years. No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the
Council shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the
people at a regular or special election as provided by general law. This requirement shall be
deemed to have the same limits of applicability as is accorded the franchise requirements in the
State Constitution and general laws.
Section 11-6 Conditions of Public Utility Franchise
All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in
the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the City, but this
enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise
any provision within the power of the City to impose or require:
A. To repeal the same for misuse, non-use or failure to comply with the provisions thereof;
B. To require the proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof
at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;
C. To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust
discrimination in service or rates;
D. To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of
the franchise throughout the entire period thereof;
E. To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the
safety, welfare and accommodation of the public;
F. To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and public places and space
above and beneath them;
G. To make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and to require reports
annually.
The City Council shall cause to be instituted such actions or proceedings as may be necessary to
prosecute a public utility company for violations of its franchise, the City Charter, or ordinances,
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 25
Adopted April 1, 1968
and may revoke, cancel, or annul all franchises granted by the City which for any reason have
become inoperative, illegal or void.
Section 11-7 Regulation of Rates
All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares and charges and may
provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility
used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated
upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits.
Section 11-8 Joint Use Permitted
Every such public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property and
appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the City by the City and by
such other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of
reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public
utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and
the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final.
Section 11-9 Revocable Permits
Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the will of the City Council, may be
granted by the City Council by resolution on such terms and conditions as it shall determine,
provided that such permits shall in no event be construed to be franchises or amendments to
franchises. All said temporary permits shall be subject to the right of the City to make
independent audit and examination of accounts at any time and to require reports annually or at
more frequent intervals as prescribed by resolution of the City Council. When the City Council
deems it in the public interest, such permits may be exclusive.
Section 11-10 Acquisition by City-Condemnation
The City shall have the right to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the property of any public
utility in accordance with the general laws of the State, provided that the price to be paid shall in
no event include any value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits.
Section 11-11 Use of Streets
Every public utility shall be subject to the power of the City to use, control and regulate use of its
streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, and the space above and beneath them and shall pay
such part of the cost of improvements or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and public
places, and the space above and beneath them as shall arise from its use thereof and shall
protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use.
Section 11-12 Existing Franchises and Permits Remain in Effect
All franchises and permits to which the City of Manistee is a party when this Charter becomes
effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and
conditions.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 26
Adopted April 1, 1968
CHAPTER 12
RETIREMENT SYSTEM (REPEALED)
(EDITOR'S NOTE: Chapter 12 was repealed by the voters February 16, 1988. See Chapter 294 of
the Administration Code of the Codified Ordinances of the City.)
CHAPTER 13
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 13-1 Property
The City shall have power to acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, legacy, bequest or
otherwise any and all kinds of property, both real and personal, absolute or in trust, located
within or without the City, for any public, proprietary, or charitable use or for any purpose within
the scope of its powers; to do all things necessary to effectuate such purpose; to hold, manage,
maintain, develop or operate the same; to change the use to other public purposes subject to any
limitation expressly placed thereon by law or the valid terms of any trust; and to lease, encumber,
sell, convey, or otherwise dispose of the same.
Section 13-2 Dilapidation
The City shall have power by ordinance to prevent, prohibit, and correct public nuisances,
structural dilapidation of dwellings and commercial, industrial or other structures, and the spread
of blight and deterioration. It may exercise all powers granted by law for such purposes to
prevent devaluation, unhealthful influences and hazards to inhabitants or to otherwise serve the
public health, morals, peace, safety and welfare. The cost of any such measures upon specific
properties may be assessed against the same.
Section 13-3 Streets and Public Ways
The City reserves the power to use, regulate, improve, vacate, abandon, and control the surface
of its streets, alleys and public ways and of the space above and beneath them; to prepare and
adopt a plan regarding the same within said City and for a distance of three (3) miles beyond its
limits.
Section 13-4 Licenses
The City Council may prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted and
revoked, and may regulate trades, occupations and amusements including the location of gas
stations and billboards. The City Council may provide for the punishment by fine or
imprisonment, or both, of any person who, without license, shall exercise any occupation or
trade, or do anything for or in respect to which any license shall be required by any ordinance or
regulation of said City.
Section 13-5 Other Express Powers
The City shall also have power:
A. To use, control and regulate the streams, waters and watercourses within its boundaries.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 27
Adopted April 1, 1968
B. To acquire, establish, extend, operate, and maintain parks, boulevards, cemeteries, hospitals,
almshouses, and all works which involve the public morals, peace, health, safety and welfare
as provided by law.
C. To provide by ordinance for the establishment of districts or zones within which the use of
lands and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of the buildings, and the
required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the density of population
may be regulated.
D. To establish and maintain a Planning Commission having the powers and duties prescribed by
law.
E. Any powers expressed in this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and the City shall
have all powers permitted by law, whether enumerated or not.
Section 13-6 Plats
The City shall have power to establish standards for the acceptance of plats or subdivisions of
lands or premises within or without said City to the distance provided by State law, may require
the dedication of streets and other public ways to public ownership, and the grading and
improvement thereof to acceptable standards.
Section 13-7 Recording of Plats
The Register of Deeds of Manistee County shall not receive for record any plat or subdivision of
any lands or premises, within the corporate limits, unless the same shall have endorsed thereon a
certificate signed by the City Clerk of said City showing that such plat or subdivision has been
accepted and approved by the City.
Section 13-8 Preservation and Destruction of Records
Subject to any applicable State law, the City shall have power to determine the period and
manner in which Municipal records shall be preserved and the time and manner in which they
may be summarized, microfilmed, recorded, or destroyed.
Section 13-9 Health
The City Council shall be the Board of Health of the City and may appoint a Health Officer,
organize and maintain a Health Department, have and exercise all powers and authority
conferred upon boards of health by the general laws, and enact such ordinances as may be
deemed necessary for the preservation and protection of the health of the inhabitants of the City.
The City shall have power to establish, maintain, and regulate suitable hospitals within or without
its corporate limits. The City is hereby authorized to consider, negotiate, determine and agree
upon the terms and conditions under which this City may join in the organization and
maintenance of a County health department, or similar agency authorized by law. It may delegate
to such department, or agency such powers, functions and duties relating to health as it may
deem proper, contract therewith for extra services, and appropriate thereto money, services, or
both. It may make applicable to the area of the City any rules or regulations promulgated by said
department or agency, and penalties for the violation thereof.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 28
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 13-10 Investigations
The City Council, the City Manager, or any person or committee authorized by either of them,
shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer of the City and to
make investigation as to Municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure to
obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence, as ordered under the
provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
Section 13-11 Damage Claims Against the City
The City shall have all the immunities from claims for damages for injury to persons or property as
may be permitted by law. The City shall not be liable on any claim for damages regardless of its
basis unless the claimant has filed a notice of claim within sixty (60) days after it shall arise giving
the particulars thereof so that the City may make timely investigation of the circumstances
pertaining thereto.
Section 13-12 Bonds
All officers and employees of the City whose duties involve the custody of public personal
property or funds shall file and maintain an official bond in such form and amount as the Council
may approve, conditioned upon the faithful performance of duty and compliance with all laws
and regulations pertaining thereto, including the prompt accounting and delivery thereof, with all
pertinent records, to the person entitled thereto or to any duly selected successor. All official
bonds shall be corporate surety bonds underwritten by a surety company authorized to do
business in this State and may be a blanket bond and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the
City. The City Clerk shall have custody of all bonds except his or her own, which shall be kept by
the Finance Director. The City Council shall determine, in case of doubt, the persons required to
submit bonds and the amount thereof and it may require additional coverage during periods of
special risk.
Section 13-13 Library
The City shall continue to maintain and support from the General Fund a Manistee City Public
Library and to provide for an Advisory Board of Trustees for the care, management and
disbursements of funds for such purpose. Said Board of Trustees shall be five in number and shall
serve staggered terms of five years without compensation unless otherwise determined by the
City Council. All rules, regulations and disbursements of money recommended by the Library
Board shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The City is empowered to merge or
consolidate the library with other public or private agencies provided that general library service
to the citizens of Manistee shall be maintained.
Section 13-14 Oath
Every elective officer and such other employees as may be designated by the City Council, before
taking office shall take the oath of office prescribed by law, but the oath of office of each
Councilperson shall be in writing and be filed with the City Clerk, and contain the statement that
in his or her candidacy for nomination and election he or she has not violated any provisions of
the general election laws of the State.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 29
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 13-15 Condemnation
The City Council shall provide by resolution for acquiring by condemnation or otherwise such
property and rights as may be required for any public use or purpose within the scope of its
powers in the manner prescribed by the statutes of this State. Any property or rights so acquired
and no longer needed for the original purpose, at the discretion of the City Council may be
diverted to any other public use or purpose within the scope of the powers of the City, or may be
leased, encumbered, or sold and disposed of in such manner as said City Council shall prescribe.
Section 13-16 Advisory Committees or Boards
The City Council or City Manager with the approval of the City Council may, from time to time,
appoint such boards as are deemed appropriate to advise and consult with them, and with
appropriate department heads, regarding any Municipal activity. Such committees or boards
shall serve temporarily and without compensation unless otherwise provided by the City Council.
Section 13-17 Amendments
This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in Act 279 of the Public Acts of
1909, as amended. Should two or more amendments having conflicting provisions be adopted at
the same election, the one receiving the largest affirmative numerical vote shall prevail as to
those provisions.
Section 13-18 Saving Clause
If any section or part of a section of this Charter proves to be invalid or unconstitutional, the same
shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of
a section of this Charter or of the Charter as a whole unless it clearly appears that such other
section or part of a section is also held invalid or unconstitutional.
CHAPTER 14
SCHEDULE
Section 14-1 Purpose
The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the Government of the City of Manistee
under this Charter and it shall constitute a part of said Charter only to the extent and for the time
required to accomplish that end.
Section 14-2 Submission to Electors
This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the City of Manistee, being
the area described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and made a part hereof by this reference, at an
election to be held on April 1, 1968, between the hours of 7:00 o'clock a.m. and 8:00 o'clock p.m.
The Clerk shall give and publish notice of such submission as the law requires.
Section 14-3 Form of Ballot
The form of the question on submission of this Charter shall be as follows:
Shall the proposed Charter of the City of Manistee, drafted by the Charter Commission which was
elected April 4, 1966, be adopted?
YES ______ NO ______
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 30
Adopted April 1, 1968
Section 14-4 Canvass and Adoption
The City Clerk as chairperson, the City Attorney and City Assessor shall act as the election
commission of said election. The Board of Canvassers shall meet within one week to publicly
canvass the returns and declare the results of the election. If it is determined that a majority of
those voting upon the question voted "yes" the Charter shall be declared adopted; otherwise, it
shall be declared rejected. If it is adopted, the City Clerk shall perform all acts required by law to
place this Charter into effect.
Section 14-5 Effective Date
Except as otherwise provided herein, this Charter, if adopted, shall go into effect on May 1, 1968,
at or after which date appointments may be made and powers exercised as herein provided. The
budget and appropriations in effect on this effective date shall continue in force unless validly
amended by the incoming Council.
Section 14-6 First Elections and Terms
The first election conducted under this Charter shall take place in November, 1969. If this Charter
is adopted April 1, 1968, all elected officers of the City shall retain their offices and their terms
shall be extended as follows:
Supervisor terms shall be extended until their successors are elected and qualify in the
November, 1970, election; terms otherwise expiring in April, 1969, shall be extended until their
successors are elected and qualify in November, 1969, and terms otherwise expiring in April,
1970, shall be extended until their successors are elected and qualify in November, 1970.
Section 14-7 Fiscal Transition
The July 1 to June 30 fiscal year provided for in Section 7-1 shall be effective as of July 1, 1969,
and thereafter. To adjust from the December 1 fiscal year, during the year 1969, the budget
adopted, appropriation made and taxes levied in December, 1968, shall be for a seven-month
period extending from December 1, 1968, to July 1, 1969.
Section 14-8 Succession to Rights and Property
The City of Manistee as herein provided shall succeed to all the privileges, titles, easements,
rights of way, causes of action, duties, commitments, powers and obligations and be the
complete successor of the previous City of Manistee. The City shall be vested with all property,
moneys, contracts, credits, effects, records, files, books and papers belonging to it under and by
virtue of its previous Charter. No right, liability, lease, contract, or franchise, either in favor of or
against the City, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall be affected in any manner by
any change resulting from the adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed, as if
no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be its debts and
liabilities, and all debts owing to it and all taxes, fines, penalties, interest or fees, imposed and existing
at the time of such change, shall be collected by the City. All trusts, established for any
Municipal purpose, shall be continued in accordance with the terms thereof, subject to the cy
pres doctrine. All procedures for borrowing funds, assessing taxes, levying special assessments,
establishing budgets, acquiring or disposing of property rights, or otherwise administering the
affairs of the City, in progress on the effective date of this Charter, shall be continued and
completed in accordance with the terms hereof. Until the City Council and City Manager herein
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 31
Adopted April 1, 1968
authorized have exercised their powers with respect thereto, all officers and employees of the
City shall continue to have the same rights, duties, powers and compensation as existed prior to
the effective date of this Charter.
Section 14-9 Transition
In all cases involving the transition of the City Government from that under the previous Charter
to that under this Charter, which are not covered by this Charter, the current Council shall supply
the necessary details and procedures and may adopt such rules, regulations, and ordinances as
may be required therefor.
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 32
Adopted April 1, 1968
Appendix 1
Boundary: City of Manistee, Michigan
(As of January 9, 2015)
The Municipal corporation now existing, known as the City of Manistee, and including so much
of the County of Manistee as is contained in the following description, to-wit:
That portion of Section One (1) lying West of Manistee Lake; entire Sections Two (2), Ten (10),
Eleven (11) and Twelve (12); Lots Two (2) and Three (3) of Section Thirteen (13); the Northeast
Quarter (1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (1/4) of said Section
Thirteen (13); all in Township Twenty-one (21) North, Range Seventeen (17) West;
Also the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) and that part of the
Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) lying West of Highway U.S.-31 of
Section Thirteen (13), Township Twenty-one (21) North, Range Seventeen (17) West;
Also commencing at the Northwest Section corner of Section Thirteen (13), Township Twentyone
(21) North, Range Seventeen (17) West, also being the intersection of the center line of
Twelfth Street (12th) and Maple Street in the City of Manistee; thence East on the center line of
Twelfth Street (12th), 440.4 feet to the intersection of the center line of Lexington Street;
Thence South 00°03’ West, 33 feet to the place of beginning; thence South 00°03’ West, 990
feet to the south line of Fifteenth Street (15th); thence East on the South line of Fifteenth Street
(15th), 880.8 feet; thence North 00°02’ East, 990 feet to the South line of Twelfth (12th) Street;
thence West on said line 880.8 feet to the place of beginning, containing Fifty-seven (57) lots –
being the plat of Golden Acres;
Also lot Seven (7) of Section Eighteen (18), Township Twenty-one (21) North, Range Sixteen (16)
West;
Also all that portion of Manistee Lake lying Eastward of and adjoining said lands and within Fifty
(50) rods (825 feet) of the West shore of said lake;
Also the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of Section Fourteen (14),
Township Twenty-one (21) North, Range Seventeen (17) West, except commencing at the
Southwest corner; thence North, 400 feet; thence East, 500 feet; thence South, 400 feet;
thence West, 500 feet to place of beginning (subject property includes the Plat of Hadsell
Village which is recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 113);
Also part of the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of Section Fourteen (14), Township Twenty-one (21)
North, Range Seventeen (17) West, commencing at the Northeast corner of said section, thence
North 89°53’23” West, 700.99 feet to the point of beginning; thence South, 1320.05 feet;
thence North 89°44’04” West, 619.02 feet; thence North, 1318.38 feet; thence South 89°53’23”
East, 620.67 feet to the point of beginning;
Also the North 33 feet of the following described premises: part of the Northeast Quarter (NE
¼) of Section Fourteen (14), Township Twenty-one (21) North, Range Seventeen (17) West,
commencing at the Northeast corner of said section, thence North 89°53’23” West, 282.96 feet
to place of beginning; thence continuing North 89°53’23” West, 417.71 feet; thence South,
475.58 feet; thence South 89°53’23” East, 417.77 feet; thence North, 476.89 feet to the place
of beginning;
Reformatted 2017
Charter of the City of Manistee, Michigan Page 33
Adopted April 1, 1968
Also the North 33 feet of the following described premises: the North 13 rods of the Northeast
Quarter (NE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section Fourteen (14), Township Twentyone
(21) North, Range Seventeen (17) West;
Also that part of Sections 14 and 15, Township 21 North, Range 17 West, described as
commencing at the Quarter corner common to Sections 14 and 15; thence Northerly, 270 feet
along the section line; thence Westerly, 580 feet parallel with the East and West ¼ line of
Section 15; thence Southerly, 270 feet parallel with the East line of Section 15 to the East and
West ¼ line of Section 15; thence Westerly along said ¼ line to a point that is 6,690.9 feet West
of the East Quarter corner of Section 14; thence North 01°00’ East, 401 feet; thence North
89°35’ West to the shore line of Lake Michigan; thence Northeasterly along said shore line of
Lake Michigan to the North line of Section 15; thence Easterly along the North lines of Sections
15 and 14 to the Northeast corner of the Northwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 14; thence
Southerly along the West 1/8 line of Section 14 to a point 300 feet North of the East and West
¼ line of Section 14; thence deflecting to the West 55°45’30” along the old road a distance of
513.94 feet, more or less, to a point on the East and West ¼ line of Section 14 that is 425 feet
West of the West 1/8 line of said Section 14; thence Westerly along the East and West ¼ line of
Section 14 to the point of beginning.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1060 Garbage Rubbish Collection and Disposal
Chapter 1060
Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal
1060.01 Definitions 1060.08 Condition and size of refuse
containers or other receptacles
1060.02 Purpose and intent; promulgation
of rules and regulations by City
Manager
1060.09 Hazardous materials
1060.03 Unlawful deposits of solid waste 1060.10 Fees; billing by Water Department;
special collection charges for cleanup
by City
1060.04 Disposal of building materials 1060.11 Collection of charges
1060.05 Disposal of junk 1060.12 Other rates and charges
1060.06 Mandatory yard waste
recycling/composting program
1060.99 Penalty
1060.07 Placement of refuse containers for
collection
CROSS REFERENCES
Health and sanitation generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 4, Sec. 51; M.C.L.A. Secs.
325.1 et seq., 327.1 et seq., 750.466 et seq.; GEN. OFF. Ch. 674
Garbage and refuse generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 46.171 et seq., 123.241 et
seq., 123.361 et seq.
Municipal authority - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 123.301 et seq.
Nuisances generally - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Depositing of garbage and rubbish in Manistee River or Manistee Lake - see
GEN. OFF. 670.02
Burning of garbage and rubbish - see GEN. OFF. 674.02
1060.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:
A. "Building materials" means all refuse material resulting from the raising, repair, excavation
or construction of buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, lumber, bricks,
concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts
or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other materials
used in the construction of a structure.
B. "Contractor" means the contractor hired by the City to collect refuse as defined herein.
C. "Hazardous waste" includes dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids,
caustics, infected materials, explosives and other materials not suitable for a Class II landfill.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1060 Garbage Rubbish Collection and Disposal
D. "Junk" includes parts of machinery or motor vehicles, boat hulls, unused stoves or other
appliances, furniture or other cast-off material of any kind, except building material, refuse
and yard waste.
E. "Living unit" includes any single-family dwelling and each living unit in a multiple dwelling.
F. "Refuse" includes all of the following: kitchen wastes, including cans, bottles, household
food, accumulations of animal food and vegetable matter attendant to the preparation, use,
cooking and serving of food; general household trash, including ashes, empty cartons,
crates, boxes, wrapping materials, newspapers, magazines, cloth materials, empty cans,
discarded toys and similar materials; and all miscellaneous debris, except building materials,
junk, hazardous waste and yard waste.
G. "Solid waste" includes building materials, hazardous waste, junk, refuse and yard waste,
generically referring to subsections A, C, D, F and H hereof.
H. "Yard waste" includes grass clippings, weeds, bushes, brush clippings and branch clippings
when such are capable of being disposed of in bags provided by the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-
20-90.)
1060.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT; PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY CITY
MANAGER
It is the intent of the City Council that this chapter be liberally construed for the purpose of
providing a sanitary and satisfactory method for the collection and disposal of all solid wastes.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as from time to time
are necessary to carry out this intent, provided, however, that such rules and regulations may
not be in conflict with this chapter or any other ordinance of the City and are subject to
approval by the City Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.03 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS OF SOLID WASTE
A. No person shall deposit or place any solid waste in any alley, street or other place within the
City, except for collection and disposal as provided for in this chapter.
B. The occupant of any premises within the City shall be responsible for the sanitary condition
of the premises occupied by such occupant, and no person shall place, deposit or allow to
be placed or deposited on his or her premises any solid waste, except as designated by the
terms of this chapter.
C. No persons shall deposit, throw or leave any solid waste on the premises of another person,
and no person shall bury solid waste anywhere in the City.
D. Any person responsible for generating or disposing of solid waste not covered by this
chapter shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of such solid waste and
shall comply in all respects with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 3
Chapter 1060 Garbage Rubbish Collection and Disposal
1060.04 DISPOSAL OF BUILDING MATERIALS
The person responsible for generating building materials is responsible for the proper, lawful
disposal of that building material. A resident of the City may dispose of building materials at
the Municipal dumpsters (if any) only if that building material was generated at his or her
primary residence and his or her primary residence is within the corporate limits of the City. No
contractors, commercial or industrial agents or concerns, nonresidents or residents not working
on their primary dwelling within the City, may dispose of building materials at the Municipal
dumpsters (if any). Building materials not authorized for deposit at the Municipal dumpsters
shall be properly disposed of at a licensed landfill.
Building material may not be deposited for City collection and disposal during the annual spring
trash haul (if any). (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.05 DISPOSAL OF JUNK
Junk may be disposed of under rules and regulations established for the same, as provided for
in Section 1060.02, during the annual spring trash haul (if any), or at the Municipal dumpsters
(if any). Junk may be disposed of as refuse within the volume and weight limits established in
such rules and regulations. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.06 MANDATORY YARD WASTE RECYCLING/COMPOSTING PROGRAM
A mandatory yard waste recycling/composting program is hereby established in the City. Yard
waste shall be disposed of in biodegradable bags under the rules and regulations of that
program as established by the City, as provided for in Section 1060.02. Yard waste is not
eligible for collection as refuse or for collection during the annual spring trash haul (if any) or at
Municipal dumpsters (if any). (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.07 PLACEMENT OF REFUSE CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION
It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises to cause to be
placed in refuse receptacles or containers any and all refuse created or accumulated on his or
her premises or under his or her control. It shall be the further duty of the owner, occupant or
person in charge of any living unit to place or cause to be placed, on the day scheduled by the
City for the collection of refuse from such premises, the receptacles or containers at such place
or places as may be designated by the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.08 CONDITION AND SIZE OF REFUSE CONTAINERS OR OTHER RECEPTACLES
A. All refuse containers shall be leak proof and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition
by the owner. They shall be equipped with handles suitable for carrying. No refuse
container shall be loaded so that it cannot be conveniently handled without spilling its
contents. Plastic bags may be used if securely fastened.
B. Receptacles or containers that are broken or rotted or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this chapter may be claimed as refuse. After notice to the person
responsible for such a receptacle, collection from that receptacle may be refused by the
contractor.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 4
Chapter 1060 Garbage Rubbish Collection and Disposal
C. Containers may not exceed forty-five gallons by volume or fifty pounds by weight, except
for City-provided, wheeled, ninety-six gallon totes. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.09 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Hazardous materials shall not be collected by the City or a duly authorized contractor. The
owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises which generates or has custody of any
hazardous material shall be solely responsible for its lawful disposal in accordance with the
rules, regulations and statutes of the State. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.10 FEES; BILLING BY WATER DEPARTMENT; SPECIAL COLLECTION CHARGES FOR
CLEAN-UP BY CITY
A. Refuse will be picked up and collected under the provisions of this chapter, subject to
payment based on a fee schedule provided, from time to time, by resolution of the City
Council, and such charges so established shall continue until changed by the City Council.
All living units as defined in this chapter are required to comply with the requirements of
this section and are subject to the charge as determined by the City Council.
B. All refuse collection charges shall be billed by the City Water Department through its usual
billing procedure, except as herein provided for low volume users electing to use the
metered bag option as provided in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
Section 1060.02.
C. Special collection charges shall be levied on a time and equipment basis in accordance with
Chapter 654 of the General Offenses Code whenever the City is required to clean up
premises. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.11 COLLECTION OF CHARGES
All bills must be paid within fifteen days from the date on the bill. Ten percent will be added to
the amount of the bill if it is not paid within fifteen days from the date of the bill.
Charges for refuse collection are hereby made a lien on the premises served and are hereby
recognized to constitute such a lien. Whenever any such charge against any piece of property is
delinquent for more than sixty days, the charge shall be certified to the taxing officer of the City
on March 1 and September 1 of each year, whereupon such charge shall be entered upon the
next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof
enforced in the same manner as general City taxes against such premises are collected and the
lien thereof enforced. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.12 OTHER RATES AND CHARGES
Other rates and charges may be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-90.)
1060.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1242 Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
Chapter 1242
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
1242.01 Tentative approval of preliminary
plat required prior to sale or
construction
1242.04 Variances; re-subdivision of land; lot
splits
1242.02 Pre-application procedure; review
of sketch of plat by Subdivision
Committee and Planning
Commission
1242.99 Penalty
1242.03 Subdivision Committee;
composition; duties
CROSS REFERENCES
Acceptance of plats; recording - see CHTR. Secs. 13-6, 13-7; M.C.L.A. Sec.
125.43
Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.44
Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.45
Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.51 et seq.
1242.01 TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED PRIOR TO SALE OR
CONSTRUCTION
No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or have made a subdivision or re-subdivision
within the jurisdictional limits of these Subdivision Regulations shall enter into any contract for
the sale of, or shall offer for sale, such subdivision, or any part thereof, or shall proceed with
any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, until he or she or it has
obtained from the Planning Commission the tentative approval of the preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1242.02 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE; REVIEW OF SKETCH OF PLAT BY SUBDIVISION
COMMITTEE AND PLANNING COMMISSION
It is required that the subdivider or his or her agent consult with the Subdivision Committee
while the plat is in sketch form and before the preliminary plat is prepared to ascertain the
location of proposed highways, major streets, parkways, parks, playgrounds and other planned
developments. At this time the subdivider may request that the Planning Commission review
the proposal in sketch form and give general comments regarding its probable acceptability.
No commitments can be made by either the Subdivision Committee or the Planning
Commission at this stage as to the official acceptance of the preliminary plat.
1242.03 SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE; COMPOSITION; DUTIES
A. A Subdivision Committee composed of three members of the Planning Commission,
together with a planning consultant, is hereby delegated to represent the Commission in
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1242 Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
pre-application negotiations with the subdivider and to perform such other functions as
may be assigned by the Chairperson of the Commission.
B. The function of the Subdivision Committee shall be to represent the Commission and make
recommendations regarding subdivision proposals in the pre-application stages. The
Committee, or any of its members, shall discuss such proposals with the subdivider, review
preliminary plats and other data, inspect sites and make such other investigations as
necessary, and shall furnish information to the subdivider regarding plat procedures and
requirements. The Committee shall present its recommendations regarding a proposal to
the Commission at its next regular meeting.
C. The information which may be furnished to the subdivider by the Committee includes the
following:
1. Procedural steps, design standards, preliminary plat requirements, zoning
requirements and public health requirements.
2. Any known unusual or difficult problems pertinent to the site, such as adjacent land
use, drainage, soil percolation, water supply, public utilities and streets. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 8-16-60.)
1242.04 VARIANCES; RE-SUBDIVISION OF LAND; LOT SPLITS
A. Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict
compliance with these Subdivision Regulations, it may vary these Regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such
variation will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of the Major Street
and Thoroughfare Plan, the Master Plan or these Regulations.
B. The general principles of design and the minimum requirements for the laying out of the
subdivision, stipulated in Chapter 1248, may be varied by the Planning Commission in the
case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a more or less self-contained neighborhood
to be developed in accordance with a comprehensive plan, safeguarded by appropriate
restrictions, which, in the judgment of the Commission, make adequate provision for all
essential community requirements, provided, however, that no modification shall be
granted by the Commission which would conflict with the proposals of the Major Street and
Thoroughfare Plan or the Master Plan or with the interests and purposes of general
principles of design and minimum requirements.
C. In the case of a small subdivision of minor importance situated in a locality where
conditions are well defined, the Planning Commission may exempt the subdivider from
complying with some or all of the requirements stipulated in Section 1244.02 pertaining to
the preparation of the preliminary plat, except that, in such cases, a public hearing on the
final plat shall be held prior to the installation of any improvements or approval of such final
plat.
D. In any particular case where the subdivider can show that, by reason of an exceptional
situation or characteristic of his or her property, strict compliance with any requirement of
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 3
Chapter 1242 Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
these Regulations would cause practical difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship, the
Planning Commission may relax such requirement to the extent deemed just and proper so
as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided that such relief may be granted without
detriment to the public good and without impairing the intent and purposes of these
Regulations or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community
in accordance with the Master Plan and the Zoning Code. Any modification thus granted
shall be entered in the minutes of the Planning Commission, justifying the modification.
E. In the case of a proposal to re-subdivide land which is already platted but is relatively
underdeveloped, the Planning Commission will give due consideration to the need for
utilizing existing street improvements, utility installations and developed residential lots, in
keeping with good subdivision design. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
F. A subdivision lot, once platted, shall not be split, sold in part or combination or in any
way modified, except as follows:
1. Each resulting parcel must meet each and every requirement of the Zoning Code for
the land use district in which the parcel is located;
2. The Planning Commission has reviewed, and made recommendations to the City
Council relating to, the proposed modifications, either with or without a public
hearing, at the discretion of the Planning Commission; and
3. The proposed modifications have been approved by the City Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed
3-3-92.)
4. This Section shall not apply to subdivision lot combinations which may be approved by
the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 97-5 Passed 6-17-97)
1242.99 PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any provision of these
Subdivision Regulations shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1973 Code §151.99)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 202 Codified Ordinances Page 1
CHAPTER 202
Codified Ordinances
202.01 Designation; citation; headings 202.06 Sections and ordinances repealed
202.02 Amendments and supplements;
numbering
202.07 Exemptions from repeal
202.03 Definitions and interpretation. 202.08 Application of Codified Ordinances
202.04 Notices 202.99 General Code penalty; complicity
202.05 Separability
CROSS REFERENCES
Initiative and referendum generally - CHTR. Ch. 4, Secs. 4-9 et seq.
Procedure ordinance for special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 9, Sec. 9-2
Publication of codes of municipal ordinances - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5b
Ordinances and resolutions - see ADM. Ch. 218
Determination of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions by Council
resolution - see B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS
A. This volume consists of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Municipality, revised, codified, arranged, numbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as such shall be known and designated as the
Codified Ordinances of Manistee, Michigan, 1994, for which designation "Codified
Ordinances" may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances.
B. All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such components of the Codified
Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited
by its name, such as the "Traffic Code." Sections may be referred to and cited by the
designation "section" followed by the number, such as "Section 202.01."
202.02 AMENDMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTS; NUMBERING
A. The Codified Ordinances of Manistee may be amended or supplemented at any time and,
when any amendment or supplement is adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
Council to make the same a part thereof, such amendment or supplement shall be
incorporated in, and deemed a part of, the Codified Ordinances, so that a reference to the
Codified Ordinances shall be understood and construed as including the Codified
Ordinances of Manistee and any and all such amendments and supplements.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 202 Codified Ordinances Page 2
B. All amendments and supplements enacted as a part of the Codified Ordinances shall be
integrated therewith by following the form of arrangement and plan set forth in the original
Codified Ordinances as follows: each Code shall be subdivided into titles and/or chapters,
and each chapter shall be subdivided into sections, which shall be numbered in accordance
with the decimal numbering system. The numbering of all sections, except penalty sections,
shall be consecutive within each chapter commencing with the first section of Chapter 202,
which shall be numbered 202.01, the first "2" signifying Code 2, and the two figures "02"
before the decimal signifying the chapter within the Code, and the two figures "01" after
the decimal signifying the first section in Chapter 202 of the Code. Penalty sections shall be
designated "99" and shall be the last section of a chapter.
202.03 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
Terms used in these Codified Ordinances, unless specifically defined herein, shall have the
meanings prescribed by State law. In the construction of these Codified Ordinances, or any
provision thereof, the following rules and definitions shall control, except those which are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of Council as disclosed in a particular provision, section or
chapter:
1. Adopting Ordinance. "Adopting Ordinance" means the ordinance of the Municipality
adopting the Codified Ordinances of Manistee, pursuant to law.
2. Authority. Whenever in these Codified Ordinances authority is given to an officer or
an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and such act may
be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy or subordinate, unless
contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such particular provision.
3. Calendar-Computation of Time. The terms "month" and "year" mean the calendar
month or year. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or a
period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day,
unless the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which case it shall be excluded. If
time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday shall be excluded.
4. Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the sense so requires.
5. Council. "Council" means the legislative authority of the City.
6. County. "County" means Manistee County, Michigan.
7. Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied to the feminine
and neuter genders.
8. General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common usage of the language, provided, however, that
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a special meaning
in the law shall be construed according to such technical or special meaning.
9. Joint Authority. Words giving authority to a board, commission, authority or three or
more officers or employees or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided.
10. Keeper and Proprietor. "Keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and co-partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant,
agent or employee.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 202 Codified Ordinances Page 3
11. Land and Real Estate. "Land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an
incorporeal nature.
12. Law. "Law" means all applicable laws of the United States of America, the State of
Michigan and the City of Manistee.
13. Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated (M.C.L.A.). Where a section of these Codified
Ordinances is followed by a reference to a section of the Michigan Compiled Laws
Annotated (M.C.L.A.), such reference indicates that the section is analogous or similar
to such M.C.L.A. section.
14. Municipality or City. "Municipality" or "City" means the City of Manistee, Michigan.
15. Notice. "Notice" means notice as described in Section 202.04.
16. Number. Words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include
the plural number.
17. Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an
affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having conscientious scruples
about taking an oath. An affirmation shall have the same force and effect as an oath.
18. Ordinance. "Ordinance" means and includes any ordinance of the Municipality,
including any provision of these Codified Ordinances.
19. Owner. "Owner," when applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or any part of such property.
20. Person. "Person" includes any individual, co-partnership, corporation, association,
club, joint venture, estate, trust and any other group or combination acting as a unit,
and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
21. Premises. "Premises," when used as applicable to property, extends to and includes
land and buildings.
22. Property. "Property" includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. "Personal property" includes every kind of property
except real property; "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
23. Public Acts. "Public Acts" means Acts of the State legislature of the State of Michigan.
24. Public Place. "Public place" means any place to or upon which the public resorts or
travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the City or any agency of the
State or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or by
invitation, express or implied.
25. Publish. "Publish" means to print in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Municipality the entire document or a brief summary thereof with a listing of places
where copies have been filed and times when they are available for inspection.
26. Reasonable Time. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done or notice
to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed to mean such time only as
may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
27. Reference to Offices or Officers. Reference in any of the provisions of these Codified
Ordinances to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office or officer
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in such provision, irrespective
of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
28. Residence. "Residence" means an abode in which a person permanently resides.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 202 Codified Ordinances Page 4
29. Shall and May. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
30. Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines or lateral
lines and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
31. State. "State" means the State of Michigan.
32. Street, Highway and Alley. "Street," "highway" and "alley" mean the entire width
subject to an easement for public right of way, or owned in fee by the City, County or
State, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to
the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word
"alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and
egress from a property.
33. Tenant and Occupant. "Tenant" and "occupant," as applied to buildings or land, shall
extend and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who
occupies the whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others.
34. Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future.
35. Time. Whenever any time established in the Codified Ordinances for the taking of any
action expires on a Sunday or a legal holiday, such time shall not expire on such day
but shall expire on the next week day.
36. Responsibility. Whenever any act is prohibited by a provision of these Codified
Ordinances or by any rule or regulation adopted there under, such prohibition shall
extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do
such act.
202.04 NOTICES
A. Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures,
abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which, if performed by the City, may be
assessed against the premises under the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, shall be
served:
1. By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his or her
residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion;
2. By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his or her last
known address; or
3. If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the
premises for five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given.
B. No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice
or placard posted by any City officer unless permission is given by such officer to remove
such notice or placard.
202.05 SEPARABILITY
It is the legislative intent of Council in adopting these Codified Ordinances that all provisions
and sections of these Codified Ordinances be liberally construed to protect and preserve the
peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. Should any provision or section
of these Codified Ordinances be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 202 Codified Ordinances Page 5
construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the
intent that these Codified Ordinances shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any
provision or section thereof.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of these Codified
Ordinances, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory
ordinance.
202.06 SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Municipality, and parts of the same, in
conflict with any of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, are hereby repealed.
202.07 EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL
The repeal provided for in Section 202.06 shall not affect:
A. Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract
or right established or accruing, before the adoption of these Codified Ordinances;
B. Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the
Municipality, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Municipality, or any evidence
of the Municipality's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the
Municipality;
C. The administrative ordinances and resolutions of Council not in conflict or inconsistent with
any provision of these Codified Ordinances;
D. Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or resolution of Council on any
person;
E. Any ordinance or resolution establishing, naming, relocating or vacating any street or other
public way;
F. Any ordinance or resolution or part thereof providing for the establishment of positions, for
salaries or compensation;
G. Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment rendered, on or prior
to the adoption of these Codified Ordinances;
H. Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing taxes or assessments;
I. Any ordinance or resolution establishing or changing the boundaries of the Municipality; or
J. Any ordinance or resolution adopted by Council after the adoption of these Codified
Ordinances.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 202 Codified Ordinances Page 6
202.08 APPLICATION OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES
These Codified Ordinances shall apply to acts performed within the jurisdiction of the City. Acts
performed outside the City shall be governed by these Codified Ordinances up to the limits
prescribed by law, where the law confers power on the City to regulate such acts outside the
City.
202.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY; COMPLICITY
A. General Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, or of
any technical or other code adopted by reference in these Codified Ordinances, or of any
rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of any provision of these
Codified Ordinances, or under authority of any technical or other code adopted by
reference in these Codified Ordinances, or under authority of State law, for which no
penalty is otherwise specifically provided, is guilty of a civil infraction and shall be fined an
amount not less than that established from time to time by the City Council, and not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Whoever violates any of such
provisions that is expressly declared to be a misdemeanor shall be fined not less than that
amount established from time to time by the City Council, and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both, for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues, unless otherwise provided.
B. Surcharges; Equitable Remedies. The imposition of any penalty provided for in this section
shall be in addition to any surcharge levied for a violation of a provision of these Codified
Ordinances, or a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these
Codified Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of
either or under authority of State law, and shall be in addition to any equitable remedy
provided by a provision of these Codified Ordinances, or a provision of a technical or other
code adopted by reference in these Codified Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order
promulgated or made under authority of either, or under authority of State law, including
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
C. Complicity. Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under these Codified
Ordinances, whether he or she directly commits the act constituting the offense or
procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted, tried or
found responsible, and on conviction shall be punished, as if he or she had directly
committed such offense.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 203 Codified Ordinances
Chapter 203
Municipal Civil Infractions
203.01 Definitions 203.04 Contents of Municipal Civil Infraction
Citations
203.02 Commencement of Municipal Civil
Infraction Citations
203.05 Municipal Ordinance Violations
Bureau
203.03 Issuance and service of Municipal
Civil Infraction Citations
203.06 Schedule of Civil Fines
CROSS REFERENCES
General Code penalty - see ADM. 202.99
Nuisances committed by animals - see GEN. OFF. 606.10
Nuisances - see GEN. OFF 654
Noise creating activities - see GEN. OFF. 662.02
Swimming in Certain Portions of Manistee River - see GEN. OFF. 670.03
Excavations - see S.U. & P.S. 1022
Sidewalks - see S.U. & P.S. 1024
Trees - see S.U. & P.S. 1026
Parks and Recreation - see S.U. & P.S. 1062
Zoning Ordinance - see P.&. Z
Building & Housing Codes - see B.& H.
Fire Prevention Code - see F.& P. 1610
203.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
A. “Act” means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended.
B. “Authorized City official” means a police officer or other personnel of the City authorized by
resolution of the City Council to issue Municipal civil infraction citations or Municipal civil
infraction violation notices.
C. “Bureau” means the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, as established by this chapter.
D. “Municipal civil infraction action” means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to
be responsible for a Municipal civil infraction.
E. “Municipal civil infraction citation” means a written complaint or notice prepared by an
authorized City official, directing a person to appear in Court regarding the occurrence or
existence of a Municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited.
F. “Municipal civil infraction violation notice” means a written notice, prepared by an
authorized City official, directing a person to appear at the Municipal Ordinance Violations
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 203 Codified Ordinances
Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of
civil fines adopted by the City, as authorized under Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act.
203.02 COMMENCEMENT OF MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION
A Municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized City
official of a Municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in Court; or
a Municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the
Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
203.03 ISSUANCE AND SERVICE OF MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized City officials as
follows:
A. The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the
citation is issued.
B. The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the District Court.
C. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the State
Court Administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the District Court. Copies of the
citation shall be retained by the City and issued to the alleged violator. as provided by
Section 8705 of the Act.
D. A citation for a Municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized City official shall be treated
as if it were made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence
of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement
immediately above the date and signature of the official: “I declare under the penalties of
perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and
belief.”
E. An authorized City official who witnesses a person commit a Municipal civil infraction shall
prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and
required copies of a citation.
F. An authorized City official may issue a citation to a person if:
1. Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for a Municipal civil infraction; or
2. Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the
person commit a Municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe
that the person is responsible for an infraction, and the City Attorney approves in
writing the issuance of the citation.
G. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized City official as follows:
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 3
Chapter 203 Codified Ordinances
1. Except as provided in paragraph (g)(2) hereof, an authorized City official shall personally
serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.
2. If the Municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other
structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged
violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or
structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner
of the land, building or structure at the owner’s last known address.
203.04 CONTENTS OF MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS
A. A Municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged
violator, the Municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall
appear in Court, the telephone number of the Court and the time at or by which the
appearance shall be made.
B. Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one of the
following:
1. Admit responsibility for the Municipal civil infraction by mail, in person or by
representation, at or by the time specified for appearance.
2. Admit responsibility for the Municipal civil infraction “with explanation” by mail by the
time specified for appearance or in person, or by representation.
3. Deny responsibility for the Municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following:
(a) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before the Judge or Magistrate of the
District Court, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless
a formal hearing before a Judge is requested by the City.
(b) Appearing in Court for a formal hearing before a Judge with the opportunity of
being represented by an attorney.
C. The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
1. That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility “with explanation” in person
or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the Court in person, by mail, by
telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time for an appearance.
2. That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply
to the Court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time
specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing,
unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
3. That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the
alleged violator or the City.
4. That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before the Judge
or Magistrate of the District Court, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 4
Chapter 203 Codified Ordinances
5. That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before the Judge or
Magistrate of the District Court, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
D. The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type stating that the failure of the alleged
violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a
hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment
against the alleged violator on the Municipal civil infraction.
203.05 MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
A. Establishment. There is hereby established a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau (the
Bureau), as authorized under Section 8396 of the Act, to accept admissions of responsibility
for Municipal civil infractions in response to Municipal civil infraction violation notices
issued and served by authorized City officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs
as prescribed by these Codified Ordinances or any other ordinance.
B. Location: Supervision: Employees: Rules and Regulations. The Bureau shall be located at
City Hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the City Treasurer. The City
Treasurer, subject to the approval of Council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the
operation of the Bureau and appoint any necessary qualified City employees to administer
the Bureau.
C. Disposition of Violations. The Bureau may dispose only of Municipal civil infraction
violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a Municipal civil infraction
violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact alone that a fine has
been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the
violation at the Bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the City from issuing
a Municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a
Court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a Municipal Civil
Infraction Violation at the Bureau and may have the violation processed before a Court of
appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the
Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person’s rights, privileges
and protection accorded by law.
D. Scope of Authority. The scope of the Bureau’s authority shall be limited to accepting
admissions of responsibility for Municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil
fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not accept payment of a
fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits
responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the Bureau determine, or attempt
to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation.
E. Municipal Civil Infraction Violation Notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall
be issued and served by authorized City officials under the same circumstances and upon
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 5
Chapter 203 Codified Ordinances
the same persons as are provided for citations in Section 203.03(f) and (g). In addition to
any other information required by these Codified Ordinances or any other ordinance, the
notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the
Bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone
number of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount of the fine
scheduled for the alleged violation and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the
required fine within the required time.
F. Appearance: Payment of Fines and Costs. An alleged violator receiving a Municipal civil
infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at
or by the time specified for appearance in the Municipal civil infraction violation notice. An
appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation.
G. Procedure Where Admission of Responsibility Not Made or Fine Not Paid. If an authorized
City official issues and serves a Municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of
responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of
fines set forth in Section 203.06 for the violation, are not paid at the Bureau, a Municipal
civil infraction citation may be filed with the District Court, and a copy of the citation may
be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator’s last known
address. The citation filed with the Court does not need to comply in all particulars with the
requirements for citations as provided by Section 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist
of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the Municipal ordinance violation
notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation.
203.06 SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES
A. A schedule of civil fines payable to the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau for
admissions of responsibility shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.
(Added Ord. 00-05 passed 3-7-00, Effective 3-21-00)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 204 Official Standards Page 1
CHAPTER 204
Official Standards
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 204. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
State Seal - see Mich. Const. Art. 3, Sec. 3; M.C.L.A. Secs. 2.41 et seq.
Seal of municipal sewage disposal and water supply authority - see M.C.L.A.
Sec. 124.284
Weights and measures - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 290.601 et seq.; 750.561 et seq.
Minimum employment standards for police officers – see ADM. 234.01
Minimum standards for rental properties - see B. & H. 1482.03
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 206 Wards, Precincts and Boundaries Page 1
CHAPTER 206
Wards, Precincts and Boundaries
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 206. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Boundaries of City generally - see CHTR. Ch. 1, Sec. 1-2, Appx. 1
Wards and precincts of City generally - see CHTR. Ch. 3, Sec. 3-1
Apportionment of wards; copy of apportionment plan - see M.C.L.A. Sec.
117.27a
Boundaries of Downtown District - see ADM. 282.05
Boundaries of Historic District – see P. & Z. 1280.21
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 208 Public Improvement Procedure
Chapter 208
Public Improvement Procedure
208.01 Commencement of proceedings 208.07 Expenses incurred by City re single
premises; collection of costs;
submission by City Assessor of
special assessment rolls to Council
208.02 Initiatory petitions; review by City
Clerk and City Manager
208.08 Liens
208.03 Council action re initiatory petitions 208.09 Collection to assessments by Finance
Director; interest on unpaid
assessments
208.04 Preparation of plans, estimates,
recommendations, etc., by City
Manager prior to construction;
referral to Council
208.10 Waiver of notice of proceedings
208.05 Public hearing; notice 208.11 Compliance with Charter
208.06 Preparation of final assessment roll
by City Assessor upon completion of
construction; hearing; action by
Council
CROSS REFERENCES
Special assessments - see Mich. Const. Art. 9, Sec. 6; CHTR. Chs. 9, 10, Sec. 10-3;
M.C.L.A. Secs. 104.8, 211.741 et seq.; ADM. 210.03(a)
Improvement funds - see CHTR. Ch. 7, Sec. 7-14
Assessment rolls - see CHTR. Ch. 8, Sec. 8-2GEN. OFF. 662.02
Council Policy on New Municipal Infrastructure - see ADM. 210.03
Improvements in subdivisions - see P. & Z. Ch. 1250
208.01 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS
Proceedings for the making of public improvements within the City may be commenced as
follows:
A. By resolution of the City Council on its own initiative.
B. By initiatory petitions signed by the property owners owning a majority of the street
frontage to be affected. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-18-48.)
208.02 INITIATORY PETITIONS; REVIEW BY CITY CLERK AND CITY MANAGER
Each initiatory petition shall contain, in addition to the signatures of the property owners
provided for in Section 208.01, a brief description of the property owned by them, and shall be
verified by the affidavit of one or more of the property owners, or by a person with knowledge
that the signers are property owners in the area to be affected and that the signatures are
genuine. Such petition shall be addressed to the City Council and filed with the City Clerk, but
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 208 Public Improvement Procedure
in no event shall such petition be mandatory on the City Council. All petitions, when filed, shall
be checked by the City Clerk to determine whether the same conform to the foregoing
requirements, and then to the City Manager for investigation and report. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-18-
48.)
208.03 COUNCIL ACTION RE INITIATORY PETITIONS
After receiving the City Manager's report, the City Council shall either grant or deny the
petition. If a petition is granted, the same may be placed on file for further consideration. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 5-18-48.)
208.04 PREPARATION OF PLANS, ESTIMATES, RECOMMENDATIONS, ETC., BY CITY
MANAGER PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION; REFERRAL TO COUNCIL
Before proceeding with the construction of any improvement, the City Council shall instruct the
City Manager to prepare and refer back to the City Council plans, specifications, estimates and
recommendations as to what portion of the expense shall be paid by special assessment and
what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the City, and the number of installments and
the time within which said special assessments shall be paid, for such improvement. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 5-18-48.)
208.05 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE
A. A public hearing shall be held before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the City
Council. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper
printed in the City not less than seven days prior to the date of such hearing. Written notice
shall also be sent by mail to each owner of property subject to assessment, as indicated by
the records of the City Assessor, showing the time and place of the hearing, but failure to
send such notice to any owner shall not invalidate the proceedings.
B. At the time and place specified for the public hearing, the City Council shall meet and hear
objections, determine the necessity for such improvements, make, or cause to be made,
such changes or corrections in the tentative cost estimates of the tentative assessment roll
as it deems advisable, and determine the extent of such special assessment district to be
covered by such assessment. Such meeting may be adjourned from time to time by the City
Council. The determinations herein required shall be made by resolution. Any person
appearing at said hearing shall have a right to be heard. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-18-48.)
208.06 PREPARATION OF FINAL ASSESSMENT ROLL BY CITY ASSESSOR UPON
COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION; HEARING; ACTION BY COUNCIL
A. Upon the completion of an improvement and the preparation of the final cost figures
therefore, the City Clerk shall certify to the City Assessor the actual cost of such
improvement. The City Assessor shall forthwith prepare a final assessment roll to conform
with the actual cost of such improvement and shall present such final roll to the City Council
within fifteen days of the time he or she shall have been notified of the cost of such
improvement. Such notice of final cost shall be delivered by the City Clerk personally to the
City Assessor, together with the information required in Chapter 9 of the City Charter.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 3
Chapter 208 Public Improvement Procedure
B. Upon receipt of the final assessment roll, the City Council shall set a date for hearing on
such assessment roll and proceed to act thereon as a board of review, in accordance with,
and as required in, Chapter 9 of the City Charter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-18-48.)
208.07 EXPENSES INCURRED BY CITY RE SINGLE PREMISES; COLLECTION OF COSTS;
SUBMISSION BY CITY ASSESSOR OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLLS TO COUNCIL
When any expense shall have been incurred by the City upon or with respect to any single
premises, which expense is chargeable against such premises and the owner thereof under the
provisions of any ordinance of the City or any provision of State law, and which expense is not
of the class which should be prorated among several lots and parcels of land in a special
assessment district, the owner shall be charged and billed therefor. When such expense is not
paid to the City within sixty days after such expense was billed, the City Assessor shall
thereafter submit to the City Council a special assessment roll covering the same. Any number
of such cases may be included in one roll. The City Council shall confirm such roll, or such part
as it deems advisable, and order the assessments confirmed to be collected in the same
manner as other special assessments under this chapter, and such confirmation shall be
conclusive. Any provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter which refer to proceedings
to be had before confirming special assessments shall not apply to assessments contemplated
in this section. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-18-48.)
208.08 LIENS
Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll by the City Council acting as a board of
review, in accordance with the City Charter, the assessments thereon shall constitute liens
forthwith upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and shall be a charge against the
person to whom assessed until paid. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-18-48.)
208.09 COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENTS BY FINANCE DIRECTOR; INTEREST ON UNPAID
ASSESSMENTS
The assessment roll shall be transmitted to the Finance Director for collection immediately
after its confirmation, and the persons assessed may pay the whole or part of such assessment
during the period of sixty days from the date of confirmation without interest or penalty. After
such sixty days, interest at a rate to be determined by the City Council shall be charged and
added to all unpaid assessments. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-19-89.)
208.10 WAIVER OF NOTICE OF PROCEEDINGS
The owner of record of any lot or premises may at any time execute, in writing, a waiver of
notice of proceedings and file the same with the Council, waiving any or all notice of hearing
and other proceedings required under this chapter and authorizing the City Council to make
such special assessment as the City Council may determine against such owner and his or her
property without further notice. The City Council may thereupon, by resolution, authorize the
City Manager to proceed with the improvement. Any special assessment so made shall, upon
confirmation of the assessment by the City Council, be considered the same as any other
special assessment formally made under this chapter, notwithstanding the omission of the
proceeding or proceedings so waived. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-18-48.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 4
Chapter 208 Public Improvement Procedure
208.11 COMPLIANCE WITH CHARTER
All other proceedings relative to collection of assessments, preparing the assessment roll and
placing the amounts due on the tax roll shall be in accordance with the City Charter. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 5-18-48.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 210 Council Policies Page 1
CHAPTER 210
Council Policies
EDITOR'S NOTE: Council Policies are guidelines for the administration of certain areas of
Municipal concern, but are not legally binding. They are separately maintained and are
available at cost, from the City Clerk.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 214 Council Page 1
CHAPTER 214
Council
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 214. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Council generally - see CHTR. Ch. 2
Legislative body in home rule cities - see CHTR. Ch. 4, Sec. 4-1; M.C.L.A. Sec.
117.3
Procedure on initiatory or referendum petitions - see CHTR. Ch. 4, Sec. 4-14
Council policies - see ADM. Ch. 210
Compensation Commission recommendations re salaries of Council members -
see ADM. 272.03
Management of combined water supply and sewage disposal system - see S.U.
& P.S. 1040.03
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 216 Mayor Page 1
CHAPTER 216
Mayor
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 216. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Mayor generally - see CHTR. Ch. 2, Sec. 2-4
Mayor in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.3
City Manager - see ADM. Ch. 220
Compensation Commission recommendations re salary - see ADM. 272.03
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 218 Ordinances and Resolutions Page 1
CHAPTER 218
Ordinances and Resolutions
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 218. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Legislation generally - see CHTR. Ch. 4
Procedure ordinance for special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 9, Sec. 9-2
Ordinances in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.3, 117.5b
Enforcement - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4i
Enactment - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4j
Actions to recover fines and penalties - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.29
Codified Ordinances - see ADM. Ch. 202
Determination of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions by Council
resolution - see B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances - Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 220 City Manager Page 1
CHAPTER 220
City Manager
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 220. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Authority re employees - see CHTR. Ch. 2, Sec. 2-10
Attendance at Council meetings - see CHTR. Ch. 2, Sec. 2-15
City Manager generally - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Secs. 5-1 et seq.
Changing salary or emoluments during term of office – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5
Duties re public improvements - see ADM. 208.02, 208.04
Enforcement of excavation regulations - see S.U. & P.S. 1022.05
Calculation of water and sewer rate increases - see S.U. & P.S. 1040.04.B.3
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 222 City Attorney Page 1
CHAPTER 222
City Attorney
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 222. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
City Attorney generally - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-8
Membership in Board of Election Commissioners – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 168.25
Duties re animals running at large - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 433.53, 433.62
Service of process - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 600.1925
As legal advisor of Retirement Board - see ADM. 294.35
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 224 City Clerk Page 1
CHAPTER 224
City Clerk
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 224. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Canvass of initiatory or referendum petitions - see CHTR. Ch. 4, Sec. 4-13
City Clerk generally - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-9
Filing charters or amendments thereto – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.24
Filing of initiative petitions - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.25
Apportionment of wards; copy of apportionment plan - see M.C.L.A. Sec.
117.27a
Review of initiatory petitions for public improvements - see ADM. 208.02
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 226 Finance Director Page 1
CHAPTER 226
Finance Director
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 226. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Finance generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 9, Secs. 1 et seq.; CHTR. Ch. 7
Finance Director generally - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-10
City Assessor - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-11; ADM. Ch. 228
Deposit of public funds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 129.11 et seq.
Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 132.2, 133.6, 135.7
Municipal Finance Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 133.5, 133.6
Collection of municipal income taxes - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 141.671
Collection of assessments for public improvements - see ADM. 208.09
Investment of Motor Pool Fund - see ADM. 246.02
Segregation of oil and gas revenues - see ADM. 260.05
As Treasurer of the Employees Retirement System - see ADM. 294.35
Duties re Parking Violations Bureau - see TRAF. 420.02
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 228 City Assessor Page 1
CHAPTER 228
City Assessor
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 228. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Finance generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 9, Secs. 1 et seq.; CHTR. Ch. 7
City Assessor generally - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-11
Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 7
Deposit of public funds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 129.11 et seq.
Public money - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.489 et seq.
Duties re assessment rolls for public improvements - see ADM. 208.06, 208.07
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 230 Code Official Page 1
CHAPTER 230
Code Official
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 230. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Enforcement of Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. 1420.05
Dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see B. & H. Ch. 1454
Moving of buildings - see B. & H. Ch. 1462
Inspection of wharf and dock construction - see B. & H. 1478.02, 1478.03
Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. 1480
Inspection of rental properties prior to permit issuance - see B. & H. 1482.05
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 232 Director of Public Safety Page 1
CHAPTER 232
Director of Public Safety
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 232. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Public safety generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.493 et seq.
Police Department - see ADM. Ch. 234
Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 236
Issuance of permits for open burning - see GEN. OFF. 674.01
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 234 Police Department
Chapter 234
Police Department
234.01 Minimum employment standards
for law enforcement officers
CROSS REFERENCES
Enforcement of laws - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4i
Arrests - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.34
Jurisdiction outside City limits - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.34
Retirement plan - see ADM. 294.19
Authority of police officers re abandoned vehicles - see TRAF. 410
Enforcement and inspections re mechanical or electronic amusement devices -
see B.R. & T. 844.06
Enforcement of excavation regulations by Chief of Police - see S.U. & P.S.
1022.05
234.01 ADOPTION OF MINIMUM EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICERS
The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as established and adopted
by the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council in accordance with Act 203 of the
Public Acts of 1965, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as the minimum
employment standards for law enforcement officers of the City.
Added 1999
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 235 Disposition of Property in Possession of the City of Manistee Police Department
Chapter 235
Disposition of Property in Possession of the
City of Manistee Police Department
235.01 Definitions 235.06 Notice of Sale
235.02 Purpose 235.07 Weapons
235.03 Custody of Property 235.08 Limitation on Claim
235.04 Disposition of Bicycles 235.09 Confiscated Property
235.05 Dissipation of Other Unclaimed
Property - Auction Sale
CROSS REFERENCES
Abandoned Vehicle Sale - see TRAFFIC Ch. 410.04 (UTC 2.5G)
Weapons Generally - see GENERAL Ch. 690
235.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Chapter the following terms shall mean:
Unclaimed Property shall mean any personal property, money or valuables which may come
into the possession of the City of Manistee Police Department and remains unclaimed for a
period of six (6) months, at which time it shall be considered abandoned and unclaimed. This
definition shall apply to all personal property, except bicycles which shall be deemed
abandoned if unclaimed for thirty (30) days.
235.02 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a protocol for the disposition of properties coming
into the possession of the City of Manistee Police Department and to promote the
administration thereof for the general benefit, safety and welfare of the people of the City of
Manistee.
235.03 CUSTODY OF PROPERTY
The Chief of Police shall be custodian of all personal property coming into the possession of the
Police Department of the City. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to provide for proper
storage of such property until it is disposed of as provided in this Chapter. The Chief of Police
shall maintain proper written records of such personal property and shall provide a duplicate of
such record to the City Manager, and shall make reasonable effort to locate and return such
property to the owner(s) thereof. Any monies or other remuneration received upon the
disposition of any personal property shall be turned over to the City Treasurer.
235.04 DISPOSITION OF BICYCLES
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, any bicycle coming into possession of the
City, and remaining unclaimed by the owner thereof for a period of 30 days, shall be considered
Added 1999
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 235 Disposition of Property in Possession of the City of Manistee Police Department
abandoned and may be disposed of by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, through public
sale, return of the bicycle to the finer thereof, or by giving the bicycle to a local charitable
organization which has entered into an agreement with the Chief of Police to recondition and
donate such bicycles to needy individuals located within the City. Provided, however, that this
provision shall not alter how bicycles being held as evidence are handled unless the same are
no longer needed as evidence and remain unclaimed. The Chief of Police shall determine the
intervals between dispositions of bicycles and otherwise administer the disposition thereof.
235.05 DISPOSITION OF OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY - AUCTION SALE
The Chief of Police shall periodically arrange for auction sales for the disposition of any
unclaimed property [except cash, marketable securities or property otherwise provided for in
this Chapter] at public auction for the best price possible. All proceeds of sale shall be promptly
turned over to the City Treasurer and shall become the property of the City. All cash and
securities shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and become part of the general fund of the
City.
235.06 NOTICE OF SALE
The Chief of Police shall establish the time and place of all auction sales and shall cause notice
thereof to be published in two (2) consecutive issues of a newspaper of general circulation in
the City. Further, the Chief of Police shall issue at such auction(s) bills of sale and such other
documents as may be necessary to convey title to purchasers of such property. However, no
such transfer, document or bill of sale shall create any warranty of title from the City of
Manistee to the purchaser of such property.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 236 Fire Department Page 1
CHAPTER 236
Fire Department
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 236. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Retirement plan - see ADM. 294.18
Mutilating or driving over fire hoses - see GEN. OFF. 658.04
Open burning and burning of garbage - see GEN. OFF. 674.01, 674.02
Authority of Fire Chief re fire hydrants - see S.U. & P.S. 1040.10
International Fire Code - see F.P. Ch. 1610
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 238 Department of Public Works Page 1
CHAPTER 238
Department of Public Works
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 238. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4d et seq.
Approval of public works projects by Planning Commission - see M.C.L.A. Secs.
125.39, 125.40
Public improvement procedure - see ADM. Ch. 208
Water Department - see ADM. Ch. 240
Sewer Department - POTW - see ADM. Ch. 242
Combined water supply and sewage disposal system - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040
Wastewater discharge regulations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042
Cross connection control - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 240 Water Department Page 1
CHAPTER 240
Water Department
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 240. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Department of Public Works - see ADM. Ch. 238
Combined water supply and sewage disposal system - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040
Cross connection control - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044
Billing for garbage and rubbish collection by Department - see S.U. & P.S.
1060.10
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 242 Sewer Department - POTW Page 1
CHAPTER 242
Sewer Department - POTW
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 242. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Department of Public Works - see ADM. Ch. 238
Water Department - see ADM. Ch. 240
Combined water supply and sewage disposal system - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040
Wastewater discharge regulations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042
Cross connection control - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part two Administration Code
Chapter 244 Parks Department Page 1
CHAPTER 244
Parks Department
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 244. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Parks generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 23; S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1062
Recreation facilities in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4e
Sale of park property - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5
Misapplication of park funds - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 123.67
Board of Harbor Commissioners - see ADM. Ch. 266
Parks and Beautification Commission - see ADM. Ch. 289
River, lake and harbor regulations - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 670
Amended 1990
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 246 Motor Pool
Chapter 246
Motor Pool
246.01 Establishment; function 246.03 Lease of Municipal fleet; lease
payments; accrual of revenues
246.02 Initial funding; investment of funds
by Finance Director
246.04 Promulgation of rules and regulations
by Council or City Manager
CROSS REFERENCES
Finance Director - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-10; ADM. Ch. 226
Council - see ADM. Ch. 214
City Manager - see ADM. Ch. 220
Uniform Traffic Code - see TRAF. Ch. 410
Parking - see TRAF. Ch. 430
Traffic control - see TRAF. Ch. 440
246.01 ESTABLISHMENT; FUNCTION
There is hereby established a City Motor Pool, which shall exist as a separate Municipal fund.
The Motor Pool shall own and be responsible for the replacement of the City's Municipal fleet,
including all the depreciable vehicles with a cost in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000).
Fire pumpers and major fire apparatus are specifically excluded due to their capital cost,
provided, however, that the City Council may place such apparatus under the jurisdiction of the
Motor Pool at some future date, by resolution. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-7-90.)
246.02 INITIAL FUNDING; INVESTMENT OF FUNDS BY FINANCE DIRECTOR
The Motor Pool Fund shall be initially established utilizing the proceeds of the City's sale of the
Dunes Subdivision. The Motor Pool Fund shall accrue all interest earned on that initial funding.
These funds shall be invested by the Finance Director in a manner consistent with the
investment philosophy for the pension fund, provided, however, that the Fund shall stay liquid
enough to meet reasonably anticipated cash flow needs. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-7-90.)
246.03 LEASE OF MUNICIPAL FLEET; LEASE PAYMENTS; ACCRUAL OF REVENUES
The Motor Pool Fund shall lease the Municipal fleet to the appropriate City departments and
funds, with lease payments made to the Motor Pool Fund not less than semi-annually. The
Motor Pool shall accrue lease income, interest earnings and other revenues which may become
available to it for the purpose of replacing vehicles in the Municipal fleet as necessary. It is the
intent of the Motor Pool to establish a perpetual revolving fund able to replace equipment, as
necessary, over time. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-7-90.)
Amended 1990
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 246 Motor Pool
246.04 PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY COUNCIL OR CITY MANAGER
Rules, regulations and policies as may be necessary to implement this chapter shall be issued by
the City Council or the City Manager, so long as they are not inconsistent with the specific
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-7-90.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 250 Planning Commission Page 1
CHAPTER 250
Planning Commission
EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Planning Commission are codified in Chapter 1220 of
Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.

Repealed 2015
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 253 Ramsdell Theatre Civic and Cultural Center Governing Authority
Chapter 253
Ramsdell Theatre Civic and Cultural Center Governing Authority
EDITOR’S NOTE: On June 16, 2015 an ordinance to amend and ordinance entitled “Chapter 253
– Ramsdell Theatre Civic and Cultural Center Governing Authority”, by deleting in full chapter
253 and repealing all ordinances in conflict herewith was made, passed and adopted by the City
Council of the City of Manistee, Manistee County, Michigan, the 16th day of June, 2015 with an
enactment date of June 26, 2015.
THE CITY OF MANISTEE ORDAINES:
Section 1. Chapter 253 – Ramsdell Theater Civic and Cultural Center Governing Authority is
repealed.
Section 2. Effective Date: Publication
This ordinance shall be effective ten (10) days after its enactment as provided in Section 4-3 of
the City of Manistee Chapter. The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this Ordinance to be
published in a newspaper circulated in the city of Manistee, stating the date of the enactment
and effective date of the Ordinance, a brief notice as to the subject matter of the Ordinance
and such other facts as the city clerk shall deem pertinent. A copy of the Ordinance shall be
made available for public use and inspection at the office of the Manistee City Clerk.
(Ord 15-06, effective 7/6/16)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 254 Construction Board of Appeals Page 1
CHAPTER 254
Construction Board of Appeals
EDITOR'S NOTE: The Construction Code Board of Appeals is established in accordance with Sec.
14 of the Michigan State Construction Code Act of 1972 as amended.
CROSS REFERENCES
Building codes in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.3
State Construction Code Act - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.15
Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds - see M.C.L.A. Sec.
117.4j
Code Official generally - see ADM. Ch. 230
Enforcement of Michigan Building Code by Code Official - see B. & H. 1420.05
Wharf and dock construction - see B. & H. Ch. 1478
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 256 Board of Health Page 1
CHAPTER 256
Board of Health
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 256. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Health and sanitation generally - see Mich. Const., Art. 4, Sec. 51; M.C.L.A. Secs.
750.466 et seq.; GEN. OFF. Ch. 674
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2; B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
Health Officer - see CHTR. Ch. 13, Sec. 13-4
Board of Health generally - see CHTR. Ch. 13, Sec. 13-9
Local health departments - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 333.2401 et seq.
Nuisances generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 600.3801 et seq.; GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 257 Historic District Commission Page 1
CHAPTER 257
Historic District Commission
EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Historic District Commission are codified in Chapter
1280 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Two Six Administration Code
Chapter 258 Board of Review Page 1
CHAPTER 258
Board of Review
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 258. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
City Assessor - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-11; ADM. Ch. 228
Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 8
Board of Review generally - see CHTR. Ch. 8, Secs. 8-3 et seq.
Special assessments - see CHTR. Chs. 9, 10, Sec. 10-3
Added March 2012
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 259 Brownfield Redevelopment Authority Page 1
CHAPTER 259
Brownfield Redevelopment Authority
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 259. The Brownfield Redevelopment
Authority was established by resolution adopted 6-6-06.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 260 Oil and Gas Investment Board
Chapter 260
Oil and Gas Investment Board
260.01 Purposes 260.04 Adoption of rules and regulations
260.02 Establishment; composition; terms 260.05 Segregation of revenues by Finance
Director; deposit in Oil and Gas
Income Account
260.03 Selection of Trustee; duties
CROSS REFERENCES
Finance Director - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-10; ADM. Ch. 226
Finance generally - see CHTR. Ch. 8
Utilities generally - see CHTR. Ch. 11
260.01 PURPOSES
The purposes of this chapter are to define and provide for the segregation of oil, gas and
related hydrocarbon income of the City, to establish an Oil and Gas Investment Board for the
purpose of preserving such income, and to provide the duties of said Board regarding the
investment of such income and allocation of interest on such income to the General Fund of the
City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-2-81.)
260.02 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS
A. There is hereby established an Oil and Gas Investment Board to manage, control, invest, reinvest
and pay to the General Fund all income upon said Fund entrusted to it.
B. The Board shall consist of five members: the Mayor, who shall act as Chairperson of said
Board, two members, either elected or appointed officials of the City, appointed by the
Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, and two additional members, with the
approval of the City Council, for staggered appointed by the Mayor. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-23-
90.)
260.03 SELECTION OF TRUSTEE; DUTIES
A Trustee shall be selected by the Oil and Gas Investment Board for the sole purpose of taking
physical custody of the Oil and Gas Income Account, carrying out the orders of investment of
the Board and paying to the City, annually, the income therefrom. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-2-81.)
260.04 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
At the first meeting of the Oil and Gas Investment Board, it shall adopt rules and regulations
and may, from time to time, amend the same, as is necessary to carry out the purposes and
intents of this chapter, which is stated to be the preservation of the principal of oil, gas and
related hydrocarbon revenues for the benefit of the citizens of the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-2-
81.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 260 Oil and Gas Investment Board
260.05 SEGREGATION OF REVENUES BY FINANCE DIRECTOR; DEPOSIT IN OIL AND GAS
INCOME ACCOUNT
All revenues, whether from lease or royalty interest from any lease, contract or other
document providing revenues to the City from oil, gas or related hydrocarbons, shall be
segregated by the Finance Director from the general income of the City and deposited to the Oil
and Gas Income Account. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-21-81.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 262 Personnel Advisory Board Page 1
CHAPTER 262
Personnel Advisory Board
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 262. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
City personnel - see CHTR. Ch.5 V, Sec. 5-6
Salaries, wages and fringe benefits of officers and employees - see CHTR. Ch. 5,
Sec. 5-7
Officers and employees generally - see ADM. Ch. 290
Employee Savings Plan - see ADM. Ch. 292
Employees Retirement System - see ADM. Ch. 294
Added 2007
Repealed 2016
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 263 Non-Motorized Transportation Committee
Chapter 263
Non-Motorized Transportation Committee
EDITOR’S NOTE: On November 1, 2016 Ordinance 16-02, an ordinance to amend the Codified
Ordinances Repeal in full Chapter 263 Non-Motorized Transportation Committee was adopted
at the regular Council meeting of November 1, 2016 and shall take effect ten days thereafter.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 264 Retirement Board Page 1
CHAPTER 264
Retirement Board
EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Retirement Board are codified in Chapter 294 of this
Administration Code.
Amended June 19, 2012
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 266 Board of Harbor Commissioners
Chapter 266
Board of Harbor Commissioners
266.01 Establishment; composition;
compensation; terms; City
Manager as ex-officio member;
organization.
266.03 Purpose and duties
266.02 Powers and authority
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal navigational facilities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.541 et seq.
Marine Safety Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.1002 et seq.
Harbor Development Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.1251 et seq.
Watercraft - see TRAF. Ch. 450
River, lake and harbor regulations - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 670
Marina operation - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.05
Wharf and dock construction - see B. & H. Ch. 1478
266.01 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION; TERMS; CITY MANAGER AS
EX-OFFICIO MEMBER; ORGANIZATION
A. There is hereby established the City of Manistee Harbor Commission.
B. The City of Manistee Harbor Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by
City Council for three (3) year terms, without compensation.
C. The City Manager shall serve as a non-voting Ex-Officio member of the Harbor Commission.
D. The Harbor Master shall serve as a voting member of the Harbor Commission.
E. The Harbor Commission shall meet annually to select the Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary
and other such officers it may deem advisable.
F. The City Council shall appoint a Harbor Master pursuant to MCL 324.79302.
(Ord. 12-03, Passed 6-19-12)
266.02 POWERS AND AUTHORITY
A. The Chair of the Commission shall be a resident of the City of Manistee.
B. The other members of the Commission shall represent a cross section of the resident
population of the City of Manistee, two (2) of who may be nonresidents of the city but
whom:
Amended June 19, 2012
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 266 Board of Harbor Commissioners
1. Owns real estate within the City.
2. Owns a business or is a licensed professional located within the City and whose
business/profession is directly related to boating or Harbor Commission areas.
C. A quorum to conduct business shall consist of a majority of the Commission, including the
Chair.
D. Meetings of the Commission shall be governed by the Michigan Open Meetings Act.
E. The Commission shall keep minutes and records of its meetings and activities and the same
shall be subject to the Michigan Freedom of Information Act.
F. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly during each year, and more frequently as
needed. The date and time of each meeting will, where practicable be agreed upon by the
consensus of the Commission members and such City staff as may be assigned to meet with
the Commission. Notice of each meeting will be posted as required by law.
(Ord. 12-03, Passed 6-19-12)
266.03 PURPOSE AND DUTIES
A. The purpose of the Commission shall be to advise the City Council, City Departments and
City Boards and Commissions on matters pertaining to the orderly development and
maintenance of the City Marina and City boat launches; and identifying and planning City
Marina and boat launch projects.
B. The responsibility and duties of the City of Manistee Harbor Commission shall include:
1. Establish bylaws with consent of the City Council.
2. Make recommendations to City Council and City Departments about the operation,
maintenance and policies of the City Marina and City operated boat launches.
3. Review and make recommendations on all significant City Marina and City boat launch
improvement projects.
4. To recommend to City Council and City Departments on the acquisition of such
additional waterfront property, wharves and docks.
5. To study and make recommendations to City Council and City Departments on the use
of waterways, channels, municipal docks or other navigational facilities which are under
the control of the city.
6. To recommend to City Council and City Departments the adoption by the City of such
ordinances or rules as public safety may require with respect to safety of boats and
ships in the navigable waters under the jurisdiction of the City of Manistee.
7. Provide an annual report to City Council on the progress of the Harbor Commission and
its projects and to seek Council approval for public projects.
(Ord. 12-03, Passed 6-19-12)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 268 Board of Canvassers Page 1
CHAPTER 268
Board of Canvassers
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 268. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Elections generally - see CHTR. Ch. 3
Election Commission - see CHTR. Ch. 3, Sec. 3-3; ADM. Ch. 278
Board of Canvassers generally - see CHTR. Ch. 3, Sec. 3-6
Canvass of initiatory or referendum petition by City Clerk - see CHTR. Ch. 4, Sec.
4-13
Canvass of votes in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.12, 117.15
Boards of election commissioners generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 168.21 et seq.
Compensation of boards of election commissioners - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 168.28,
168.682
Canvass of votes generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 168.801 et seq.
Amended June 17, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 270 Housing Commission
Chapter 270
Housing Commission
270.01 Establishment 270.03 Powers and duties
270.02 Appointments; composition; terms;
compensation; removals; vacancies
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal housing commissions - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.653et seq.
Adoption, promulgation and publication of rules - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.694b
Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.731 et
seq.
Appointments to commissions generally - see ADM. 210.01(d)(1)
Retirement plan - see ADM. 294.17
BOCA National Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1480
Rental dwellings - see B. & H. Ch. 1482
270.01 ESTABLISHMENT
Pursuant to Act 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended by Act 80 of the Public Acts of
1935, Act 265 of the Public Acts of 1937 and Act 5 of the Extra Session of 1938 (M. S. A. 5.3011),
a commission is hereby established in and for the City to be known as the Housing Commission.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-66.)
270.02 APPOINTMENTS; COMPOSITION; TERMS; COMPENSATION; REMOVALS;
VACANCIES
The Mayor of the City is hereby directed to appoint the members of the Housing Commission,
with the consent and approval of the other members of the City Council. The Housing
Commission shall consist of five members, each of whose term of office shall be five years.
Members of the first Housing Commission shall be appointed for terms of one year, two years,
three years, four years and five years, respectively, and annually thereafter one member shall
be appointed for a term of five years. The members shall serve without compensation and may
be removed from office by the appointing authority. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-66.)
270.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Housing Commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested
in housing commissions by Act 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as heretofore or hereafter
amended, and any laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto, it
being the intent of this chapter to vest in the Housing Commission all powers and duties
permitted by law. (Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-66.)
(Ord. 14-01. Passed 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14 deleted Section 270.04 Employees of Commission)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 272 Compensation Commission
Chapter 272
Compensation Commission
272.01 Purpose 272.03 Recommendations by Commission re
salaries of Mayor and Council;
expense allowance
272.02 Establishment; composition; terms;
vacancies; conflicts of interest
272.04 Meetings; quorum; organization;
compensation
CROSS REFERENCES
Mayor - see CHTR. Ch. II, Sec. 2-4; ADM Ch. 216
Compensation of Councilmembers - see CHTR. Ch. II, Sec. 2-8
Compensation of officers and employees - see CHTR. Ch. V, Sec. 5-7
Appointments to commissions generally - see ADM. 210.01(d)(1)
Council - see ADM. Ch. 214
Salaries of elected officials in Home Rule Cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5c
272.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Compensation Commission in accordance with
State statute, which Commission shall have authority over the compensation paid to elected
officials of the City, including the Mayor and City Council members. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-89.)
272.02 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS; VACANCIES; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
A Compensation Commission is hereby established. The Commission shall consist of five
members who are registered electors of the City, appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the City Council. The term of
office shall be five years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be
appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. All first members shall be
appointed within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter. Thereafter, members shall
be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative or administrative
branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or
employee shall be eligible to be a member of the Commission. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-89.)
272.03 RECOMMENDATIONS BY COMMISSION RE SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL;
EXPENSE ALLOWANCE
The Compensation Commission shall make recommendations regarding the salaries of the
Mayor and City Council members. Those recommendations shall be forwarded to the City
Council, which shall consider the same at a regularly scheduled Council meeting. In the event
that Council accepts the recommendations by a majority vote, then the salaries fixed shall
become effective on the first day of the next odd-numbered year thereafter. In the event that
the Council rejects the recommendations, the salaries of the Mayor and City Councilmembers
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 272 Compensation Commission
shall not be changed until a subsequent recommendation is received from the Commission.
Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be
for expenses incurred in the course of City business and accounted for to the City.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-89.)
272.04 MEETINGS; QUORUM; ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION
The Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than fifteen session days every oddnumbered
year beginning in the year 1989 and shall make its determination within forty-five
calendar days of its first meeting of the year. A majority of the members of the Commission
constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the Commission. The Commission shall
not take action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members
appointed and serving on the Commission. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from
among its members. As used in this section, "session days" means any calendar days on which
the Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the Commission shall receive
no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 3-20-89.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 274 Tree Commission
CHAPTER 274
Tree Commission
EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Tree Commission are codified in Chapter 1026 of
Part Ten - the Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 278 Election Commission Page 1
CHAPTER 278
Election Commission
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 278. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Elections generally - see CHTR. Ch. 3
Election Commission - see CHTR. Ch. 3, Sec. 3-3; ADM. Ch. 278
Board of Canvassers generally - see CHTR. Ch. 3, Sec. 3-6
Canvass of initiatory or referendum petition by City Clerk - see CHTR. Ch. 4, Sec.
4-13
Canvass of votes in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.12, 117.15
Boards of election commissioners generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 168.21 et seq.
Compensation of boards of election commissioners - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 168.28,
168.682
Canvass of votes generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 168.801 et seq.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 280 Building Authority
CHAPTER 280
Building Authority
EDITOR'S NOTE: The Building Authority was Repealed in Full by City Council on November 18,
2008, and took effect 10 days thereafter. (Ord. 08-10. Passed 11-18-08.)
Amended May 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 282 Downtown Development Authority
Chapter 282
Downtown Development Authority
EDITOR'S NOTE: An unnumbered ordinance passed April 2, 1985, as amended by an
unnumbered ordinance passed March 30, 1989, as amended by ordinance 08-07 passed
September 16, 2008, adopted the Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the
Manistee Downtown Development District and Area. Copies of such ordinances and Plan may
be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.
282.01 Purposes 282.06 Board of Directors
282.02 Definitions 282.07 Powers
282.03 Determination of necessity 282.08 Director; posting of bond
282.04 Establishment; title 282.09 Fiscal year; adoption of budget;
financial reports; audits.
282.05 Boundaries of Downtown District
CROSS REFERENCES
Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 8
Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4g, 117.5,
117.14a, 117.35a
Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4d et seq.
Business area redevelopment projects - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.981 et seq.
Downtown development authorities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.4201 et seq.
282.01 PURPOSES
The purposes of this chapter are to establish a Downtown Development Authority pursuant to
Act 57 of the Public Acts of 2018 (“Act 57”); to establish a Board of Directors for the Authority;
to define the boundaries of the Downtown District constituting the Downtown Development
Authority; and to provide for all other matters necessary and related thereto. (Ord. Unno. Passed
1-19-82.) (Ord. 19-16 adopted 5-21-19)
282.02 DEFINITIONS
The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning given to them in Act 57 of the
Public Acts of 2018, or as hereinafter in this section provided, unless the context clearly
indicates to the contrary:
A. "Act 57" means Act 57 of the Public Acts of 2018, as now in effect or hereafter
amended, being M.C.L.A. 125.4201 et seq. (Ord. 19-16 adopted 5-21-19)
B. "Authority" means the Downtown Development Authority established by this chapter.
C. “Board" or "Board of Directors" means the Board of Directors of the Authority, which is the
governing body of the Authority.
Amended May 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 282 Downtown Development Authority
D. "Chief Executive Officer" means the City of Manistee City Manager. (Ord. 19-16 adopted 5-
21-19)
E. "Downtown District" means the Downtown District designated by this chapter, as now
existing or hereafter amended.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-82.)
282.03 DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY
Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the City to halt property
value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the Business District
of the City, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by
establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Act 57. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-82.)
(Ord. 19-16 adopted 5-21-19)
282.04 ESTABLISHMENT; TITLE
Pursuant to Act 57, there is hereby established a Downtown Development Authority for the
City. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers
under the title "Manistee Downtown Development Authority." The Authority may adopt a seal,
may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to
carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this chapter and Act 57. The
enumeration of a power in this chapter or in Act 57 shall not be construed as a limitation upon
the general powers of the Authority. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-82.) (Ord. 19-16 adopted 5-21-19)
282.05 BOUNDARIES OF DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as provided for in Act
57, as amended, shall consist of the following described territory in the City, subject to such
changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this chapter and Act 197: Filer and Tyson's
Addition, Block 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, and Island. Filer and Tyson's Addition, Block 7, except Lots 5, 6 and
7. Delo's Filer Subdivision, Block 6. All of Green and Milmoe's Addition. All of George Willard
Addition. Holden and Green Addition, Block 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7. Filer and Smith Addition, Block 7
and 8, Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12 and 13, except Lots 9, 10, 11 and 12, Block 13. Filer and Smith
Addition, Blocks 11, Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 11, 10 and part of Lot 9. Metes and bounds, part of gov't.
Lot 2, Sec. 12. Filer and Smith Addition, Block 6, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. M. S. Tyson and Co. New
Addition, Lots 1 through 7. Filer and Smith Addition, Block 1. Filer and Smith Addition, Block 14,
Lots 5, 6, 11 and 12 and part of Lots 4, 10, 9 and Lot 8. Englemann's Addition, Block 8, Lots 1
and 19. Englemann's Addition, Block 9, except Lots 9 through 14. Englemann's Addition, Blocks
10 and 16. Englemann's Addition, Block 14, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4. Englemann's Addition, Block 15,
Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4. Metes and bounds, Lot 5, Sec. 12. Ramsdell and Benedicts Addition, Block 3,
Lots 1, 2, and 3. Ramsdell and Benedicts Addition, Block 5. Filer and Smith Addition, part of Res.,
Lots 7, 6 and 8. Smith St. to Division St. and River St. to the middle of River. Metes and bounds,
Section 12. Metes and bounds, part of gov't. Lot 1, Sec. 11, between Short St. and Washington
St. and Fifth Ave. and River St. M. S. Tyson's Addition, Lot 1, Block 3; excepting therefrom Lot 1,
Block 14, and Lots 3 and 4, Block 15, Englemann's Addition, to the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-
82.) (Ord. 19-16 adopted 5-21-19)
Amended May 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 3
Chapter 282 Downtown Development Authority
282.06 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The Authority shall be under the control and supervision of a Board of Directors, consisting of
the Chief Executive Officer of the City and eight members as provided by Act 57. The members
shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer, subject to approval by the City Council, and
shall hold office until their successors are appointed. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-82.) (Ord. 19-16 adopted
5-21-19)
282.07 POWERS
Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter, the Authority shall have all powers
provided by law, subject to the limitations imposed by law and this chapter. The Authority shall
have the power to levy ad valorem taxes on the real and tangible personal property not exempt
by law and as finally equalized in the Downtown District at the rate of not more than two mills
each year if the City Council annually approves the levy thereof by the Authority.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-82.)
282.08 DIRECTOR; POSTING OF BOND
If a director is employed as authorized by Section 5 of Act 57, a bond shall be posted in a sum to
be prescribed by the City Council, as required by the Act. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-82.) (Ord. 19-16
adopted 5-21-19)
282.09 FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET; FINANCIAL REPORTS; AUDITS
A. The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the
following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the City.
B. The Board of Directors shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the City Council
on the same date that the proposed budget for the City is required by the City Charter to be
submitted to the City Council. The Board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year
until the budget has been approved by the City Council. The Board may, however,
temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which
have been financed by revenue bonds when required to do so by the ordinance authorizing
the revenue bonds.
C. The Authority shall submit financial reports to the City Council as requested by the City
Council. The Authority shall be audited by the same independent auditors auditing the City,
and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the City Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-19-82.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 284 Local Development Financing Authority
CHAPTER 284
Local Development Financing Authority
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 284. The Local Development Financing
Authority was established by resolution adopted 11-15-88.
The LDFA was allowed to dissolve on 6-30-04 in accordance with the sunset provisions a Council
Resolution adopted on 1-19-99.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six Administration
Chapter 286 Airport Authority Page 1
CHAPTER 286
Airport Authority
EDITOR'S NOTE: A resolution adopted by Council on July 2, 1990, and a resolution adopted by
the County Board of Commissioners on July 17, 1990, created the Manistee Blacker Airport
Authority under the Airport Authority Act, being Act 312 of the Public Acts of 1982, as
amended. Copies of such resolutions may be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.
There are no sections in Chapter 286. This chapter has been established to provide a place for
cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4g, 117.5,
117.14a, 117.35a
Downtown Development Authority - see ADM. Ch. 282
Amended May 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 288 P.E.G. Commission
Chapter 288
P.E.G. Commission
288.01 Commission Established,
Composition
288.03 Duties
288.02 Rate Regulation Authority
CROSS REFERENCES
Cable Television Systems - see Ch. 816
288.01 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED, COMPOSITION
A. The Public, Education, and Government (P.E.G.) commission is hereby created and
established to advise the City Council, the Filer Township Board and Staff on matters
relating to cable television services and specifically public access.
B. The Commission shall consist of five members. Up to two members may be appointed by
the Charter Township of Filer Board of Trustees. All other Commission members shall be
Manistee County residents and appointed by the City Council provided, however, that an
employee of the P.E.G. operator, or a member of their immediate family, may not serve on
the P.E.G. Commission. Employees of the P.E.G. operator will be provided notice of all
meetings and invited to attend and participate in discussions of the P.E.G. Commission.
(Ord. 12-5 Passed 10-16-12) (Ord. 19-15 adopted 5-21-19)
C. The term of each member shall be for a period of three years except that members first
appointed shall be appointed for terms of one, two and three years, as evenly as possible.
Members shall serve without compensation. All terms shall expire at the end of the
calendar year.
288.02 RATE REGULATION AUTHORITY
The P.E.G. Commission shall have no responsibility or authority for rate regulation, rate change
request processing, financial analysis, or any responsibilities relating to the cable franchise
except to the extent that they relate to the P.E.G. channel(s).
288.03 DUTIES
A. The P.E.G. commission shall meet as often as is necessary to carry out its duties. The
commission may elect its own officers and create its own rules of procedure so long as they
are not inconsistent with rules or procedures adopted by the City Council or Township
Board.
The duties of the Commission shall include:
1. To gather information, including input from the public via public hearings, the practices
of other communities and current developments in cable technology relating to the
selection of an operator for the governmental access channel.
Amended May 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 288 P.E.G. Commission
2. To advise the attorneys regarding a contract or agreement by which a P.E.G. operator is
selected for a term not to exceed five years, with the agreement providing appropriate
methods of monitoring the operator's performance in creating and encouraging public
access opportunity.
3. To review and critique any plans of the cable operator for the development of new
services.
4. To review, monitor, suggest modification and generally evaluate scheduling and
programming services and activities.
5. To monitor complaints that may be filed regarding the operator and the provision of
public access to the community.
6. To submit an annual report to the City Council and Township Board describing the
activities of the P.E.G. Commission during the preceding year.
B. The P.E.G. commission shall insure that all rules, regulations, procedures and policies
regulating the P.E.G. channel are content neutral except as standards established by the
Federal Communications Commission may otherwise allow. (Ord. 94-3 Passed 8-3-94) (Ord.
Unno., Passed 12-5-95) (Ord. 12-05 Passed 10-16-12)
Amended September 2017
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 289 Parks Commission
Chapter 289
Parks Commission
289.01 Commission Established,
Composition
289.03 Purpose and Duties
289.02 Qualifications of Members;
Meetings
CROSS REFERENCES
Parks generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 23; S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1062
Recreation facilities in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4e
Sale of park property - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5
Misapplication of park funds - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 123.67
Parks Department - see ADM. Ch. 244
Planning Commission - see ADM. Ch. 250
Tree Commission - see ADM. Ch. 274
River, lake and harbor regulations - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 670
Trees - see S.U. & P.U. Ch. 1026
Parks and Recreation - see S.U. & P.U. Ch. 1062
289.01 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED AND COMPOSITION
A. There is hereby established the City of Manistee Parks Commission.
B. The City of Manistee Parks Commission shall consist of at least seven (7) members, which
includes the Chair, as appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 05-07 adopted 12-20-05) (Ord. 09-01, adopted 6-16-09) (Ord. 14-02, adopted 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14)
(Ord. 15-09 adopted 7-21-15)
289.02 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; MEETINGS
A. Members of the Commission shall represent a cross-section of the population of the City;
however, three (3) members may be nonresidents of the City who:
1. Own real estate within the City;
2. Have an ownership interest in a business/profession licensed to do business at a
location in the City; or
3. Have a child attending school within the City.
(Ord. 17-70 adopted 9-19-17)
B. Members shall serve for a term of three (3) years. (Ord. 15-09 adopted 7-21-15)
C. A quorum to conduct business shall consist of any four (4) members of the Commission.
D. Meetings of the Commission shall be governed by the Michigan Open Meetings Act (MCL
15.261 et seq.).
Amended September 2017
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 2
Chapter 289 Parks Commission
E. The Commission shall keep minutes and records of its meetings and activities and the same
shall be subject to the Michigan Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.).
F. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly, and more frequently as needed. Notice of
each meeting will be posted as required by law.
(Ord. 05-07 adopted 12-20-05) (Ord. 09-01, adopted 6-16-09) (Ord. 14-02, adopted 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14)
289.03 PURPOSE AND DUTIES
A. The purpose of the Commission shall be to advise the City Council, City Departments and
City Boards and Commissions on matters pertaining to the orderly development and
maintenance of the City Parks System and identifying, planning and implementing public
and private beautification projects.
B. The responsibility and duties of the City of Manistee Parks Commission shall include:
1. Establish by-laws.
2. Establishing an annual parks and beautification project list.
3. Organize and conduct annual tour of parks system.
4. Review all significant parks improvement projects.
5. Provide an annual report to the City Council on the progress of the Parks Commission
and its projects and to seek Council approval for public projects.
6. Act as a liaison providing parks and beautification information to various groups, boards
and commissions of the City of Manistee, and organizations within the City whose
purpose is beautification of properties located within the City.
(Ord. 05-07 adopted 12-20-05) (Ord. 07-30 adopted 12-4-07) (Ord. 09-01, adopted 6-16-09) (Ord. 14-2,
adopted 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14) (Ord. 15-09 adopted 7-21-15)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code
Chapter 290 Employees Generally Page 1
CHAPTER 290
Employees Generally
EDITOR'S NOTE: Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to compensation and
benefits are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at cost,
from the City Clerk.
The City enters into agreements from time to time with representatives of various classes of
Municipal employees. Such agreements provide for compensation, benefits and other
incidents of employment. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such
agreements and a provision of these Codified Ordinances or of any other ordinance or
resolution of Council, the provision of the agreement shall control. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation and of such agreements may be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.
There are no sections in Chapter 290. This chapter has been established to provide a place for
cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Authority of Council and Manager re appointment, removal and discipline of
employees - see CHTR. Ch. 2, Sec. 2-10
Nepotism - see CHTR. Ch. 2, Sec. 2-12
Appointments by Council - see CHTR. Ch. 2, Sec. 2-14; ADM. 210.01(d)(1)
Appointments by City Manager - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-4
Employees generally - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-6
Compensation and salaries - see CHTR. Ch. 5, Sec. 5-7; M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.3,
117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33
Shortening or extending terms of office - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5
Employees Retirement System - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 38.601 et seq.; ADM. Ch.
294
Personnel Advisory Board - see ADM. Ch. 262
Housing Commission employees - see ADM. 270.04
Employee Savings Plan - see ADM. Ch. 292
Repealed March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 292 Employee Savings Plan
Chapter 292
Employee Saving Plan
EDITOR’S NOTE: On March 19, 2019 Ordinance 19-09, an ordinance to amend the Codified
Ordinances Repeal in full Chapter 292 Employee Saving Plan was adopted at the regular Council
meeting of March 19, 2019 and shall take effect ten days thereafter.
Repealed March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Two Administration Code Page 1
Chapter 294 Employees Retirement Plan
Chapter 294
Employee Retirement Plan
EDITOR’S NOTE: On March 19, 2019 Ordinance 19-09, an ordinance to amend the Codified
Ordinances Repeal in full Chapter 294 Employee Retirement Plan was adopted at the regular
Council meeting of March 19, 2019 and shall take effect ten days thereafter.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 410 Uniform Traffic Code
Chapter 410
Uniform Traffic Code
410.01 Code and Amendments and
Revisions adopted
410.03 Notice to be Published
410.02 References in Code 410.99 Penalties
CROSS REFERENCES
Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4h
Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.601 et seq.,
257.634 et seq.
Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.951 et seq.
Motor Pool - see ADM. Ch. 246
Parking - see TRAF. Ch. 430
Use of motor vehicles in posted public areas - see TRAF. 440.03
410.01 CODE AND AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS ADOPTED
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages are promulgated by the director of
the Michigan department of state police pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969,
1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future
amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and
effective in this state are incorporated by reference. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-5-91.) (Ord. 03-02, Passed 2-
10-03)
410.02 REFERENCES IN CODE
References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to a "governmental
unit" shall mean the City of Manistee. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-5-91.) (Ord. 03-02, Passed 2-10-03)
410.03 NOTICE TO BE PUBLISHED
The City Clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at
the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships,
and Villages and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office
of the Clerk for inspection. (Ord. Unno. Passed 3-5-91.) (Ord. 03-02, Passed 2-10-03)
410.99 PENALTIES
The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Village are
adopted by reference. (Ord. 03-02, Passed 2-10-03)
Amended January 2018
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 411 Michigan Vehicle Code
Chapter 411
Michigan Vehicle Code
411.01 Code Adopted 411.03 Notice to be Published
411.02 References in Code 411.99 Penalties
CROSS REFERENCES
Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4h
Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.601 et seq.,
257.634 et seq.
Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.951 et seq.
Uniform Traffic Code - see Ch. 410
Motor Pool - see ADM. Ch. 246
Parking - see TRAF. Ch. 430
Use of motor vehicles in posted public areas - see TRAF. 440.03
Open Storage of Disabled, Inoperable, Junked, and Abandoned Motor Vehicles
see Ch. 415
411.01 CODE ADOPTED
The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257-923, is adopted by reference.
(Ord. 00-06 adopted 6-6-00.)
411.02 REFERENCES IN CODE
References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to “local authorities” shall mean the City of Manistee.
(Ord. 00-06 adopted 6-6-00.)
411.03 NOTICE TO BE PUBLISHED
The City Clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at
the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a
complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection.
(Ord. 00-06 adopted 6-6-00.)
411.99 PENALTIES
The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided,
however, that the City may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which
the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days, except that violation of MCL
257.625 (1)(c), as may be subsequently amended, shall be punishable by 1 or more of the
following:
A. Community service for not more than 360 hours;
B. Imprisonment for not more than 180 days;
C. A fine of not less than $200 or more than $700.
(Ord. 00-06 adopted 6-6-00.) (Ord. 03-01 adopted 2-10-03) (Ord. 18-02 adopted 1-2-18)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 415 Open Storage of Disabled, Inoperable, Junked and Abandoned Motor Vehicles Code
Chapter 415
Open Storage of Disabled, Inoperable, Junked,
and Abandoned Motor Vehicles
415.01 Definitions 415.04 Where Permitted
415.02 No Person Shall Permit 415.99 Penalties
415.03 Fail to Remove
CROSS REFERENCES
Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.951 et seq.
Parking - see TRAF. Ch. 430
Safety, Sanitation & Health - see GEN. 674
415.01 DEFINITIONS
A. “Motor Vehicles” shall mean every vehicle which is built or intended to be self propelled.
B. “Disabled Motor Vehicle” shall mean any motor vehicle that is not currently licensed in any
state or which lacks the equipments are required by the State of Michigan to be driven
upon a public right-of-way.
C. “Inoperable Motor Vehicle” shall mean any motor vehicle that is not currently licensed or is
not capable of being licensed for operation on the rights-of-way of the streets, alleys, or
highways of the City in a safe or legal manner.
D. “Abandoned Motor Vehicles” shall mean any motor vehicle as defined in Section 2.5a and
all amendments thereto, of the Uniform Traffic Code for the City of Manistee.
415.02 NO PERSON SHALL PERMIT
No person, firm, or corporation shall permit any disabled, inoperable, or junked motor
vehicle(s) to be parked, stored, placed, or allowed to remain in open storage within the City of
Manistee on private or public property for a period longer than seven (7) days.
415.03 FAIL TO REMOVE
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to remove any disabled, inoperable, or junked motor
vehicle(s) within the time limits described in Section 98.02 and after having been served notice
by an officer of the Manistee Police Department, shall be in violation of this Ordinance.
415.04 WHERE PROHIBITED
Storage, repair, and servicing of disabled, inoperable, or junked motor vehicles not authorized
herein, and the tearing down, stripping, or junking of motor vehicles shall be permitted, only
where and when such use is specifically authorized, permitted, or licensed under other
Ordinances of the City, and in accordance therewith.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 2
Chapter 415 Open Storage of Disabled, Inoperable, Junked and Abandoned Motor Vehicles Code
415.05 PENALTIES
Whoever violates any provision of this Code for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be
subject to the following:
A. Whoever violates any provision of this Code which describes an act or omission which
constitutes a civil infraction under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code, being Act 300 of
the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of
a civil infraction and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and costs,
in accordance with Section 907 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, for each offense.
B. Whoever violates any provision of this Code not constituting a civil infraction under the
terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code, being Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended,
or any provision of this Code which is expressly declared to be a misdemeanor, and for
which no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
more than one hundred ($100.00) or imprisonment not more than ninety days, or both, for
each offense.
In addition to the penalties above, the Manistee City Council may direct the City Attorney to
prosecute appropriate action in a Court of equity to abate any nuisance created by violation of
Sections 98.02 or 98.03 inclusive.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 420 Parking Violations Bureau
Chapter 420
Parking Violations Bureau
420.01 Establishment; purpose;
supervision and control
420.04 Settlement of violations; specific
request of violators required
420.02 Duties of Finance Director 420.05 Traffic tickets and notices of violation
420.03 Jurisdiction
CROSS REFERENCES
Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4h
Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.601 et seq.,
257.634 et seq.
Parking generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.672 et seq.; TRAF. Ch. 430
Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.951 et seq.
Uniform Traffic Code - see Ch. 410
Abandoned motor vehicles - see TRAF. 410.04(UTC 2.5a et seq.)
420.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE: SUPERVISION AND CONTROL
Pursuant to Section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan, as added by Act 154
of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended, a Parking Violations Bureau, for the purpose of handling
alleged parking violations within the City, is hereby established. The Parking Violations Bureau
shall be under the supervision and control of the Finance Director. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-19-68.)
420.02 DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR
The Finance Director shall, subject to the approval of the City Council, establish a convenient
location for the Parking Violations Bureau, appoint qualified City employees to administer the
Bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-19-68.)
420.03 JURISDICTION
The fact that a particular parking violation is provided in this Traffic Code, including the Uniform
Traffic Code, as adopted in Section 410.01, shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of
the violation at the Bureau, and in any case the person in charge of such Bureau may refuse to
dispose of such violation, in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a
sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law.
420.04 SETTLEMENT OF VIOLATIONS; SPECIFIC REQUEST OF VIOLATORS REQUIRED
No violation may be settled at the Parking Violations Bureau except at the specific request of
the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies
having committed the offense, and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the Bureau
determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such
alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the Parking
Violations Bureau, and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before
a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 2
Chapter 420 Parking Violations Bureau
of any violation at the Parking Violations Bureau shall not prejudice him or her, or in any way
diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him or her by law.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 11-19-68.)
420.05 TRAFFIC TICKETS AND NOTICES OF VIOLATION
The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the City shall be
deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall
indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond
before the Parking Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the Bureau, the hours
during which the Bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which
the ticket was issued and the fact that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket
was issued will be sought if such person fails to respond within the time limit specified.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 11-19-68.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 430 Parking Generally
Chapter 430
Parking Generally
430.01 Alternate parking 430.03 Prohibited parking
430.02 Two-hour parking; exemption of
handicap parking spaces
430.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Parking generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.672 et seq.; TRAF. Ch. 430
Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.951 et seq.
Uniform Traffic Code - see Ch. 410
Abandoned motor vehicles - see TRAF. 410.04(UTC 2.5a et seq.)
Parking Violations Bureau - see TRAF. Ch. 420
430.01 ALTERNATE PARKING
A. Between October 15 of each year and April 15 of the following year, the owner, operator or
any person having control of any motor vehicle or other object shall park said motor vehicle
or other object on the public streets in the City only in the following manner:
1. On even-numbered calendar days, all motor vehicles or other objects shall be parked
on the side of the public street on which even-numbered homes are located. On oddnumbered
calendar dates, all motor vehicles or other objects shall be parked on the
side of the street on which odd-numbered homes are located.
2. The time of change-over shall be from 4:00 to 7:00 p.m. All hours before 4:00 p.m.
shall be designated as an odd or even calendar date, depending on the actual date. All
hours after 7:00 p.m. shall be considered as odd or even calendar dates depending on
the calendar date of the following day.
3. Between October 15 and November 15, alternate parking as described above shall be
required only between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and only on Monday through Friday, it
being the intent of this paragraph to permit fall leaf collection.
B. The provisions of subsection (a) hereof shall apply to all public streets in the City, except for
the streets and City parking lots that are posted for no parking between the hours of 3:00
a.m. to 7:00 a.m. between November 15 and April 15 of the following year.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 8-23-90.)(Ord. 94-4 passed 8-16-94)
430.02 TWO-HOUR PARKING; EXEMPTION OF HANDICAP PARKING SPACES
A. Upon the erection of signs giving appropriate notice, a two-hour time limit shall apply to onstreet
parking for the following areas:
Street Name Area
River Street From Cypress Street to Pine Street, both sides.
Greenbush Street From River Street to Clay Street, west side only.
Poplar Street From River Street to Clay Street, west side only.
Filer Street From Greenbush to Division Street, both sides.
Manistee Inn Parking Lot Designated public parking spaces on the east side
of the parking lot (Ord. 07-26, adopted 5-15-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 2
Chapter 430 Parking Generally
B. These time limits shall apply between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, of each week.
C. All publicly-owned parking lots in the C4 Commercial District, except as otherwise modified
above, shall be designated as long-term parking areas subject to other provisions of these
Codified Ordinances. The provisions herein described shall not modify or change the
provisions of Section 430.01.
D. Designated handicap parking spaces shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection (a)
hereof. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-5-93.)
430.03 PROHIBITED PARKING
A. Parking shall be prohibited at all times as follows:
Arthur Street (Full length)
Cleveland Street (Full length)
Cypress Street (Full length)
Poplar Street (East side to Water)
Greenbush Street (East side, River to Filer; west side, Filer to First)
Maple Street (West side, First to Twelfth)
Oak Street (West Water Street to First Street)
Melitzer Street (Fifth Avenue to Fourth Avenue)
Hancock Street (East side, First to Third)
First Street (North side, Hancock to Cherry)
Filer Street (North side, Division to Greenbush)
(1973 Code §72.06) (Ord. 99-3, passed 2/26/99)
B. Handicap Parking. Parking shall be prohibited in a parking space which is clearly identified as
being reserved for use by the disabled and which is on public property or private property
that is available for public use, unless the vehicle clearly displays a certificate or placard of
identification issued under Section 257.675(5) of the State of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code;
or unless it displays a special registration plate issued under Section 257.803d of the State
of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code.
Penalty. Whoever violates this Section shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) if such fine is paid
within four business days. If such fine is not paid within four business days, the penalty
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or
both. (Ord. 99-3, passed 2-26-99)
C. Semi tractor-trailer combination(s) or detached semi tractor or semi-trailer shall not park
upon any public street or highway except when parking is during the loading or unloading of
such vehicle. (Ord. 98-08, passed 8-14-98)
D. Parking shall be prohibited in all unpaved portions of the City right-of-way, commonly
referred to as the property between the street/curb and the sidewalk. For those locations
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 3
Chapter 430 Parking Generally
where no on-street parking is available, due to the width of the street, parking in the rightof-
way may be permitted on a case by case basis by the City Manager or his/her designee
with specific conditions, which may include paving requirements. (Ord. 04-04, passed 9-21-04)
E. Overtime Parking. Whoever violates the Overtime limits of posted parking shall be fined
$20.00 if such fine is paid within five (5) business days of issuance of a citation of violation.
If paid after five (5) business days but within ten (10) business days of issuance the fine shall
be $40.00. If not paid within the ten (10) business days the fine shall be $100.00.
(Ord. 04-05, adopted 11-16-04, Ord. 07-26, adopted 5-15-07)
430.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, or
any provision of the Uniform Traffic Code, as adopted in Section 410.01, pertaining to parking,
shall be fined forty dollars ($40.00) if paid within two weeks of issuance of a citation of
violation, after which the fine shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment for not
more than ninety (90) days, or both. (Ord. 94-5 passed 11-15-94) (Ord. 04-05 adopted 11-16-04)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 440 Traffic Control
Chapter 440
Traffic Control
440.01 One-way streets 440.03 Use of motor vehicles in posted
public areas; exceptions
440.02 Through streets 440.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4h
Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.601 et seq.,
257.634 et seq.
Parking generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.672 et seq.; TRAF. Ch. 430
Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 257.951 et seq.
Uniform Traffic Code - see Ch. 410
Abandoned motor vehicles - see TRAF. 410.04(UTC 2.5a et seq.)
Parking Violations Bureau - see TRAF. Ch. 420
Parking generally - see TRAF. Ch. 430
440.01 ONE-WAY STREETS
One-way streets, and the direction of traffic thereon, are hereby designated as follows:
A. Tamarack Street One way South to North between 4th and 3rd
B. River Street One way East to West between Division and Water Street
C. Third Street One way West to East between Tamarack and Cedar
D. Short Street One way North to South between 5th and 6th
E. Sixth Avenue One way East to West between Short and Ford
F. Fairview Avenue One way South to North between Eighth and Fifth
(Ord. 00-13 adopted 7-18-00, Effective 8-1-00) (Ord. 11-07 adopted 7-5-11, Effective 7-15-11)
(EDITOR'S NOTE: One-Way Streets are subject to change by Order of the Chief of Police and City
Manager.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 2
Chapter 440 Traffic Control
440.02 THROUGH STREETS
Through streets are hereby designated as follows:
U.S. Route 31 (Cypress Street, Cleveland Street and Arthur Street)
NORTH SIDE
Fifth Avenue
Freemont Street (To Second Avenue)
Second Avenue (To Freemont Street)
Monroe Street
Harrison Street
Taylor Street
Memorial Drive
Washington Street
SOUTH SIDE
River Street
Water Street (Cedar Street to Greenbush Street)
Maple Street
Oak Street (River Street to First Street)
Oak Street (Fifth Street to Sixth Street)
Pine Street (River Street to First Street)
Spruce Street
Bryant Avenue
Cherry Street (First Street to Eighth Street)
Eighth Street
Twelfth (Maple Street to Cypress Street)
Poplar
Greenbush
Filer (Greenbush to Cypress Street)
Clay (Greenbush to Cypress Street)
First Street
Division Street
Hancock Street (First Street to River Street)
Sibben Street
Kosciusko Street
Sixth Street (Cypress Street to Davis Street)
Sixth Street (Kosciusko to Engelmann)
Davis Street (Sixth Street to Eighth Street)
Engelmann (Eighth Street to Sixth Street)
Vine Street (Eighth Street to Thirteenth Street)
(1973 Code §72.06)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 3
Chapter 440 Traffic Control
440.03 USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN POSTED PUBLIC AREAS; EXCEPTIONS
No motor vehicle, as defined in the Uniform Traffic Code, as adopted in Section 410.01, licensed
or unlicensed, shall be operated in any posted public areas in the City, except on roads that are
maintained for the purpose of travel by motor vehicles. Said posting shall be consistent with the
use of said areas. No operator of a motor vehicle, licensed or not, shall make an entrance or exit
within the posted areas in the City. The exception, however, shall be vehicles which are used in
the maintenance of recreation and beach areas. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-2-83.)
440.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 410.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 450 Watercraft
Chapter 450
Watercraft
450.01 Wakes 450.99 Penalties
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal navigational facilities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.541 et seq.
Marine Safety Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.1002 et seq.
Board of Harbor Commissioners - see ADM. Ch. 266
River, lake and harbor regulations - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 670
Marina operation - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.05
Wharf and dock construction - see B. & H. Ch. 1478
450.01 WAKES
On the waters of the Manistee Harbor entrance channel eastward from a line connecting the
south breakwater light and the north pierhead light to the easterly end of the channel at
Manistee Lake, no operator of any motorboat shall exceed a slow "no wake" speed, which
means a very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by the motorboat is minimal.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 4-21-70.)
450.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 410.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Adopted August 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 1
Chapter 460 Golf Carts
Chapter 460
Golf Carts
460.01 Definitions 460.03 Violations and Penalties
460.02 Operations of Golf Carts on City
Streets
CROSS REFERENCES
Michigan Compiled Law 257.657a
Penalty, Civil Infractions – Chapter 202
460.01 DEFINITIONS
Words and phrases used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in MCL 257.657a, as
the same may be amended from time to time, which words and phrases are incorporated
herein by reference.
460.02 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON CITY STREETS.
A person may operate a golf cart on city streets, subject to the following restrictions:
A. A person shall not operate a golf cart unless he or she is at least 16 years old and
licensed to operate a motor vehicle.
B. The operator of a golf cart shall comply with the signal requirements of MCL 257.648
that apply to the operation of a vehicle.
C. A person operating a golf cart upon a city street shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.
D. A person shall not operate a golf cart on a state trunk line highway. This subsection does
not prohibit a person from crossing a state trunk line highway when operating a golf cart
on a city street, using the most direct line of crossing.
E. Where a usable and designated path for golf carts is provided adjacent to a highway or
street, a person operating a golf cart shall be required to use that path.
F. A person operating a golf cart shall not pass between lines of traffic, but may pass on
the left of traffic moving in his or her direction in the case of a two-way street or on the
left or right of traffic in the case of a one-way street, in an unoccupied lane.
G. A golf cart shall not be operated on a sidewalk constructed for the use of pedestrians.
Adopted August 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Four Traffic Code Page 2
Chapter 460 Golf Carts
H. A golf cart shall be operated at a speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour and shall not be
operated on a highway or street that has a speed limit of more than 30 miles per hour,
except to cross that highway or street.
I. A golf cart shall not be operated on city streets during the time period from one-half
(1/2) hour before sunset to one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise.
J. A person operating a golf cart or who is a passenger in a golf cart is not required to wear
a crash helmet.
K. This ordinance does not apply to a police officer in the performance of his or her official
duties.
L. A golf cart operated on a city street under this ordinance is not required to be registered
under the Michigan Vehicle Code for purposes of section 3101 of the insurance code of
1956, 1956 PA 218, MCL 500.3101.
M. As used in this ordinance, “golf cart” means a vehicle designed for transportation while
playing the game of golf. A golf cart is not required to meet the vehicle safety
requirements of a low-speed vehicle for approval under this ordinance.
N. The operator and/or owner of a golf cart operated pursuant to this Ordinance shall
maintain liability insurance protecting against damage and injury associated with the
use of the golf cart.
O. All golf carts intended for street use shall be registered and the owners or operators of
those golf carts shall register such golf carts prior to operating the same on any city
street. Registration is with the City of Manistee Police Department, at no cost, and
each registered golf cart shall receive a registration sticker. The owners or operators
must show proof of liability insurance as required by Section 460.02 N. when registering
with the City. The registration sticker must be affixed in plain view on the back of the
golf cart at all times it is operated on city streets.
460.03 PENALTY
Violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 460 shall be penalized as a civil infraction under
Section 202.99 of the City of Manistee Codified Ordinances.
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 606 Animals
Chapter 606
Animals
606.01 Prohibited Animals 606.06 Cats
606.02 Confinement to Premises 606.07 Chickens or Ducks
606.03 Access to Public Ways and Places 606.08 Feeding Deer, Wild Turkeys and other
Wild Mammals
606.04 Removal of Defecation 606.99 Penalty
606.05 Dogs
CROSS REFERENCES
Dog Law generally see MCL 287.261 et seq.
Registration and identification of Dogs see MCL 287.301 et seq.
Use of firearms to control pests - see GEN. OFF. 690.05
606.01 PROHIBITED ANIMALS
A. "Annoying Animals” No person shall harbor or keep any animal or bird which causes
annoyance or disturbance in a neighborhood, by making sounds common to its species or
otherwise, or which endangers the safety of any person or property.
B. "Penalty" a person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
pursuant to Chapter 203.
606.02 CONFINEMENT TO PREMISES
The owner or custodian of any animal or bird shall keep such animal or bird confined to his or
her own premises if necessary to avoid annoyance or disturbance in the neighborhood.
606.03 ACCESS TO PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES
No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal in such a manner that the animal has access to
any portion of any street, alley or public place.
606.04 REMOVAL OF DEFECATION
No owner or person having custody of any dog, cat or other animal shall permit such dog, cat or
other domestic animal to defecate on any school grounds, public street, alley, sidewalk, tree,
lawn, park, or other public grounds or private property in the City, other than on the premises
or such owner or person, unless such defecation is removed immediately.
606.05 DOGS
A. Application of State Law. No person shall violate any law of the State pertaining to dogs, or any
rule or regulation pertaining to dogs adopted by any state agency, which laws and the penalties
therein provided are incorporated herein as laws of the City. (Ord. 19-06, amended 3-19-19)
B. License Required. Any dog subject to license, which dog is not licensed, is a nuisance and
may be impounded in the County Animal Shelter.
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 606 Animals
C. Running at Large. Any dog, licensed or unlicensed, which is not attached to a leash, and
which is running at large in public places or private property, other than the premises of the
owner or person having custody of such dog, may be impounded in the County Animal
Shelter. When any dog is running at large, the owner or custodian may be notified by the
City of a violation of this section, and after three such notices, the dog may be taken from
the owner or custodian and impounded. This subsection shall not apply to City parkland
which has been designated as an off-leash area by resolution of the City Council and so
posted by sign.
D. Dogs on Beaches. No dog shall be permitted on any of the City beaches, except between the
piers at 1st Street Beach and the beach area adjacent to Lake Michigan from the north end of
Manmade Lake to the north end of the City beach. (Ord. 19-06, amended 3-19-19)
606.06 CATS
A. Application of State Law. No person shall violate any law of the State pertaining to cats, or any
rule or regulation pertaining to cats adopted by any state agency, which laws and the penalties
therein provided are incorporated herein as laws of the City. (Ord. 19-06, amended 3-19-19)
B. Running at Large. The owner or custodian of a cat which is not spayed or neutered shall not
permit the cat to run at large in public places or on private property, other than the
premises of the owner or person having custody of such cat.
606.07 CHICKENS OR DUCKS
Chickens and Ducks may be kept according to the following conditions:
A. A maximum of eight (8) female chickens (hens) or ducks may be kept per parcel. Male
chickens (roosters) are prohibited.
B. Slaughtering of chickens or ducks outdoors is prohibited.
C. Chickens or ducks shall remain within a fully enclosed shelter with an optional covered
fenced enclosure in the rear yard and shall not be located within 25 feet of a dwelling on a
neighboring parcel.
D. Chickens and Ducks shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rodents,
vermin and disagreeable odors.
E. No chicken or duck shall be kept on parcels with more than one dwelling.
606.08 FEEDING DEER, WILD TURKEYS AND OTHER WILD MAMMALS
No person may place or permit placement within the city any fruit, berries, grain, vegetables,
nuts, salt or other edible material, or bait, which may reasonably be expected to attract or feed
deer, wild turkeys or other wild mammals. The foregoing prohibition does not apply to naturally
growing materials from fruit trees, trees, shrubs, crops, flowers, gardens producing fruit or
vegetables for household consumption, bird feeders at least four (4) feet off the ground and
vegetation. The foregoing prohibition also does not apply to the feeding of domestic pets, nor
chickens or ducks kept in compliance with this Chapter 606. (Ord. 15-10 Passed 10-6-15)
606.99 PENALTY
Any violation of this Chapter for which no penalty is stated shall be considered a municipal civil
infraction pursuant to Chapter 203.
(Ord. 15-07 Passed 7-7-15)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 650 Anti-Blight
Chapter 650
Anti-Blight
650.01 Purpose 605.04 Enforcement
650.02 Definitions 650.05 Severability
650.03 Prohibited Conduct 650.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Safety, Sanitation and Health - see Gen Off. Ch. 674
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2; B&H. 1454.01 et seq.
Dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see B. & H. Ch. 1454
Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1480
Rental Properties - see B.& H. Ch. 1482
Michigan Building Code - see B.&. H. Ch. 1420
650.01 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight in the City of Manistee
by the prevention or elimination of contributing factors and causes of blight which exist or
which may in the future exist in the City of Manistee. (Ord. No. 04-03, Adopted 9-21-04)
650.02 DEFINITIONS
The following words or terms, when used herein, shall be deemed to have the meanings set
forth below:
A. Blighted Structure. Any dwelling, garage, or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, office
building, warehouse, or other structure or part of a structure which:
1. Because of fire, wind, other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, cannot be
occupied as a dwelling, does not have adequate heating, plumbing or electrical
systems, or cannot be used for its intended purpose; or (Ord. No. 11-05, Adopted 5-4-11)
2. Is partially completed and which is not presently being constructed under an existing,
valid building permit issued by or under the authority of the City of Manistee; or
3. Is not structurally sound, weather-tight, waterproof or vermin-proof; or
4. Is not covered by a water resistant paint or other waterproof covering so as to protect
said structure from the adverse effects of the elements or from physical deterioration.
B. Building Material. Any lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks, plumbing materials,
electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, cement, nails,
screws, or other material commonly used in the construction or repair of any buildings or
structures.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 650 Anti-Blight
C. Enforcement Officer. Enforcement Officer means the Manistee City Building Inspector, any
Manistee City Police Officer, or any other person designated by the Manistee City Council to
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. Junk. Any abandoned, discarded, unusable, unsightly, or unused objects or equipment
including, but not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, implements,
parts of motor vehicles, machinery, cloth, rubber, bottles, metals, boxes, cartons, tarps,
plastics, crates or similar materials or items. (Ord. No. 11-05, Adopted 5-4-11)
E. Open Storage. “Open storage” as used in this chapter shall mean storage or accumulation,
including when covered by a tarp or similar type covering, of building materials or junk
which is visible from any public street, sidewalk, or from any adjoining property. (Ord. No. 11-
05, Adopted 5-4-11)
F. Person. Any natural person, firm, association, partnership or corporation.
G. Vacant Buildings. Any building which is unoccupied and which is not securely locked, with
the windows glazed or neatly boarded up and protected against the elements and from
vandals and rodents and other animals.
(Ord. No. 04-03, Adopted 9-21-04)
650.03 PROHIBITED CONDUCT
Except as may otherwise be permitted by the holding of a specific business license or by other
City of Manistee Ordinance, no person in the City of Manistee shall:
A. Maintain or permit the open storage of junk on premises owned, leased, rented, or
occupied by him. (Ord. No. 11-05, Adopted 5-4-11)
B. Maintain or permit the open storage of any building materials on property owned, leased,
rented or occupied by him for any period longer than reasonably necessary for the
immediate use of such materials, but in no event longer than sixty (60) days. (Ord. No. 11-05,
Adopted 5-4-11)
C. Maintain or permit the maintenance or existence of any vacant building on property owned,
leased, or rented by him. (Ord. No. 11-05, Adopted 5-4-11)
D. Maintain or permit the maintenance or existence of any blighted structure on property
owned, leased, rented or occupied by him.
E. Maintain or permit the storage of firewood on property owned, leased, rented or occupied
by him except in a neat, orderly stack to a height no greater than five (5) feet. The storage
of firewood shall be restricted to the rear yard or an interior side yard of the premises. (Ord.
No. 04-03, Adopted 9-21-04)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 3
Chapter 650 Anti-Blight
650.04 ENFORCEMENT
A. Before commencing enforcement proceedings under this Ordinance, for the first violation,
the enforcement officer shall notify the violator(s) of the existence of a violation under
Section 650.03 above. Such notice shall be in writing and served upon the violator(s), either
personally or by first class mail sent to the last known address of the violator(s) or to the
common address of the property upon which the violation exists. The violator(s) shall be
given five days from the date of personal service or seven days from the date of mailing the
notice in which to remedy the violation.
B. Enforcement proceedings may be commenced against a violator(s), without prior notice, in
any instance where a violation notice had previously been sent, within the previous 12
months, relating to the same address.
C. Each day that a violation under this Ordinance continues to exist may be considered a
separate violation subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth.
Ord. No. 04-03, Adopted 9-21-04)
D. Costs of prosecution and/or enforcement and/or repair, alteration or razing may be
assessed to anyone, jointly and severally, in violation of this Section. Said costs may be
added to the tax roll for the property where the violation occurred as a special assessment
or a lien against the property as may otherwise be provided in law. In addition to all other
penalties, the City of Manistee may bring an action for costs of enforcement and
prosecution expense upon any person(s), corporation(s) and/or firm(s) that have violated
this Ordinance. The cost of enforcement and prosecution shall be the actual amount of
attorney fees and out-of pocket expense for enforcement of the ordinance. An itemized list
of fees and costs shall be given under oath and shall be prima facie evidence of the fees and
costs. (Ord. No. 11-05, Adopted 5-4-11)
650.05 SEVERABILITY
The sections and provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and any portion
which is declared inoperative or invalid for any reasons by a court of competent jurisdiction
shall in no way affect the remaining sections or provisions of this Ordinance. (Ord. No. 04-03,
Adopted 9-21-04)
650.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with
Section 202.99, subject to fines and penalties as provided therein, including the ability of the
City of Manistee to seek equitable remedies available in addition to all other sanctions provided
in Section 202.99. (Ord. No. 04-03, Adopted 9-21-04) (Ord. No. 11-05, Adopted 5-4-11)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 654 Nuisances
Chapter 654
Nuisances
654.01 Public nuisance defined 654.03 Abatement by City
654.02 Public nuisances prohibited 654.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Health and sanitation generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 4, Sec. 51; M.C.L.A. Secs.
750.466 et seq.; GEN. OFF. Ch. 674
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2; B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
Nuisances generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 600.3801 et seq.
Dogs and other animals running at large; nuisance conditions - see GEN. OFF.
606.02
Peace disturbances - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 662
Attractive nuisances - see GEN. OFF. 674.03
Accumulation of garbage and rubbish - see GEN. OFF. 674.11
Uninvited peddling, soliciting, etc., declared a nuisance - see B.R. & T. 858.01,
858.02
Nuisance trees on private property - see S.U. & P.S. 1026.09
654.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED
As used in this chapter, "public nuisance" means whatever annoys, injures or endangers the
safety, health, comfort or repose of the public, offends public decency, interferes with or
obstructs or renders dangerous any street, alley, highway, river or stream, or in any way
renders the public insecure in life or property. The term "public nuisance" shall include, but not
be limited to, whatever is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited by any provision of these
Codified Ordinances.
654.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED
No person shall create, maintain or permit to be maintained a public nuisance in the City. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 12-17-63.)
654.03 ABATEMENT BY CITY
A. The owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or any other person in charge of any premises
where a public nuisance is deemed to exist shall be notified by certified mail or personal
service by any officer acting on behalf of the City. The notice shall cite the nuisance
condition and inform the person that such nuisance condition must be corrected within
seven days. In the event that the property is occupied by a person other than the owner,
the owner shall also be notified by certified mail or personal service by any officer acting on
behalf of the City at the address on record in the City Assessor's office.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 654 Nuisances
B. Any owner or occupant of such premises who is notified in accordance with subsection (a)
hereof and who disputes the alleged nuisance condition shall so indicate, in writing, the
reasons therefore, said response to be delivered by certified mail or personal service to the
City Manager within seven days of the date of the notice by the City. In the event that the
City Manager does not concur with the owner or occupant, said matters shall be remedied
in accordance with subsection (c) hereof.
C. In addition to the penalty provided in Section 654.99, in the event that a nuisance exists, it
shall be lawful for officers or employees of the City to enter upon any premises where such
nuisance exists and cause the same to be abated, at the expense of the owner of the
premises. If the owner of such premises shall refuse or neglect to pay such costs, a lien shall
be set against the premises and collected the same as other taxes or assessments are
collected within the City.
654.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 658 Offenses Relating to Property
Chapter 658
Offenses Relating to Property
658.01 Damaging or defacing public
property
658.04 Mutilating or driving over fire hoses
658.02 Defacing or marring of streets 658.99 Penalty
658.03 Interference with radio or
television reception
CROSS REFERENCES
Real estate generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 554.1 et seq.
Malicious destruction of property by minors - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 600.2913
Theft generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.356 et seq.
Malicious destruction of property - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.377a, 750.377b
Malicious destruction of trees and shrubs - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 750.382; S.U. &
P.S. 1026.06, 1026.07, 1026.11
Injuring vegetation in area between gutter line and line of lots abutting streets -
see S.U. & P.S. 1024.05
Tampering with hydrants, stop cocks, stop gates, etc. - see S.U. & P.S. 1040.10
Tampering with and polluting wells - see S.U. & P.S. 1040.11
Tampering with or destruction of combined water and sewer system - see S.U.
& P.S. 1040.12
658.01 DAMAGING OR DEFACING PUBLIC PROPERTY
No person, without proper authority, shall willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any
manner deface any property not his or her own, any public school building, or any public
building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light, street sign, traffic control device, railroad
sign or signal, parking meter or shade tree belonging to the City or located in the public places
of the City; mark or post handbills on any public building, fence, tree or pole within the City; in
any manner mar the walls of any public building; or damage, destroy, take or meddle with any
property belonging to the City, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be
kept, placed or stored. (Ord. Unno. Passed 12-23-63.)
658.02 DEFACING OR MARRING OF STREETS
No person shall allow any horse, motor vehicle, tractor, trailer or any other vehicle, animal or
object of any kind to go in or upon any street in the City, which street has been paved with oil
aggregate, if such motor vehicle, animal or object of any kind is tired, shod or equipped with
any sharp wheels, shoes, objects or contrivances which will mar, tear up or deface the surface
of such oil aggregate, or tend to do so. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-4-40.)
658.03 INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO OR TELEVISION RECEPTION
A. Prohibited Equipment; Exceptions. No person shall maintain or operate any equipment,
device, appliance or apparatus in the City which generates or causes high frequency
oscillations which interfere with radio or television transmitting or receiving equipment or
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 658 Offenses Relating to Property
radio or television reception, provided, however, that X-ray pictures, examinations or
treatments and diathermy treatments may be made, if the machine or apparatus therefore
is equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference and is not
negligently operated.
B. Radio Inspector; Inspections; Right of Entry. The City Manager shall appoint a Radio
Inspector to investigate complaints of interference with radio or television transmission or
reception, and he or she is hereby given authority, upon presenting his or her evidence of
authority, to have a right of access to any premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose
of inspecting any equipment, device, appliance or apparatus coming within the terms of this
section to determine if such equipment, device, appliance or apparatus complies with this
section. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with such Inspector in making such
inspection or to refuse to allow the Inspector to enter upon the premises for such purpose.
C. Notification of Violation. When such an inspection and test shall have been made by the
Inspector, and it is found that such equipment, device, appliance or apparatus is being
operated in violation of subsection (a) hereof, the person responsible for such operation
shall be notified, in writing, to discontinue the use of such equipment, device, appliance or
apparatus, or to make such additions, repairs or modifications thereof in order that the
same may be operated in a manner which complies with the provisions of this chapter.
Such notice may be given personally or by registered mail addressed to such person. In the
event that such person, within forty-eight hours after the receipt of such notice to repair or
discontinue the use of such equipment, device, appliance or apparatus, does not entirely
discontinue its use or repair the same so that it complies with this section, such person shall
be deemed to be operating the same in violation of this section.
D. Interstate Commerce Equipment Excepted. No provision of this section shall be construed
as regulating any equipment, device, appliance or apparatus used in interstate commerce
where the same is licensed or regulated by any act of Congress of the United States. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 5-20-47.)
658.04 MUTILATING OR DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSES
A. No person shall at any time cut, prick, mutilate or destroy any hose belonging to the Fire
Department, or a hose of any engine in the City used for the purpose of extinguishing fires.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 8-29-1879.)
B. No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command, be driven
over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department, when such hose is laid down on any
street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire.
658.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to penalties in accordance with section 202.99. (Ord. 00-10. Passed 6-20-00)
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 662 Peace Disturbances
Chapter 662
Peace Disturbances
662.01 Offenses relating to public peace
and morals
662.09 Penalty
662.02 Noise creating activities
CROSS REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.167 et seq.
Gambling - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.301 et seq.
Prostitution - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.448 et seq.
Noise from mufflers - see TRAF. 410.04(UTC 5.90)
Barking or howling dogs - see GEN. OFF. 606.05
Nuisances - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Noise in parks - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.01
Michigan Vehicle Code – see M.C.L.A., Secs. 257.1 et seq.
662.01 OFFENSES RELATING TO PUBLIC PEACE AND MORALS
A. Public Place Defined. As used in this section, "public place" means any place of business or
assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to public
view or to which the public has access.
B. Prohibited Acts. No person shall:
1. Be under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug in a public place and who is
endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that
causes a public disturbance;
2. Engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral or obscene conduct in any public place;
3. Engage in peeping in the windows of any inhabited place;
4. Make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his or her person;
5. Engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place;
6. Play any game in any public street or sidewalk or otherwise obstruct traffic on any street or
sidewalk by collecting in groups thereon, for any purpose;
7. Permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him or her to be a resort of noisy,
boisterous or disorderly conduct;
8. Prowl about any alley or the private premises of any person in the nighttime, without
authority or the permission of the owner of such premises;
9. Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or vehicle, or
on the private property of another person;
10. Trespass or unlawfully remain upon premises of another;
11. Enter a motor vehicle without the owner’s permission;
12. Accost a person or endeavor to entice him or her into a vehicle;
13. Willfully make to a law enforcement officer any false, misleading or unfounded statement for
the purpose of interfering with the law enforcement officer’s duties or with the intention of
misleading any law enforcement officer; or
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 662 Peace Disturbances
14. Willfully make to a firefighter any false, misleading or unfounded report for the purpose of
interfering with the firefighter’s duties or with the intention of misleading any firefighter of
this City.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 12-23-63.) (Ord. 14-03 Deleted Item 4 “Fire, discharge, sell, display or possess any
fireworks except of the type and under conditions permitted by Chapter 30 of the Penal Code of the
State of Michigan, as amended by Act 242 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, and those permitted
by the Chief of Police;” 6-17-14) (Ord. No. 18-05, Deleted Items 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18,
20, 21, 23, 26, Amend Items 19, 25,27, 28, Renumber list and added new Item 11 passed 04-04-18)
(Ord. 19-05, deleted and replaced 662.01 B. 1. adopted 3-19-19)
C. Violations as Misdemeanors. Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 662.99.
662.02 NOISE-CREATING ACTIVITIES
A. General Restrictions: No person, firm or corporation or other legal entity shall cause, create,
assist in creating, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonable or unnecessary
loud noise or disturbance which unreasonably upsets the comfort, health, peace, quiet or
safety of a person or persons in the City or their property.
B. Specific Violations of Noise Regulation: The following noises and disturbances are hereby
declared to be a violation of this ordinance; provided, however, that the specification of the
same is not thereby to be constructed to exclude other violations of this ordinance not
specifically enumerated:
1. Radio, television, musical instruments. The playing of a radio, phonograph, television,
or other electronic or mechanical sound producing device, including any musical
instrument, in such a manner or with such volume as to unreasonably upset or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of other person or persons. The operation of such
instrument or sound producing devices in such a manner as to be plainly audible on a
property or in a dwelling unit other than that from which the sound originates shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. The operation of such a device from
a vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if the sound
produced is audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the vehicle.
2. Shouting or whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or the making of
other loud noises on public property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or
the making of such noises at any time or place so as to unreasonably upset or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity.
3. School, church and court zones. The emission or creation of any excessive noise which
unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school, church, or court.
4. Loud motor vehicles. The operation of an automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so
out of repair or so loaded or constructed as to cause loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling, or other unreasonable noise (including the noise resulting from
exhaust), which is clearly audible from nearby properties and which unreasonably
upsets or disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of other person or persons. The
modification or elimination of any noise abatement device on any motor vehicle or
engine or the failure to maintain such a device so that the noise emitted by such
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 3
Chapter 662 Peace Disturbances
vehicle or engine is increased above that emitted by the vehicle as originally
manufactured shall violate this section.
5. Horn and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or other device on any vehicle
unless necessary to operate said vehicle safely or as required by the Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code.
6. Engine exhaust. The discharging outside of any enclosed building of the exhaust of
any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or motor boat engine
except through a muffler or other similar device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises.
7. Construction noises. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building or premises in any part of the City, and including the streets and highways, in
such a manner as to emanate noise unreasonably upsetting or disturbing to other
person or persons, other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any
day, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety. In
such cases of urgent necessity, a permit shall be obtained from the City Manager or
Public Safety Director, which permit shall limit the periods when the activity may
continue.
8. Loading areas. The creation of a loud or excessive noise unreasonably upsetting or
disturbing to other persons in the vicinity in connection with the operation, loading or
unloading of any vehicle, trailer, railroad car, or other carrier or in connection with the
repairing of any such vehicle in or near residential areas.
9. Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, display
or other commercial purpose which, by the creation of such noise, shall be
unreasonably upsetting or disturbing to other person or persons in the vicinity. Also,
the operation of a loudspeaker or other sound amplifying device upon any vehicle on
the streets of the City with the purpose of advertising, where such vehicle, speaker or
sound amplifying device emits loud and raucous noises easily heard from nearby
adjoining residential property.
C. The prohibitions of Sections A and B shall not apply to the following:
1. Emergency vehicles. Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle
while engaged in necessary emergency activities.
2. Highway and utility maintenance and construction. Excavation or repair of bridges,
streets or highways or other property by or on behalf of the State of Michigan, the
City of Manistee, the County of Manistee, or any public utility, or any agency of the
foregoing when the public welfare, safety and convenience necessitates the
performance of the work at such time.
3. Warning devices. Warning devices emitting sound for warning purposes as authorized
by law.
4. City approved activities. City sponsored or approved parades, festivals, fairs or events.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 12-17-63.) (Ord. No. 18-05, Deleted entire language in Section 662.02 and
replaced with new language )
662.99 PENALTY
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 4
Chapter 662 Peace Disturbances
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 663 Fireworks
Chapter 663
Fireworks
663.01 Definitions 663.05 Repeal
663.02 Use of Consumer Fireworks
Prohibited
663.06 Severability
663.03 Firework Safety 663.99 Penalty
663.04 Enforcement
CROSS REFERENCES
Michigan Fireworks Safety Act – see M.C.L.A. Secs 28.451
Director of Public Safety – See ADM. Ch. 232
663.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. "Act 256" means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act 256 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
2011, being MCL 28.451, et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.
B. "Consumer fireworks" means that term as defined in Act 256.
C. "Firework" or "fireworks" means that term as defined in Act 256.
D. "Retailer" means that term as defined in Act 256.
E. "Wholesaler" means that term as defined in Act 256.
F. "National holiday" means those holidays described in 5 USC § 6103.
(Ord. 14-03 adopted 6-17-14)
663.02 USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS PROHIBITED
No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks in the City, except for the following:
From 11:00 am on the following days:
A. December 31st to January 1st at 1:00 am each day;
B. Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day (until 11:45 pm those days);
C. June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 pm those days;
D. July 5, if a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 pm; and
E. Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 pm those days.
(Ord. 14-03 adopted 6-17-14) (Ord. 16-01 adopted 9-20-16) (Ord. 19-04 adopted 3-19-19)
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 663 Fireworks
663.03 FIREWORK SAFETY
No person shall recklessly endanger the life, health, safety, or well-being of any person by the
ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks. (Ord. 14-03 adopted 6-17-14)
663.04 ENFORCEMENT
The Director of Public Safety, his designees and sworn law enforcement officers are authorized
to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. (Ord. 14-03 adopted 6-17-14)
663.05 REPEAL
All regulatory provisions contained in other city ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance are repealed. (Ord. 14-03 adopted 6-17-14)
663.06 SEVERABILITY
The sections and provisions of this Chapter 663 are declared to be severable and any portion
which is declared inoperative or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction shall
in no way affect the remaining sections or provisions of this Ordinance. (Ord. 14-03 adopted 6-17-14)
663.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provisions of this Chapter 663 is guilty of a municipal civil infraction and shall be
fined in the amount of $1,000.00 for each and every violation. $500 of every fine collected under this
ordinance shall be remitted to the City of Manistee Police Department. (Ord. 14-03 adopted 6-17-14) (Ord.
19-04 adopted 3-19-19)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 670 River, Lake and Harbor Regulations
Chapter 670
River, Lake and Harbor Regulations
670.01 Placing oil or other substances in
Manistee River or Manistee Lake
670.04 Access channel sign
670.02 Depositing of waste matter or
debris in Manistee River or
Manistee Lake
670.99 Penalty
670.03 Swimming in certain portion of
Manistee River prohibited
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal navigational facilities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.541 et seq.
Marine Safety Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.1002 et seq.
Harbor Development Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.1251 et seq.
Board of Harbor Commissioners - see ADM. Ch. 266
Watercraft - see TRAF. Ch. 450
Marina operation - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.05
Wharf and dock construction - see B. & H. Ch. 1478
670.01 PLACING OIL OR OTHER SUBSTANCES IN MANISTEE RIVER OR MANISTEE LAKE
No person shall put, cause to be put or allow to be put, any refuse oils, refuse or other material
from the manufacture of gas, or any other substance detrimental or injurious to watercraft or
fishing, into any portion of the Manistee River or Manistee Lake, within the City. Whoever
violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
penalties in accordance with section 202.99. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-20-14.) (Ord. 00-11. Passed 6-20-00)
670.02 DEPOSITING OF WASTE MATTER OR DEBRIS IN MANISTEE RIVER OR MANISTEE
LAKE
No person shall cast, put or deposit into the Manistee River or Manistee Lake within the limits
of the City, any refuse lumber, sawdust, slabs, waste materials, sand, filth, manure or obstruction,
or allow the same to be done. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties in accordance with section 202.99.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-17-1877.) (Ord. 00-11. Passed 6-20-00)
670.03 SWIMMING IN CERTAIN PORTION OF MANISTEE RIVER PROHIBITED
No person shall swim in the Manistee River between the channel at Lake Michigan on the west
to the mouth of Manistee Lake to the east. No person shall swim or dive from the Fifth Avenue
Pier, the Stub Pier or the First Street Pier, except for authorized public safety purposes.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 3-3-92.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 670 River, Lake and Harbor Regulations
670.04 ACCESS CHANNEL SIGN
A. The access channel constructed by the Harbor Village Partners to serve the Harbor
Village at the Manistee Beach development, or its successor, shall be appropriately signed to
warn vessels that the access channel shall not be used during severe weather.
B. The sign shall be of sufficient size and properly located so as to be clearly visible to vessels
approaching from the Manistee River. The sign shall include the following language: "Do
Not Use Channel During Severe Weather, Seek Refuge Upstream".
C. All costs associated with the construction and maintenance of said sign shall be borne by
the owners of the access channel and marina basin, or their successors.
D. In the event that said sign is not properly constructed or maintained by the owners of the
access channel and marina basins, the City shall erect or maintain said sign, with all costs
associated with that construction or maintenance levied as a special assessment against the
owners of record of the access channel and/or marina basins.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 3-3-92.)
670.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 674 Safety, Sanitation and Health
Chapter 674
Safety Sanitation and Health
674.01 Open burning; permit required;
issuance by Director of Public
Safety
674.07 Snow and ice removal from sidewalks
in Central Business District
674.02 Emission of noxious odors; burning
of garbage
674.08 Snow and ice removal from private
property; obstructing sidewalks and
streets
674.03 Abandoned refrigerators; open
cesspools, septic tanks and wells;
other attractive nuisances;
correction of violations
674.09 Littering; obstructing ditches, drains,
culverts or gutters
674.04 Barricades or fences required
around uncovered cellars or
excavations near streets
674.10 Dust from coal, sand or gravel
operations
674.05 Obstructing streets, alleys and
sidewalks; exceptions for
construction and firewood
674.11 Storage of building materials;
accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish
or refuse; correction of violations;
noncompliance; remedies of City
674.06 Obstructions to be lighted at night 674.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Health and sanitation generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 4, Sec. 51; M.C.L.A. Secs.
325.1 et seq., 327.1 et seq., 750.466 et seq.
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2; B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
Health Officer - see CHTR. Ch. 13, Sec. 13-4
Board of Health - see CHTR. Ch. 13, Sec. 13-9; Ch. 256
Local health departments - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 333.2401 et seq.
Nuisances generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 600.3801 et seq.; GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Public safety generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.493 et seq.
Director of Public Safety - see ADM. Ch. 232
Dogs and other animals running at large; nuisance conditions - see GEN. OFF.
606.02
Nuisance trees on private property - see S.U. & P.S. 1026.09
Placement of hazardous waste for collection as garbage and rubbish - see S.U.
& P.S. 1060.09
Responsibility of occupants of rental properties re sanitation - see B. & H.
1482.05
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 674 Safety, Sanitation and Health
674.01 OPEN BURNING; PERMIT REQUIRED; ISSUANCE BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
SAFETY
A. No person shall burn or cause to be burned outside of any dwelling, leaves, lawn clippings,
debris or rubbish on public or private property in the City, except under a permit issued by
the City Manager. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-6-88.)
B. No person shall burn or cause to be burned outside of any structure, any solid waste
materials, including building materials, junk, refuse or miscellaneous debris.
C. No person shall burn or cause to be burned outside of any structure, any brush, stumps,
wood or other similar matter, except after having received a permit to do the same from
the Director of Public Safety. The Director of Public Safety shall not issue said permit unless
or until he or she has satisfied himself or herself that such burning will not cause any public
nuisance from smoke, odor or other factors and that said burning shall not create any public
safety hazard through threat of the fire spreading.
D. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit barbecues, cooking fires or other similar
fires suitably contained on private property or in established stoves or fixtures on public
property. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-23-90.)
674.02 EMISSION OF NOXIOUS ODORS; BURNING OF GARBAGE
No person shall cause or allow noxious odors to be emitted into the open air in such a manner
as to annoy or offend the public. This prohibition shall apply to the burning of garbage outside
of a building or dwelling as provided in Section 674.01. (Ord. Unno. Passed 12-17-63.)
674.03 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS; OPEN CESSPOOLS, SEPTIC TANKS AND WELLS;
OTHER ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES; CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS
A. No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling or in any unlocked building or
dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box,
refrigerator or other box or container having a capacity of over one and one-half cubic feet,
of the type or kind which has a snap lock or other automatic locking device, without first
removing the locking device or the doors from such ice box, refrigerator or container.
B. No person shall have on his, her or its premises accessible to children an open cesspool,
septic tank, sewer, well, pit or hole or a cesspool, septic tank, sewer, well, pit or hole
covered with a weak, insecure and unsafe cover or lid which can be easily removed by a
child or which might or could break through easily. No person shall have in places
accessible to children overhanging lumber, cement or other material which is insecure and
unsafe, or have any condition on his or her or its premises which could or might attract and
allure children and cause them to play about such condition, the natural or probable result
of which might or could cause injury or death to such children.
C. Immediately upon the discovery of any of the dangerous conditions described in this
section, it shall be the duty of any employee of the City to notify the owner of the premises
or person in possession thereof to forthwith correct such condition. Such City employee
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 3
Chapter 674 Safety, Sanitation and Health
shall forthwith notify the City Manager of the condition and give him or her the name of the
person and the time such person was requested to correct the condition complained of.
Should the owner of the premises or person in possession thereof fail, neglect or refuse to
correct such dangerous condition, or if no one appears to be in possession of such premises,
then the City shall correct the dangerous condition and charge to the owner of the premises
the cost of such repairs. If the owner neglects or refuses to pay for such repairs, such
charges shall be assessed against the premises and collected in the same manner as are
general City real estate taxes. Such charges shall be in addition to the penalty provided in
Section 674.99. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-20-53.)
674.04 BARRICADES OR FENCES REQUIRED AROUND UNCOVERED CELLARS OR
EXCAVATIONS NEAR STREETS
When any cellar or other excavation is left uncovered by the burning or removal of the building
there from, and is adjacent to any street, the owner or occupant of the premises shall
immediately thereafter surround the same with a sufficient fence or barrier to prevent
accidents. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-3-14.)
674.05 OBSTRUCTING STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS; EXCEPTIONS FOR
CONSTRUCTION AND FIREWOOD
No person shall place or cause to be placed any stone, brick, timber, logs, lumber, lath, shingles,
slabs, sand, weeds or other materials whatsoever, or any dumpster for the containment
thereof, in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the City, unless for the purpose of building,
and then only for such period of time as shall be prescribed by the City Manager or Council in a
written permission to be granted for that purpose, except that firewood may be allowed to
remain in the street or on the sidewalk in front of any residence or place of business not longer
than forty-eight hours at any one time, when so placed as not to be an obstruction to travel.
674.06 OBSTRUCTIONS TO BE LIGHTED AT NIGHT
It shall be the duty of any person placing any of the substances set forth in Section 674.05, or
any dumpster for the containment thereof, in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk, to display
thereon, from one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise the following morning, a
lighted lamp which shall throw off a visible red or amber light.
674.07 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. Central Business District Defined. For the purpose of this section, the Central Business
District is defined as follows: River Street, from Cypress Street to Pine Street; Water Street,
from Pine Street to Greenbush Street; Clay Street, from Greenbush Street to Division Street;
Division Street, from River Street to First Street; Maple Street, from River Street to Water
Street; Poplar Street, from River Street to Water Street; Greenbush Street, from River Street
to Water Street.
B. Duties of Owners. The owner or occupant of any occupied or unoccupied business, building
or vacant lot within the Central Business District, as defined in this section, shall keep
sidewalks adjacent to his or her property clear of snow and ice and not allow the same to
accumulate for more than twenty-four hours.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 4
Chapter 674 Safety, Sanitation and Health
C. Enforcement. If the owner of any such occupied or unoccupied business, building or vacant
lot shall fail to clear adjacent sidewalks within twenty-four hours, either by his or her own
action or that of his or her tenant, the City Manager or his or her agent may cause the
sidewalks to be cleared at the expense of the owner of such property. The cost of clearing
the sidewalks shall be set by resolution of the City Council, and the same may be revised
from time to time as conditions may warrant. If the owner shall refuse or neglect to pay the
fee set forth by such Council resolution, a lien shall be set against the property and
collected the same as other taxes or assessments are collected within the City. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 7-2-74.)
674.08 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY; OBSTRUCTING
SIDEWALKS AND STREETS
Owners or operators of used car lots, private parking lots, hospitals and other such privatelyowned
or operated expansive areas shall be totally responsible for the removal of snow and ice
from these areas. No person shall deposit such snow and ice within the boundaries of a public
street or alley. No person shall, while removing snow or ice from private property not included
in the foregoing categories, deposit the same on any sidewalk, on the roadway portion of any
street, in any area between the sidewalk and the curb line or between the sidewalk and the
roadway, except in such area as is adjacent to the property from which the snow is removed,
and then only in such quantity as will not create a traffic hazard. (Ord. Unno. Passed 12-17-63.)
674.09 LITTERING; OBSTRUCTING DITCHES, DRAINS, CULVERTS OR GUTTERS
A. No person shall place, deposit, throw, scatter or leave on any street, highway, lane, alley,
public place, public square or private property, any tree or bush trimmings, grass clippings,
leaves, refuse, waste or such other materials, provided, however, that such materials may
be deposited on City streets at such times and as directed by the City during designated
City-wide clean-up periods or leaf pick-up by the City.
B. No person shall transport, dump or deposit any refuse or other waste materials in such a
manner as to cause the littering of any stream, public place or private property, or to cause
the obstruction of any public ditch, drain, culvert or gutter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 12-17-63.)
674.10 DUST FROM COAL, SAND OR GRAVEL OPERATIONS
A. No person engaged in the wholesaling or retailing of coal in or near a residential area shall
unload coal from railroad cars or trucks, or load the same into railroad cars or trucks, unless
the coal is dampened sufficiently to prevent coal dust from being blown beyond the
confines of the coal yard. This provision shall not be construed as to prevent the operator
of the coal yard from adopting other suitable measures to prevent the coal dust from
becoming a public nuisance.
B. No person engaged in the handling, storing, hauling or sale of sand or sand and gravel,
whose stockpiles are in or near a residential area, shall unload these materials from railroad
cars or trucks until suitable measures have been taken to prevent sand and dust from being
blown into or onto the residential area. (Ord. Unno. Passed 12-17-63.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 5
Chapter 674 Safety, Sanitation and Health
674.11 STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS; ACCUMULATION OF JUNK, TRASH,
RUBBISH OR REFUSE; CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS; NONCOMPLIANCE;
REMEDIES OF CITY
A. Except in a completely enclosed building, the storage of building materials upon any
property shall not be permitted, unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the
City for construction upon said property and said materials are intended for use in
connection with such construction. As used in this section "building materials" shall include,
but shall not be limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials,
electrical wiring and equipment, heating ducts and equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete,
cement, nails, screws or any other materials used in construction. Except where such
building materials are part of the stock in a trade or business located on said property, such
building materials shall be removed within seven days.
B. The storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except domestic
refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance, shall be permitted for a
period not to exceed seven days. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor
vehicles, boat hulls, unused stoves or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or other
material or other cast-off material of any kind, stored in the open, whether or not the same
could be put to any reasonable use.
C. The owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or any other person in charge of any dwelling or
property where a violation of subsection (a) or (b) hereof exists shall be notified by certified
mail or personal service by any officer acting on behalf of the City. The notice shall cite the
violation and inform the person that the violation must be corrected within seven days. In
the event that the property is occupied by a person other than the owner, the owner shall
also be notified by certified mail or personnel service by any officer acting on behalf of the
City at the address on record in the City Assessor's office.
D. Any owner or occupant of such lands notified in accordance with subsection (c) hereof who
disputes the alleged violation shall so indicate, in writing, the reasons therefor, said
response to be delivered by certified mail or personal service to the City Manager within
seven days of the date of the notice by the City. In the event that the City Manager does
not concur with the owner or occupant, said matters shall be remedied in accordance with
subsection (e) hereof.
E. In addition to the penalty provided in Section 674.99, in the event that a nuisance exists, it
shall be lawful for an officer or employee of the City to enter upon any such land used for
the storage of building material or for the accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of
any kind and cause the same to be properly disposed of at the expense of the owner of the
land. A schedule of the cost for this work shall be set by resolution of the City Council and
may be revised from time to time as conditions may warrant. If the owner of such land
refuses or neglects to pay the fee set forth by the Council's resolution, a lien shall be set
against the land and collected the same as other taxes or assessments are collected within
the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-7-88.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 6
Chapter 674 Safety, Sanitation and Health
674.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Updated Cross References June 17, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 690 Weapons and Explosives
Chapter 690
Weapons and Explosives
690.01 Firearm defined 690.04 Use of firearms to control pests;
permit required
690.02 Discharging or public display of
firearms
690.05 Violations as misdemeanours
690.03 Exceptions to chapter 690.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Storage and transportation of explosives - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 29.3a
Arson - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.71 et seq.
Construction or possession of explosive devices – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 750.211a
Fireworks - see GEN. OFF. 663
690.01 FIREARM DEFINED
For the purpose of this chapter, "fire arm" means any weapon or device from which is
propelled any missile, projectile, bullet, shot, pellet or other mass, by means of explosives,
compressed air or gas or by means of springs, levers or other mechanical devices, which
weapon or device shall be capable, by the discharge of any such propelled missile, projectile,
bullet, shot, pellet or other mass, of inflicting personal injury or death upon any person or
damage to another's property. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-4-83.)
690.02 DISCHARGING OR PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREARMS
No person shall discharge any firearm in the City, and no person shall draw, handle or flourish
any firearm in any public street, alley or other place open to the public in the City.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 10-4-83.)
690.03 CARRYING FIREARMS
No person shall carry any firearm upon his or her person in any public street, alley or other
place open to the public in the City unless:
A. The person has been issued a valid license to do so as provided in Act 372 of the Public Acts
of 1927, as amended (M.S.A. 28.91 et seq.); or
B. All ammunition has been removed from the chamber cylinder, clip or magazine of the
firearm and the firearm has been noticeably rendered inoperable by being broken down or
disassembled or is completely enclosed within a case or other similar container. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 10-4-83.)
690.04 EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER
The prohibitions set forth in Sections 690.01 through 690.03 do not apply:
A. To persons acting in the lawful defense of person, property or family;
B. To police officers or other officers of the law in the lawful discharge of their duty;
Updated Cross References June 17, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 690 Weapons and Explosives
C. When a firearm is being shown or otherwise handled in the regular course of
merchandising, is being carried from the building immediately after the purchase of said
firearm within the building or is being carried into the building for repair;
D. To authorized military parades by permission of the City Council;
E. To indoor enclosed firearm ranges so constructed as to prevent damage to property or
injury or death to any person, provided that such firearm ranges are otherwise lawful, and
provided, further, that the discharge of a bow and arrow is permitted upon unenclosed
ranges when such ranges are constructed so as to prevent damage to property or injury or
death to any person;
F. To persons who have obtained a permit from the City Clerk for the control of pests (birds or
animals) that are causing property damage or creating a health hazard or a general
nuisance, provided, however, that when any wild birds or animals are classified as
protected game birds or animals by the Department of Natural Resources of Michigan,
permission to destroy them shall first have been obtained from said Department, and
provided, further, that after said protected wild bird or animal has been killed, it shall be
disposed of as directed by said Department. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-4-83.)
690.05 USE OF FIREARMS TO CONTROL PESTS; PERMIT REQUIRED
A. No person shall be issued a permit to use a firearm for the control of pests unless he or she
is eighteen years of age and provides the following information:
1. Name, address and age;
2. Affiliations, if any;
3. Type of pest to be controlled;
4. Method of control; and
5. Period of time required for pest control.
B. All requests for permits shall be reviewed and signed by the Director of Public Safety or his
or her designee, only after he or she is satisfied that the procedure to be used to eliminate
the pests is safe from damage or injury to any person residing in the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed
10-4-83.)
690.06 VIOLATIONS AS MISDEMEANORS
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject
to the penalty provided in Section 690.99.
690.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Amended June 17, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 692 Weeds
Chapter 692
Weeds
692.01 Noxious Weeds Prohibited; Height
Limits
692.03 Cutting by City; Recovery of Costs
692.02 Duty of Occupant or Owner 692.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Weeds generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 247.51, 247.52, 247.61 et seq., 286.701 et
seq.
Injury to vegetation in area between gutter line and line of lots abutting streets
- see S.U. & P.S. 1024.05
Trees - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1026
692.01 NOXIOUS WEEDS PROHIBITED; HEIGHT LIMITS
Except as provided, no person owning, leasing, renting or occupying any parcel shall permit the
growth of noxious weeds; nor the growth of grass or vegetation to a greater height than 10
inches. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-3-83.)(Ord. 99-6. Passed 7-16-99) (Ord. 14-04. Passed 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14)
692.02 DUTY OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every parcel within the city, to cut and
remove all such noxious weeds, grass, vegetation and brush as often as may be necessary to
comply with section 692.01 (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-20-69.) (Ord. 14-04. Passed 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14)
692.03 CUTTING BY CITY; RECOVERY OF COSTS
If after having been provided 7-days written notice to the address listed on the City tax roll, an
owner or occupant of land refuses or neglects to cut down any noxious weeds; or fails to cut
grass or vegetation that exists in violation of this Chapter it shall be lawful for City employees to
enter upon any such lands and cause the noxious weeds, grass or vegetation in violation of this
Chapter to be cut down and destroyed at the expense of the owner of the lands. A schedule of
the cost for this work shall be set by resolution of the City Council. If the owner of such land
refuses or neglects to pay the fee set forth by the Council's resolution, a lien shall be set against
the land and collected the same as other taxes or assessments are collected within the City.
(Ord. 14-04. Passed 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14)
692.99 PENALTY
In addition to any charge imposed under Section 692.03, failure to remove noxious weeds or
cut grass or vegetation in accordance with this Chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction
pursuant to Chapter 203. The Director of Public Works is authorized to issue a Municipal Civil
Infraction Notice of Violation or Municipal Civil Infraction Citation as provided in Chapter 203
for a violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 14-04. Passed 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 1
Chapter 693 Drug Paraphernalia
Chapter 693
Drug Paraphernalia
693.01 Definitions 693.05 Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia
693.02 Purpose 693.06 Repealed
693.03 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia 693.07 Exemptions
693.04 Manufacture, sale or delivery of
drug paraphernalia
693.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Driving under the influence - see TRAFFIC Ch. 410.04 (UTC 4.14 et. seq.)
Controlled Substances Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 333.7107 et. seq.
693.01 DEFINITIONS
The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this Chapter means any equipment, product or
material of any kind or nature whatsoever which is used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as defined by the Controlled
Substance Act, MCL 33.1701, et seq., MSA 14.15(7101), et seq, as amended
693.02 PURPOSE
This Chapter is enacted to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city by
rendering unlawful the manufacture, sale, use, delivery, possession or distribution, or the
attempt to manufacture, sell, use, deliver, possess or distribute drug paraphernalia.
693.03 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
It is unlawful for any person, business entity or corporation to use, or possess with the intent to
use, drug paraphernalia.
693.04 MANUFACTURE, SALE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
It is unlawful for any person to sell, deliver, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or
manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia.
693.05 ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication
distributed in the City any advertisement, the purpose of which, in whole or in part, is to
promote the sale of any object designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
693.06 REPEALED
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Six General Offenses Code Page 2
Chapter 693 Drug Paraphernalia
693.07 EXEMPTIONS
This Chapter shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical
technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories,
medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, law enforcement
agencies, pharmacists and embalmers in the lawful course of business or professional activity,
nor to persons suffering from any medical condition which requires administering prescribed
medication.
693.99 PENALTY
A. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. Each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense and may be separately punished.
B. When an individual who has not previously been convicted of an offense under this division
or under any similar state or federal law, pleads guilty or is found guilty of a violation
hereof, the Court, without entering a judgment of guilt, may defer further proceedings and
place the individual upon probation subject to whatever terms and conditions it deems
appropriate.
C. Upon violation of a term or condition of such probation, the Court may enter an
adjudication of guilt and sentence the individual. Upon fulfillment of the terms and
conditions of probation, the Court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the
proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of
guilt and is not conviction for purposes of any disqualification or disability imposed by law
upon conviction of a crime. There may be only one (1) discharge and dismissal under this
section as to an individual. The police department shall retain a nonpublic record of an
arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section. This record shall be furnished to a
court or police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a
criminal action involving the use of a controlled substance covered herein has previously
utilized this section of the Chapter.
D. If any individual is convicted of a violation of this Chapter, the Court as part of the sentence,
during the period of confinement or the period of probation, or both, may require the
individual to attend a course of instruction or rehabilitation program on the medical,
psychological, and social effects of the misuse of drugs. The court may order the individual
to pay a fee for the instruction or program. Failure to complete the instructions or program
shall be considered a violation of the terms of probation. (Ord. 98-09. Adopted 7-21-98.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 806 Alcoholic Liquor Sales
Chapter 806
Alcoholic Liquor Sales
806.01 Definitions 806.06 Non-licensed establishments
806.02 Application of chapter to persons
selling or furnishing alcoholic
beverages
806.07 Outdoor service permit
806.03 Sales to or purchases by underage
persons prohibited; exceptions
806.08 Violations
806.04 Misrepresentation of age by
underage persons
806.09 Penalty
806.05 Furnishing proof of age upon
demand
CROSS REFERENCES
Intoxicating liquors generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 436.1 et seq.
Sales on Sundays and municipal election days - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 436.19e
Driving under influence - see TRAF. 410.04(UTC Secs. 5.15 et seq.)
Consumption of alcoholic beverages on streets or public property; storage in
motor vehicle passenger compartment - see TRAF. 410.04 (UTC 5.16a, 5.16b)
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.02
806.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
A. "Alcoholic liquor" or "alcoholic beverage" means any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented
liquor, liquid and compound, whether or not medicated, proprietary or patented, and by
whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, fit
for beverage purposes.
B. "Consideration" includes any fee or cover charge, the storage of alcoholic liquor, the sale of
food, ice mixers or other liquids used with alcoholic liquor drinks or the furnishing of
glassware or other containers for use in the consumption of alcoholic liquor in conjunction
with the sale of food.
C. "Licensed premises" means any portion of a building, structure, room or enclosure which is
owned, leased, used, controlled or operated by the licensee in the conduct of the business
at the location for which the person is licensed by the State, except when otherwise
specified by a rule or written order of the State Liquor Control Commission.
D. "Licensee" means those persons licensed by the State to manufacture, sell, import,
warehouse, deliver, promote or otherwise assist in the sale of alcoholic liquor or beverages.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 806 Alcoholic Liquor Sales
E. "Permit" means a contract between the licensee and the City granting authority to the
licensee to perform the functions defined by the license and permit at the licensed
premises. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-21-91.)
806.02 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO PERSONS SELLING OR FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES
Any person selling alcoholic liquor at retail, giving it away or furnishing it, whether in the
employ of another or of a partnership, association or corporation, or self-employed, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-21-91.)
806.03 SALES TO OR PURCHASES BY UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS
A. No licensee shall sell, give or furnish any alcoholic liquor or beverage to any person unless
said person shall have attained the age of twenty-one years, and no licensee shall allow any
person under the age of twenty-one years to consume any alcoholic liquor or beverage in or
upon his or her licensed premises.
B. No person under the age of twenty-one years shall offer to buy, obtain or drink any
alcoholic liquor or beverage in any tavern, restaurant, store or other place of business
where alcoholic liquor and alcoholic beverages are sold, and no person shall furnish, sell,
give or offer to furnish, sell or give alcoholic liquor or beverages to any person under the
age of twenty-one years in any tavern, restaurant, store or other place where alcoholic
liquor or beverages are sold.
C. No person shall give or furnish any alcoholic liquor to a minor except upon authority of and
pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-21-91.)
806.04 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS
No person under the age of twenty-one years shall falsely represent himself or herself to be
twenty-one years of age or over for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining possession of any
alcoholic liquor or beverage, and no person shall make false statements as to the age of
another person for the purpose of inducing the sale or the delivery of any alcoholic liquor or
beverage to any person under the age of twenty-one years. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-21-91.)
806.05 FURNISHING PROOF OF AGE UPON DEMAND
Any person in charge of any tavern, restaurant, store or other place where alcoholic liquors or
beverages are sold shall have the right at any time to demand of any person offering to buy,
buying, obtaining or drinking any alcoholic liquor or beverage in such tavern, restaurant, store
or other place where alcoholic liquor or beverages are sold, who may appear to such person to
be under the age of twenty-one years, to show satisfactory identification of the age of such
person. A person in charge of any tavern, restaurant, store or other place where alcoholic
liquors or beverages are sold may refuse to serve a person who fails to show satisfactory
identification of age any alcoholic liquor or beverage and may exclude such person from such
place of business. No person, upon request of the person in charge of said business, shall
refuse to leave such place of business. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-21-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 806 Alcoholic Liquor Sales
806.06 NON-LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS
No person shall maintain, operate, lease or otherwise furnish to any person any premises or
place which is not licensed, as defined in Section 806.01, where the other person may engage
in, or use such premises as a place for engaging in, the drinking of alcoholic liquor or beverages
for any consideration. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-21-91.)
806.07 OUTDOOR SERVICE PERMIT
An outdoor service permit shall be issued to a licensee for licensed premises only in compliance
with the following:
A. No glass containers of any kind shall be permitted in the outdoor service area, including, but
not limited to, beverage glasses, ashtrays, table centerpieces, etc.
B. The outdoor service area shall be properly lighted from dusk until closing time.
C. If the outdoor service area has ingress or egress other than through the licensed premises,
such ingress and egress must be properly signed to advise patrons of such ingress to or
egress from the licensed premises and that no alcoholic beverages may be removed from
the licensed premises.
D. The playing of any jukebox, radio, phonograph or musical instrument, and any and all other
created noise, including singing, shall be conducted in such a manner and at such a volume
so as not to disturb the reasonable peace and tranquility of any other persons in the vicinity
of the licensed premises.
E. Any licensee who is granted an outdoor service permit shall conform to and abide by all
other statutes and administrative rules as promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Liquor Act
governing the sale and manufacture of alcoholic beverages, and shall also conform to and
abide by all other local ordinances, rules and regulations as lawfully promulgated by the City
Council, the City Manager and the Chief of Police.
F. An outdoor service permit shall not be issued to a licensed premise when the outdoor
service area would be within 200 feet of a Residential District. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-21-91.)
806.08 VIOLATIONS
A. A violation of this chapter may be cause for the revocation of an outdoor service permit
and/or liquor license. Further, whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 806.99. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 5-21-91.)
B. Whoever, being a minor, violates any provision of this chapter, shall be dealt with in
accordance with Juvenile Court law.
806.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
Chapter 810
Telecommunications
810.01 Purpose 810.12 Savings Clause
810.02 Conflict 810.13 Use of Funds
810.03 Terms Defined 810.14 Annual Report
810.04 Permit Required 810.15 Cable Television Operators
810.05 Issuance of Permit 810.16 Existing Rights
810.06 Construction/Engineering Permit 810.17 Compliance
810.07 Conduit or Utility Poles 810.18 Reservation of Police Powers
810.08 Route Maps 810.19 Severability
810.09 Repair or Damage 810.20 Authorized City Officials
810.10 Establishment and Payment of
Maintenance Fee
810.99 Penalties
810.11 Modification of Existing Fees
CROSS REFERENCES
Cable Television System - see Ch. 816
Utilities, Franchises and Permits - see CHTR. CH. 11
810.01 PURPOSE
The purposes of this ordinance are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way
by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the
public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way
in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight
Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that
the City qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and
complying with the Act. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.02 CONFLICT
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or
other applicable law. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.03 TERMS DEFINED
A. The terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings:
1. “Act” means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time.
2. “City” means the City of Manistee
3. “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Manistee or its designee. This
Section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by
law to be made by the City Council.
4. “City Manager” means the City Manager or his or her designee.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
5. “Permit” means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this ordinance
to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the City for its
telecommunications facilities.
B. All other terms used in this ordinance shall have the same meaning as defined or as
provided in the Act, including without limitation the following:
1. “Authority” means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act.
2. “MPSC” means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term
"Commission" in the Act.
3. “Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity.
4. “Public Right-of-Way” means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal,
state, or private right-of-way.
5. “Telecommunication Facilities” or “Facilities” means the equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and
sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or
provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or
facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment
shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to
provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of
part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47
U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.
6. “Telecommunications Provider”, Provider and “Telecommunications Services” mean
those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991
PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an
affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio
service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934,
chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile
radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this ordinance only, a provider
also includes all of the following:
(a) A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication
facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(c) A person providing broadband internet transport access service. (Ord. 02-06,
adopted 12-17-02)
810.04 PERMITS REQUIRED
A. Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider
using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities
shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this ordinance.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
B. Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form
approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications
provider shall file one copy of the application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City
Manager or his designee, and one copy with the City Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk
shall make 2 copies of the application and distribute a copy to the City Assessor and the
City Planning Commission. Applications shall be complete and include all information
required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the
provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act.
C. Confidential Information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the
route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or
confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA
442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications
provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
D. Application Fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be
accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00.
E. Additional Information. The City Manager or his designee may request an applicant to
submit such additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably necessary or
relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable
deadlines for such additional information established by the City Manager. If the City and
the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the
City, the City or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act.
F. Previously Issued Permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits
previously issued by the City under Section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act,
1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the City to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan
telecommunications act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this
ordinance.
G. Existing Providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1,
2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in
a public right-of-way in the City as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991
PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the City an application for a permit in accordance
with the requirements of this ordinance. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not
required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A
provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the
permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. (Ord.
02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 4
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
810.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
A. Approval or Denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby
delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the City Manager shall
approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 4(b) of this
ordinance for access to a public right-of-way within the City. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the
Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City Manager has granted or denied a
permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the
date on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably
deny an application for a permit.
B. Form of Permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City Manager shall issue the
permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit
terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.
C. Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may impose conditions
on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications
provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way.
D. Bond Requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on
subsection (c) above, the City Manager may require that a bond be posted by the
telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not
exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original
condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. (Ord. 02-06,
adopted 12-17-02)
810.06 CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under
the public rights-of-way in the City without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit
as required under chapter 1022 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public
rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. (Ord. 02-
06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.07 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the
Act or under this ordinance does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit
or utility poles. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.08 ROUTE MAPS
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after
the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the City,
submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC
and to the City. The route maps should be in [paper or electronic] format unless and until the
MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-
02)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 5
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
810.09 REPAIR OR DAMAGE
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation
or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or
temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the City, as authorized by a permit, shall
promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below,
or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its
preexisting condition. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.10 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE
In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the City set forth in subsection 4(d)
above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the City's public
rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the
Act. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.11 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the City hereby modifies, to
the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1,
2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to
an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall
be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the
City also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication
facilities in public rights-of-way within the City's boundaries, so that those providers pay only
those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The City shall provide each telecommunications
provider affected by the fee with a copy of this ordinance, in compliance with the requirement
of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in
excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the
Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the City's policy and intent, and upon
application by a provider or discovery by the City, shall be promptly refunded as having been
charged in error. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.12 SAVINGS CLAUSE
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section 11 above shall be void from the date
the modification was made. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.13 USE OF FUNDS
Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the City from the Authority shall
be used by the City solely for right-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that
requirement, all funds received by the City from the Authority shall be deposited into the Street
Improvement Fund maintained by the City. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02) (Ord. 0303, adopted 5-20-03)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 6
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
810.14 ANNUAL REPORT
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual report with the
Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority. (Ord. 02-06,
adopted 12-17-02)
810.15 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the City shall not hold a cable television operator in default
or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002,
the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues
from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.16 EXISTING RIGHTS
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees,
this ordinance shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the City
may have under a permit issued by the City or under a contract between the City and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 02-06, adopted
12-17-02)
810.17 COMPLIANCE
The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this ordinance is to fully comply
with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a
manner as to achieve that purpose. The City shall comply in all respects with the requirements
of the Act, including but not limited to the following:
A. Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL
15.231 to 15.246, as provided in Section 4(c) of this ordinance;
B. Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in
accordance with Section 4(f) of this ordinance;
C. Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit,
and excusing such providers from the $500 application fee, in accordance with Section 4(g)
of this ordinance;
D. Approving or denying an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a
public right-of-way within the City, in accordance with Section 5(a) of this ordinance;
E. Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with
Section 5(a) of this ordinance;
F. Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with Section 5(a) of
this ordinance;
G. Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different
permit terms, as provided in Section 5(b) of this ordinance;
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 7
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
H. Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications
provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with Section 5(c) of
this ordinance;
I. Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost
to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after
the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with Section 5(d) of this
ordinance;
J. Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or
engineering permits, in accordance with Section 6 of this ordinance;
K. Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the City's right-of-way fees with a
copy of this ordinance, in accordance with Section 11 of this ordinance;
L. Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with Section 14 of this
ordinance; and
M. Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees,
in accordance with Section 15 of this ordinance.
(Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.18 RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this ordinance shall not limit the City's right to review and
approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or
limit the City's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.19 SEVERABILITY
The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this ordinance are hereby
declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this ordinance
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent
jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity
of any remaining provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.20 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS
The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized City official to
issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or
municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal
chapter violations bureau) for violations under this ordinance as provided by the City Code.
(Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
810.99 PENALTIES
A person who violates any provision of this ordinance or the terms or conditions of a permit is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to Section 202.99. Nothing in
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 8
Chapter 810 Telecommunications
this Section 810.99 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the City in the event of
a violation by a person of this ordinance or a permit. (Ord. 02-06, adopted 12-17-02)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 816 Cable Television Systems
Chapter 816
Cable Television Systems
816.01 Definitions 816.10 Refunds to subscribers; notice
816.02 Purposes; implementation and
interpretation
816.11 Written decisions of Council; effective
date; notice
816.03 Compliance with FCC Rules 816.12 Promulgation of additional rules and
regulations by Council
816.04 Filing of rate schedules or increases
by operators; additional
information; burden of proof
816.13 Failure to give notice
816.05 Submission of proprietary
information; confidentiality
816.14 Additional public hearings
816.06 Public notice of rate schedules or
increases; notice to operators of
initial review of Council
816.15 Additional powers of City
816.07 Effective date of rates; issuance of
tolling orders by Council;
submission of additional
information by operators; public
hearings; notice.
816.16 Failure to comply; remedies;
revocation of franchises
816.08 Reports to Council; written
responses by operators
816.17 Conflicts
816.09 Issuance of orders by Council
CROSS REFERENCES
Franchises generally - see CHTR. Ch. 11
Construction and maintenance of facilities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 247.183 et seq.
Television and radio generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 484.301 et seq., 750.507 et
seq.
Cables improperly located; insurance - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 500.3123
Interference with television reception - see GEN. OFF. 658.03
Radar, radio and television antennas - see B. & H. Ch. 1468
Public, Educational, and Government (P.E.G.)commission Ch.288
816.01 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter:
A. "Act" means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by
the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, P.L. 102-385), and
as may be amended from time to time.
B. "Associated equipment" means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to
47 CFR 76.923.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 816 Cable Television Systems
C. "Basic cable service" means "basic service," as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable
television service which is subject to rate regulation by the City pursuant to the Act and the
FCC Rules.
D. "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
E. "FCC Rules" means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act.
F. "Increase in rates" means an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer
services as provided in the FCC Rules.
All other words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meanings given in the Act
and the FCC Rules. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.02 PURPOSES; IMPLEMENTATION AND INTERPRETATION
The purposes of this chapter are to:
A. Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable
service rate regulation; and
B. Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of
interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the City.
This chapter shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.03 COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RULES
In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the
City shall follow all FCC Rules. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.04 FILING OF RATE SCHEDULES OR INCREASES BY OPERATORS; ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION; BURDEN OF PROOF
A. A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated
equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC
Rules. The cable operator shall include, as part of its submission, such information as is
necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with
the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule of rates
or proposed increase in such rates with the City Clerk. For purposes of this chapter, the
filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies
have been received by the City Clerk. Council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules
and regulations as allowed by law prescribing the information, data and calculations which
must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or proposed
increase in such rates.
B. In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the City adopted
pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, a cable operator shall provide all information requested
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 816 Cable Television Systems
by the City Manager that is related and helpful in connection with the City's review and
regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a
proposed increase in such rates. The City Manager may establish reasonable deadlines for
submission of the requested information, and the cable operator shall comply with such
deadlines.
C. A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service
tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act
and the FCC Rules, including, without limitation, 47 USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.05 SUBMISSION OF PROPRIETARY INFORMATION; CONFIDENTIALITY
A. If this chapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the City pursuant to Section 816.04(a),
or any request for information pursuant to Section 816.04(b), requires the production of
proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the
time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that
specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from
public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated
as proprietary and the facts that support such reason. The request for confidentiality will
be granted if the City determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that
nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC
552. The City shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in
information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request
is denied:
1. Where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal,
in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or
2. The cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any
appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review.
B. Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the
City. The City shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the
reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then
promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the
information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request.
The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an
appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any
appeal.
C. The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to, and consistent
with, the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality, including, without
limitation, 47 CFR 0.459.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 4
Chapter 816 Cable Television Systems
816.06 PUBLIC NOTICE OF RATE SCHEDULES OR INCREASES; NOTICE TO OPERATORS OF
INITIAL REVIEW BY COUNCIL
Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant
to Section 816.04(a), the City Clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City which shall state that:
A. The filing has been received by the City Clerk and (except for those parts which may be
withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying; and
B. Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the City
Clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published.
The City Clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time and place of the meeting
at which the City Council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase of
such rates. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least three days before the meeting.
In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed
increase of such rates is prepared for consideration of the City Council, then the City Clerk shall
mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the
meeting at which the City Council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed
increase of such rates. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.07 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES; ISSUANCE OF TOLLING ORDERS BY COUNCIL;
SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION BY OPERATORS; PUBLIC
HEARINGS; NOTICE
A. After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in such
rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in such
rates will become effective after thirty days from the date of filing under Section 816.04(a),
unless the City Council (or another properly authorized body or official) tolls the thirty-day
deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or
otherwise, within thirty days of the date of filing. The City Council may toll the thirty-day
deadline for an additional ninety days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and
for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings.
B. If a written order has been issued pursuant to subsection (a) hereof and 47 CFR 76.933 to
toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or
a proposed increase in such rates, the cable operator shall submit to the City any additional
information required or requested pursuant to Section 816.04. In addition, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the
additional ninety-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The City Clerk shall publish a
public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City
which shall state:
1. The date, time and place at which the hearing shall be held;
2. That interested parties may appear in person, by agent or by letter at such hearing to
submit comments on, or objections to, the existing rates or the proposed increase in
such rates; and
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 5
Chapter 816 Cable Television Systems
3. That copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in such rates and related
information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available
for inspection or copying from the office of the City Clerk. The public notice shall be
published not less than fifteen days before the hearing. In addition, the City Clerk
shall mail, by first-class mail, a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less
than fifteen days before the hearing. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.08 REPORTS TO COUNCIL; WRITTEN RESPONSES BY OPERATORS
Following the public hearing provided for in Section 816.07, the City Manager shall cause a
report to be prepared for the City Council which shall include (based on the filing of the cable
operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the
cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review and other appropriate information)
a recommendation for the decision of the City Council provided for in Section 816.09. The City
Clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less than
twenty days before the City Council acts under Section 816.09. The cable operator may file a
written response to the report with the City Clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are
filed by the cable operator with the City Clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the
cable operator, the City Clerk shall forward it to Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.09 ISSUANCE OF ORDERS BY COUNCIL
The City Council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which, in whole or in
part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a
proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase in such rates,
orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed
increase in such rates to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief,
in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the City Council issues an order allowing the existing rates
or proposed increase in such rates to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the
cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in
this section shall be issued within ninety days of the tolling order provided for in Section
816.07(a) in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within
150 days after the tolling order provided for in Section 816.07(a) in all cases involving a cost-ofservice
showing. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.10 REFUNDS TO SUBSCRIBERS; NOTICE
The City Council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR 76.942. Before the
City Council orders any refund to subscribers, the City Clerk shall give at least seven days
written notice to the cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time and place at which the
City Council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable
operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent or by letter, at such
time for the purpose of submitting comments to Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.11 WRITTEN DECISIONS OF COUNCIL; EFFECTIVE DATE; NOTICE
Any order of the City Council pursuant to Section 816.09 or 816.10 shall be in writing, shall be
effective upon adoption by the City Council and shall be deemed released to the public upon
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 6
Chapter 816 Cable Television Systems
adoption. The City Clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper
of general circulation within the City, which shall:
A. Summarize the written decision; and
B. State that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying
from the office of the City Clerk.
In addition, the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable
operator by first-class mail. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.12 PROMULGATION OF ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS BY COUNCIL
In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to Section 816.04, the City Council may, by resolution
or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings
(including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC
Rules. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.13 FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE
The failure of the City Clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this
chapter shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the City Council so long as there is
substantial compliance with this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.14 ADDITIONAL PUBLIC HEARINGS
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, hold
additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the City Council shall prescribe.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.15 ADDITIONAL POWERS OF CITY
The City shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the cable operator's
franchise and all other applicable laws. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC
Rules and this chapter shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The City
may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest
in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
816.16 FAILURE TO COMPLY; REMEDIES; REVOCATION OF FRANCHISES
The City may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator
(including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the
City) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the City
pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter or any rules or regulations
promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC
Rules, any orders or determinations of the City pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of
this chapter, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient
grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-
28-93.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 7
Chapter 816 Cable Television Systems
816.17 CONFLICTS
In the event of any conflict between a provision of this chapter and a provision of any prior
ordinance or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with a cable
operator, the provision of this chapter shall control. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-28-93.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 820 Michigan Consolidated Gas Company Gas Franchise
Chapter 820
Michigan Consolidated Gas Company Gas Franchise
820.01 Grant of Gas Franchise and
Consent to Laying of Pipes, Etc
820.06 Successors and Assigns
820.02 Gas Service and Extension of
System
820.07 Effective Date: Term of Franchise
Ordinance; Acceptance by Company
820.03 Use of Streets and Other Public
Rights-of-Way
820.08 Incorporation of City Charter
820.04 Hold Harmless Provisions 820.09 Effective and Interpretation of
Ordinance
820.05 Standards and Conditions of
Service; Rules, Regulations and
Rates
CROSS REFERENCES
Franchises generally - see CHTR. Ch. 11
Powers of Council re licensing in general - see CHTR. Ch. 13, Sec. 13-4
820.01 GRANT OF GAS FRANCHISE AND CONSENT TO LAYING OF PIPES, ETC
Subject to all the terms and conditions mentioned in this ordinance, consent is hereby given to
Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Michigan (the "Company"), and to its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, operate, and use
gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes, and other necessary equipment in the highways,
streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way in the City of Manistee, Manistee County,
Michigan, and a franchise is hereby granted to the Company, its successors and assigns, to
transact local business in said City of Manistee for the purposes of conveying gas into and
through and supplying and selling gas in said City of Manistee and all other matters incidental
thereto.
820.02 GAS SERVICE AND EXTENSION OF SYSTEM
If the Provisions and conditions herein contained are accepted by the Company, as in Section 7
hereof provided, then the Company shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in
accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; and provided further that such initial
installation and any extensions shall be subject to the Main Extension provisions, the Area
Expansion Program provisions (if and where applicable), and other applicable provisions now or
from time to time hereafter contained in the Company's Rules and Regulations for Gas Service
as filed with the Michigan Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar
jurisdiction.
820.03 USE OF STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
The Company, its successors and assigns, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any of
the highways, streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way within said City of Manistee and shall
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 820 Michigan Consolidated Gas Company Gas Franchise
within a reasonable time after making an opening or excavation, repair the same and leave it in
as good condition as before the opening or excavation was made.
No road, street, alley, or highway shall be opened for the laying of trunk lines or lateral mains
except upon application to the Highway Commissioner or the City of Manistee or other
authority having jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work and the
route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the Highway Commissioners or
the City Council, or such other authority as may have jurisdiction, to issue a permit to the
Company to do the work proposed, provided the Company complies with the appropriate
standards and requirements of the authority and pays all required fees. Any repairs to City
rights-of-way or properties shall be completed to standards which insure continued usable
condition. The Company shall replace any repair work which fails under normal condition.
820.04 HOLD HARMLESS PROVISION
The Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City harmless from any and all claims
made against the City as a result of the Company's activities under this ordinance. The
Company shall, in connection with this obligation, pay or reimburse the City for all damages,
costs and expenses experienced by the City in connection with any such claim, including but not
limited to, judgments or awards for damages, settlements, court, dispute litigation or
settlement costs, attorneys fees, consultant and laboratory fees and other related expenses
which may be incurred by the City resulting from the activities of the Company or its officers,
employees, agents or servants under this ordinance.
820.05 STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE; RULES, REGULATIONS AND RATES
The Company is now under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission to the
extent provided by statute; and the rates to be charged for gas, and the standards and
conditions of service and operation hereunder, shall be the same as set forth in the Company's
schedule of rules, regulations, and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages and
townships in which the Company is now rendering gas service, or as shall hereafter be validly
prescribed for the City of Manistee under the orders, rules and regulations of the Michigan
Public Service Commission or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises.
820.06 SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS
The words "Michigan Consolidated Gas Company" and "the Company", wherever used herein,
are intended and shall be held and construed to mean and include both Michigan Consolidated
Gas Company and its successors and assigns, whether so expressed or not.
820.07 EFFECTIVE DATE: TERM OF FRANCHISE ORDINANCE; ACCEPTANCE BY
COMPANY
This ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days following the date of publication thereof, and shall
continue in effect for a period of thirty (30) years thereafter, subject to revocation at the will of
the City of Manistee at any time during said thirty (30) year period; provided, however, that
when this ordinance shall become effective the City Clerk shall deliver to the Company a
certified copy of the ordinance accompanied by written evidence of publication and recording
thereof as required by law, and the Company shall, sixty (60) days after receiving the
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 820 Michigan Consolidated Gas Company Gas Franchise
documents from the City Clerk, file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of the conditions
and provisions hereof.
820.08 INCORPORATION OF CITY CHARTER
This Ordinance, and its acceptance, is subject to all of the applicable provisions of the Charter of
the City of Manistee, Chapter 11, including Chapter 11, Section 11-6, A through G.
820.09 EFFECT AND INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCE
All ordinances and resolutions, and parts thereof, which conflict with any of the terms of this
ordinance are hereby rescinded. In the case of conflict between this ordinance and any such
ordinances or resolutions, this ordinance shall control. The catch line headings which precede
each Section of this ordinance are for convenience in reference only and shall not be taken into
consideration in the construction or interpretation of any of the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 96-1. Passed 2-20-96)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 844 Mechanical or Electronic Amusement Devices
Chapter 844
Mechanical or Electronic Amusement Devices
844.01 License required 844.05 Posting of license
844.02 Application for license 844.06 Enforcement and inspections by
Police Department
844.03 License fee 844.99 Penalty
844.04 Due date of fees
CROSS REFERENCES
Powers of Council re licensing in general - see CHTR. Ch. 13, Sec. 13-4
Opening or attempting to open coin-operated devices - see M.C.L.A. Secs.
750.113, 752.811, 752.812
Slugs - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 752.801 et seq.
844.01 LICENSE REQUIRED
No mechanical or electronic amusement device or machine requiring the deposit of money
through a slot or otherwise in order to operate the same shall be operated or placed for
operation within the City, unless the owner, lessee or person in charge thereof has first
obtained a license to operate the same in the location or place where such machine is to be
placed in operation. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-21-41; Ord. Unno. Passed 11-18-41.)
844.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
Any applicant for a license shall make application to the City Clerk for such license. The
applicant shall give to the City Clerk any information as to the location or ownership of the
mechanical or electronic amusement device or machine as the City Clerk shall desire, and the
application for such license shall be accompanied by the license fee hereinafter provided.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 10-21-41.)
844.03 LICENSE FEE
Every applicant for a mechanical or electronic amusement device or machine license shall pay a
license, inspection and regulation fee as determined from time to time by Council resolution.
844.04 DUE DATE OF FEES
License fees provided for herein are payable on or before December 5 of each year. License
fees provided for herein are for the whole or any fraction of a year after December 5 of any
year. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-21-41.)
844.05 POSTING OF LICENSE
On the wall of the place or location where mechanical or electronic amusement devices or
machines are to be operated, there shall be fixed or attached and conspicuously displayed the
license provided for in this chapter, and the license shall bear the description and number of
machines and/or the kinds of machines for which such place or location has been licensed.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 844 Mechanical or Electronic Amusement Devices
Such license shall also bear the date the license expires. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-21-41; Ord. Unno.
Passed 11-18-41.)
844.06 ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS BY POLICE DEPARTMENT
The Police Department of the City shall make regular checkups to determine if there are any
locations or places which are not licensed or which are violating the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 10-21-41; Ord. Unno. Passed 11-18-41.)
844.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 850 Business Registration
Chapter 850
Business Registration
850.01 Business defined; application of
chapter; exceptions
850.05 Limitations of Registration
850.02 Registration required 850.06 Vending & Peddling Restricted
850.03 Application for registration;
falsification
850.99 Penalty
850.04 Registration fees
CROSS REFERENCES
Sales of rabbits and baby poultry - see GEN. OFF. 606.09
Itinerant merchants - see B.R. & T. Ch. 858
Commercial centers in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1248.09
850.01 BUSINESS DEFINED; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER; EXCEPTIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the word "business" shall mean any trade, occupation,
profession, work, commerce or other activity owned, operated or conducted for profit or
benefit either directly or indirectly on any premise in this City. The provisions of this chapter
shall, however, not apply to societies making sales for charitable, religious, non-profit or public
purposes, a producer of agricultural products selling products grown by the producer himself or
herself, businesses operating as a part of a City Council approved festival or event.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 11-4-47; Ord. 98-02 Passed 3-17-98; Ord. 03-06 Passed 6-17-03)
850.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED
From and after the effective date of this chapter, every business, before opening, transfer of
ownership, relocating and/or operating a business in the City, or exposing his or her goods,
wares, merchandise, or services for sale, shall procure from the City a business registration
certificate as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 11-4-47; Ord. 98-02 Passed 3-17-98; Ord. 03-06 Passed 6-17-03)
850.03 APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE; FALSIFICATION
Applications for a business registration certificate shall be in writing and shall contain a
statement of facts as to the character of the business to be conducted; the location of such
business; and a statement as to where the applicant has been engaged in business for the
preceding two years. No person shall make any false statement in his or her application for his
or her business registration certificate.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 11-4-47; Ord. 98-02 Passed 3-17-98: Ord. 03-06 Passed 6-17-03)
850.04 REGISTRATION FEES
Registration fees for the various classifications of businesses shall be as provided in a schedule
adopted from time to time by Council resolution, and such fees shall be collected by the City
before a business registration certificate is issued. (Ord. 98-02 Passed 3-17-98)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 850 Business Registration
850.05 LIMITATIONS OF REGISTRATION
Notwithstanding proper registration in accordance with this Chapter, no business, profession,
trade or other activity so registered is relieved from obtaining and maintaining any and all local,
state and/or federal licensees, certificates, registration or other required authorization
necessary to the lawful carrying on such trade, business, profession or other activity.
Proper registration under this Chapter is not, directly or indirectly, an endorsement or approval
of those trades, businesses, professions or other activities and entities so registered.
(Ord. 03-06 Passed 6-17-03)
850.06 VENDING AND PEDDLING RESTRICTED
There shall be no vending or peddling except as a part of a Council approved event or with a
special vendor’s license issued by City Council or in compliance with Chapter 862 Vendors.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 9-6-49; Ord. 98-02 Passed 3-17-98, Ord, 07-02 Adopted 2-20-07)
850.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 858 Peddlers and Solicitors
Chapter 858
Peddlers and Solicitors
858.01 Uninvited peddling, soliciting, etc.,
declared a nuisance.
858.03 Exemption of charitable and nonprofit
organizations
858.02 Abatement of nuisances by police
officers
858.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Hawkers, peddlers and transient merchants generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs.
445.371 et seq.
Sales of rabbits and baby poultry - see GEN. OFF. 606.09
Nuisances generally - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Merchants - see B.R. & T. Ch. 850
858.01 UNINVITED PEDDLING, SOLICITING, ETC., DECLARED A NUISANCE
The following practices by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient
vendors of merchandise are hereby prohibited and declared to be nuisances:
A. The practice of going in and upon a private residence in the City, not having been requested
or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such private residence, for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or for the purpose of
disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same;
B. The practice of ringing door bells, knocking on doors and other means for gaining entrance
into a private residence for any of the purposes described in subsection (a) hereof; and
C. The practice of soliciting clerks, employees and other persons in any of the stores, offices
and other places of business in the City for orders of merchandise and/or for the purpose of
disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same during business hours, without having
been invited or requested to do so by the proprietors or those in charge of such places of
business. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-17-50.)
858.02 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES BY POLICE OFFICERS
The Chief of Police and all other police officers of the City are hereby required and directed to
suppress and abate any nuisance as provided in Section 858.01 by forthwith arresting any
person or persons creating such nuisance and taking such person or persons before a
magistrate to be dealt with as required by this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 10-17-50.)
858.03 EXEMPTION OF CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
A religious, charitable, patriotic, social service, civic or political nonprofit organization may be
exempted from the provisions of this chapter by Council on a case by case basis, provided that
its authorized representative volunteers to undertake such activities without remuneration and
provided that the entire proceeds of the activities will go to the organization and not for private
profit.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 858 Peddlers and Solicitors
858.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 860 Street Performers
Chapter 860
Street Performers
860.01 Purpose 860.06 Revocation of Permit
860.02 Definitions 860.07 Appeal Procedure
860.03 Prohibition of Performing 860.08 Fees
860.04 Street Performer Application 860.99 Penalty
860.05 Rules and Regulations
CROSS REFERENCES
Downtown Development Authority – see ADM. Ch. 282
860.01 PURPOSE
This ordinance seeks to impose reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on street
performers to the extent necessary to ensure the safety of performers, their audiences and the
general public, and to prevent unreasonable interference with residents’ enjoyment of the
character of Downtown Manistee or the ability of businesses to conduct business. This
ordinance regulates performing on public property in the Manistee Central Business District.
(Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
860.02 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases shall be interpreted and construed in accordance with the
following definitions.
A. Central Business District means the Downtown District as described in Chapter 282 of this
Code of Ordinances
B. Contemporary community standards mean the customary limits of candor and decency in
the City of Manistee at or near the time of the alleged actions or speech.
C. Designated public area means an area on public property designated for street
performances.
D. Perform includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: acting; singing; playing
musical instruments; juggling; dancing; demonstrating pantomime; exhibiting magic;
exhibiting puppetry, or other similar activity.
E. Performer means a person who has obtained a permit pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
860.03 PROHIBITION OF PERFORMING
No person shall perform in the streets, parks, or rights-of-way in the City Central Business
District without complying with the provisions of this Article and the Code. (Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-
20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 860 Street Performers
860.04 STREET PERFORMER APPLICATION
The Coordinator/Executive Director of the Manistee Downtown Development Authority (the
street performer “Coordinator”) shall issue street performer permits. Persons desiring to
perform are required to make written application on forms provided by the Coordinator. Being
selected as a street performer is a privilege rather than a right, therefore the street performer
permit can be revoked by the Manistee Downtown Development Authority or the City of
Manistee at any time for any reason. The performer agrees to fully cooperate with the wishes
of the Downtown Development Authority as well as with City of Manistee officials. The
applicant shall truthfully and fully state the information requested on the application including
a description sufficient for identification of the subject matter and method of the performing in
which the performers will engage and also any other information the Coordinator deems
necessary to approve the application. A permit shall be valid from the date on which it is issued
through December 31 of the year issued or for the specific duration noted on the permit. A
permit shall be nontransferable.
The Coordinator shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for a street
performer’s permit within fifteen (15) days of it being filed.
(Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
860.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS
A. Performances shall only take place at designated public areas in the Central Business
District approved by the Coordinator. The location of designated public areas may be
changed at any time by the Coordinator; City Manager or the City Manager’s Assignee; the
Police Chief or a Police Officer.
B. Manistee City Council authorizes the Coordinator to promulgate rules and regulations
relating to the time, place, and manner of performances. The complete set of rules and
operating procedures is available by contacting the Manistee DDA.
C. Some of these rules include:
1. No performances will take place during City authorized festivals without special
permission from the organizations in charge of these festivals. Permits are not
required for performances that are activities of these festivals or for activities part of
other events approved by the City of Manistee.
2. The performance must meet contemporary community standards for candor and
decency.
3. A performer may request contributions at a performance. Contributions may be
received in any receptacle, such as an open musical instrument case, box ,or hat.
(Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
860.06 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
The Coordinator or an officer of the Police Department or the City Manager may
without notice revoke a street performer permit. The revocation can be immediate at the time
of a performance; or the Coordinator shall send written notice to the street performer at the
address set forth in the application. (Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 860 Street Performers
860.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE
If the permit is not issued or is revoked, the street performer shall have the right to a hearing
before the Coordinator. Such hearing shall be set within fifteen (15) days of the written notice
to the performer. If after a hearing, the Coordinator finds that the revocation is supported by a
preponderance of the evidence, the permit shall remain revoked. The street performer shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Directors of the Manistee Downtown Development
Authority. (Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
860.08 FEES
There shall be imposed pursuant to these sections various fees, as established from time to
time by the City Council by resolution which Fee Schedule is incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
860.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with
Section 202.99. (Ord. 07-01 adopted 2-20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 862 Vendors
Chapter 862
Vendors
862.01 Purpose 862.06 Revocation of Permit
862.02 Definitions 862.07 Appeal Procedure
862.03 Application for Vendor Permit 862.08 Fees
862.04 Location Limitations 862.99 Penalty
862.05 Rules and Regulations
CROSS REFERENCES
Business Registration - see B.R. & T. Ch 850
862.01 PURPOSE
This ordinance seeks to impose reasonable restrictions on vendors to the extent necessary to
ensure the safety of vendors, their customers and the general public, and to prevent
unreasonable interference with citizens’ enjoyment of the character of Downtown Manistee or
the ability of businesses to conduct business. This ordinance regulates vending on public
property in Manistee Central Business District. No person shall vendor goods or services in the
streets, parks, or rights-of-way in the City without complying with the provisions of this Article
and the Code, and other Articles and Codes. (Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
862.02 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases shall be interpreted and construed in accordance with the
following definitions.
A. Central Business District means the Downtown District as described in Chapter 282 of this
Code of Ordinances.
B. Contemporary community standards mean the customary limits of candor and decency in
the City of Manistee.
C. Designated public area means an area on public property designated for street vendors.
D. Vending includes, but is not limited to: offering out of doors such goods, foodstuffs or
services from a stationary cart, stand, wagon, or from one's person; offering, exposing for
sale, or making available for a price or donation, making sales and delivering articles to
purchasers, or soliciting orders for sale of goods, foodstuffs, or services of any kind, for
immediate or future delivery or performance.
E. Vendor means a person who has obtained a permit pursuant to this section.
F. Person shall mean any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association,
or joint stock association, society, organization or league, and includes any employee, agent
or other similar representative thereof.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 862 Vendors
G. Established Merchant is a person who operates a business from a building in the Central
Business District of Manistee
(Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
862.03 APPLICATION FOR VENDOR PERMIT
The Coordinator/Executive Director of the Manistee Downtown Development Authority (the
street vendor “Coordinator”) shall issue street vendor permits. Persons desiring to vendor
goods and services are required to make written application on a form provided by the
Coordinator. Being a street vendor is a privilege rather than a right, therefore the street
vending permit can be revoked by the Manistee Downtown Development Authority or the City
of Manistee at any time for any reason. The vendor agrees to fully cooperate with the wishes
of the Downtown Development Authority as well as with City of Manistee officials. (Ord. 07-02
adopted 2-20-07)
862.04 LOCATION LIMITATIONS
Locations for vendors are determined by the Coordinator under these general criteria.
A. Vendors will not be allowed to directly compete with established merchants located within
close proximity of the established business. Established businesses may ask the
Coordinator to locate vendors a certain distance from their business. Generally vendors
selling merchandise similar to established merchants will be located at least 200 feet from
the established merchant.
B. Vendors are limited to a size area determined by the Coordinator and the display must be
safe for the vendor and the public. The vendor may not prevent the public from utilizing
any public benches, waste receptacles, or other public street furniture.
C. Vendors will conduct their business at approved locations in the Manistee Central Business
District - strolling is not permitted. All stands, sales materials, merchandise, etc. must be
removed at the end of the business day. The area must be kept clean and orderly and all
trash must be removed at the end of the day.
D. Existing businesses are not required to have a Vendor Permit in order to establish dining
areas or sidewalk sales and display areas as long as these outdoor areas are adjacent to the
property from which they normally do business. (Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
862.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS
A. To apply for a vendors permit the individual must submit to the Coordinator a complete and
specific list of what will be sold by the vendor. Items deemed not to meet contemporary
community standards for candor and decency will not be allowed. Any applicable fees must
be paid, and the vendor may need other permits and licenses such as a Michigan Sales Tax
License and a Health Department Permit.
B. Manistee City Council authorizes the Coordinator to promulgate rules and regulations
relating to the time, place, and manner of performances. The complete set of rules and
operating procedures is available by contacting the Manistee DDA.
C. Some of these rules include:
1. No vendor sales are allowed during City authorized festivals without special
permission from the organizations in charge of these festivals. Permits are not
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 862 Vendors
required for outdoor sales that are officially part of these festivals or for activities part
of other events approved by the City of Manistee.
2. The vendor permit shall be displayed on a conspicuous place.
3. Vendor permits issued pursuant to this division are not transferable or assignable. No
person shall write upon, alter, amend, modify, change or damage any vendor permit.
4. The vendor may not violate the applicable provisions of this Code regarding noise.
(Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
862.06 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
The Coordinator or an officer of the Police Department or the City Manager may immediately
and without notice revoke a vendor permit. The revocation can be immediate; or the
Coordinator shall send written notice to the vendor at the address set forth in the application.
(Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
862.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE
If the permit is not issued or is revoked, the vendor shall have the right to a hearing before the
Coordinator. Such hearing shall be set within fifteen (15) days of the written notice to the
vendor. If after a hearing, the Coordinator finds that the revocation is supported by a
preponderance of the evidence, the permit shall remain revoked. The vendor shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Directors of the Manistee Downtown Development Authority.
(Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
862.08 FEES
There shall be imposed pursuant to these sections various fees, as established from time to
time by the City Council by resolution which Fee Schedule is incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
862.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with
Section 202.99. (Ord. 07-02 adopted 2-20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 864 Medical Marihuana
Chapter 864
Medical Marihuana
864.01 Intent 864.05 Restriction on Distribution
864.02 Definitions 864.06 No Vested Rights
864.03 Licensure Requirements 864.99 Penalty
864.04 Application for License
CROSS REFERENCES
A Local Government View of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Gerald A.
Fisher, October 5, 2010;
2009 Michigan Administrative Code: 2009 AC, R 333.101 et seq.
Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.
864.01 INTENT
It is the intent of this ordinance to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons in this
community while authorizing permitted uses of medical marihuana as set forth in the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act (MCL 333.26421 et seq. (the Act)). This ordinance shall in no way
prevent otherwise lawful activity that may be described in the Act or the Department of
Community Health Regulations, 2009 Administrative Code: 2009 AC, R 333.101 et seq. or the
amendment of said Act or Regulations.
864.02 DEFINITIONS
The words and phrases contained within this Ordinance shall be interpreted and construed in
accordance with the definitions set forth in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL
333.26421, et seq., and Michigan Administrative Rules, R 333.101, et seq.
864.03 LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS
Activities of a Licensee under this Ordinance shall only occur in accordance with this Ordinance
and only after the licensure of the business of a Caregiver at a particular location. A Licensee
shall fully comply with the requirements of the Act and Administrative Rules promulgated
pursuant to the Act (MCL 333.26421 et seq. and 2009 Administrative Code: 2009 AC, R 333.101
et seq.)
864.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
A. The requirement of this ordinance is to license a location and not to license persons. No
license will be necessary for a patient who is growing and possessing marihuana of 12 plants
or less for personal use. A confidential application for a license under this section shall be
submitted the City of Manistee Police Department and shall be in a form as prescribed by
the City of Manistee Police Department. The Application and all accompanying information
shall be confidential and not subject for disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 864 Medical Marihuana
B. Requirements and standards for approval of licensure and for the activity permitted.
1. Location shall not be within 250 feet from the site of any other caregiver location.
2. Any Location where more than 13 plants are cultivated shall not be within 1,000 feet
from a public or private elementary school, middle school, high school, or community
college.
Measurements for purposes of this sub-section shall be made from property boundary to
property boundary.
C. All medical marihuana cultivation shall occur within the confines of a building licensed
under this section, and such activities shall occur only in locations not visible to the public
and adjoining uses, provided, this subsection shall not prohibit a caregiver from assisting a
patient at the patient’s principal residence.
D. An approval of licensure may include reasonable conditions requested in writing by the
application during the application and review process.
E. All use of the property shall be in accordance with the granted license.
864.05 RESTRICTION ON DISTRIBUTION
A caregiver and any other person authorized under the Act to assist patients, if any, shall
distribute medical marihuana only on a confidential, one-on-one basis, within the patient’s
private residence.
864.06 NO VESTED RIGHTS
A property owner shall not have vested rights or nonconforming use rights that would serve as
a basis for failing to comply with this ordinance or any amendment of this ordinance.
864.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with
Section 202.99.
(Ord. 11-03 adopted 5-4-11)
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
Chapter 866
Medical Marihuana Facilities
866.01 Purpose 866.09 Minimum Operational Standards for
Secure Transporter Facilities
866.02 Definitions 866.10 Location of Grower Facility, Safety
Compliance Facility, Processor Facility
and Secure Transporter Facility
866.03 Authorization of Facilities and Fee 866.11 Denial and Revocation
866.04 Requirements and Procedure for
Issuing Permit
866.12 Permit Renewal
866.05 Minimum Operational Standards
for All Marihuana Facilities within
the City of Manistee
866.13 Applicability
866.06 Minimum Operational Standards
for Grower Facilities
866.14 Penalties and Enforcement
866.065 Minimum Operational Standards
for Provisioning Center Facilities
866.15 Severability
866.07 Minimum Operational Standards
for Safety Compliance Facilities
866.16 Effective Date
866.08 Minimum Operational Standards
for Processor Facilities
CROSS REFERENCES
Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.
Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.
Michigan Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq.
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, Administrative Rules, R
333.101 et seq.
866.01 PURPOSE
A. It is the intent of this ordinance to authorize the establishment of certain types of medical
marihuana facilities in the City of Manistee and provide for the adoption of reasonable
restrictions to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the of the
community at large; retain the character of neighborhoods; and mitigate potential impacts
on surrounding properties and persons. It is also the intent of this ordinance to help defray
administrative and enforcement costs associated with the operation of a marihuana facility
in the City of Manistee through imposition of an annual, nonrefundable permit application
fee of not more than $5,000.00 for each Permit.
B. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to grant immunity from criminal or civil prosecution,
penalty, or sanction for the cultivation, manufacture, possession, use, sale, or distribution of
marihuana, in any form, that is not in compliance with the Medical Marihuana Act, MCL
333.26421 et seq. (MMA); the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
seq. (MMFLA); the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq. (MTA); and all other
applicable rules promulgated by the state of Michigan.
C. As of the effective date of this ordinance, marihuana remains classified as a Schedule 1
controlled substance under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Sec. 801 et
seq., which makes it unlawful to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marihuana, or possess
marihuana with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marihuana. Nothing in this
ordinance is intended to grant immunity from any criminal prosecution under federal law.
(Ord. 18-01 adopted 1-2-18)
866.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance:
A. Any term defined by the MMA shall have the definition given in the MMA.
B. Any term defined by the MMFLA shall have the definition given in the MMFLA.
C. Any term defined by the MTA, shall have the definition given in the MTA.
D. “City” means the City of Manistee.
E. “City Council” means the Manistee City Council
F. “Grower” means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in Michigan that cultivates,
dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center.
G. “Licensee” means a person holding a state operating license issued under the MMFLA.
H. “Marijuana” or “marihuana” means that term as defined in the Michigan Public Health
Code, MCL 333.1101 et seq.; the MMA; the MMFLA; and the MTA.
I. “Marihuana facility” means an enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is
licensed to operate under the MMFLA, including a marihuana grower, marihuana processor,
marihuana secure transporter, or marihuana safety compliance facility. The term does not
include or apply to a “primary caregiver” or “caregiver” as that term is defined in the MMA.
J. “Permit” means the authorization granted by the City for a Licensee’s operation of a
marihuana facility in the City pursuant to this Ordinance.
K. “Permittee” means a person issued a permit to operate a marihuana facility in the City
pursuant to this ordinance.
L. “Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability partnership, trust, or other legal entity.
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
M. “Processor” means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in Michigan that purchases
marihuana from a grower, or also holds a grower’s license, and that extracts resin from the
marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form
to a “safety compliance facility”.
N. “Safety Compliance Facility” means a licensee that is a commercial entity that receives
marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for
contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test
results, and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility.
O. “Secure Transporter” means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in Michigan that
stores marihuana and transports marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee.
P. “Stakeholder” means members of a limited liability company, shareholders of a corporation,
partners of a partnership or investors in the proposed Permitee.
Q. “Zoning Ordinance” means the City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance adopted February 21,
2006, as amended.
R. “Provisioning Center” means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that
purchases marihuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana
to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary
caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold
at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial
location used by a registered primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to
the caregiver through the department's marihuana registration process in accordance with
the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act is not a provisioning center for purposes of this act.
(Ord. 18-01 adopted 1-2-18) (Ord.19-17 Added item R. adopted 6-4-19)
866.03 AUTHORIZATION OF FACILITIES AND FEE.
A. The maximum number of each type of marihuana facility permits allowed in the City shall
be as follows:
Facility Number
Grower Unlimited
Processor 2
Provisioning Center Unlimited
Secure Transporter 2
Safety Compliance 2
(Ord. 18-01 adopted 1-2-18) (Ord.19-17 adopted 6-4-19) (Ord. 19-20 adopted 8-20-19) (Ord. 20-01 adopted 1-21-
2020)
B. A nonrefundable permit application fee shall be paid by each marihuana facility permitted
under this ordinance in an annual amount of not more than $5,000.00 as set by resolution
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 4
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
of the City Council to defray the administrative and enforcement costs of the City associated
with the operation of the licensed marihuana facility. The application fee is in addition to
any other fees required, including, but not limited to, zoning fees.
C. Should the City grant a marihuana facility permit, the permit application fee shall be
considered as the nonrefundable fee imposed for the first year the Permit is granted. Prior
to the expiration of the first year of the Permit, and as provided in this Ordinance in Section
866.12, the Permitee may apply for an extension/renewal of the Permit for an additional
one year period at a nonrefundable fee of not more than $5,000 as set by resolution of the
City Council.
866.04 REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE FOR ISSUING LICENSE
A. No person shall operate a marihuana facility in the City without a valid Permit issued by the
City pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
B. No person shall be issued a Permit by the City without first having obtained from the City of
Manistee Planning Commission a Special Use Permit authorizing the operation of the facility
pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Every applicant for a Permit to operate a marihuana facility shall file an application in the
City Clerk’s office upon a form provided by the City. The application shall include:
1. The appropriate nonrefundable permit application fee in the amount determined by the
City;
2. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant’s name; date of birth; Social Security
number; physical address, including residential and any business address; copy of
government-issued photo identification; email address; one or more phone numbers,
including emergency contact information;
3. If the applicant is not an individual, the names; dates of birth; physical addresses,
including residential and any business address; copy of government-issued photo
identifications; email address; and one or more phone numbers of each Stakeholder of
the applicant, including designation of the highest ranking representative as an
emergency contact person; contact information for the emergency contact person;
articles of incorporation or organization; assumed name registration; Internal Revenue
Service EIN confirmation letter; copy of the operating agreement of the applicant, if a
limited liability company; copy of the partnership agreement, if a partnership; names
and addresses of the beneficiaries, if a trust, or a copy of the bylaws or shareholder
agreement, if a corporation;
4. The name and address of the proposed marihuana facility;
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 5
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
5. For the applicant and for each Stakeholder and employee of the applicant, an
affirmation that each and every person is at least 18 years of age and has not been
convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to a felony or controlled-substance-related
misdemeanor;
6. Before hiring a prospective agent or employee of the applicant, the holder of a license
to operate shall conduct a background check of the prospective employee or agent. If
the background check indicates a pending charge or conviction within the past ten (10)
years for a controlled substance-related felony, the applicant shall not hire the
prospective employee or agent without written permission from the City Clerk;
7. A signed release authorizing the City of Manistee Police Department to perform a
criminal background check to ascertain whether the applicant, each Stakeholder of the
applicant, and each employee of the applicant meet the criteria set forth in this chapter,
the cost of which will be charged to the applicant. Alternatively, the applicant may
satisfy this requirement by providing to the City a criminal background check conducted
by the Michigan State Police or other law enforcement agency;
8. The name, date of birth, physical address (residential and any business address), copy of
photo identification, and email address for any managerial employee of the marihuana
facility, if other than the applicant or Stakeholder of applicant;
9. An affirmation under oath as to whether the applicant or Stakeholder of applicant has
ever applied for or been granted a commercial license or certificate issued by a licensing
authority in Michigan or any other jurisdiction that has been denied, restricted,
suspended, revoked, or not renewed, and a statement describing the facts and
circumstances concerning the application, denial, restriction, suspension, revocation, or
nonrenewal, including the licensing authority, the date each action was taken, and the
reason for each action;
10. One of the following: (a) proof of ownership of the entire premises wherein the
marihuana facility is to be operated; or (b) written consent from the property owner for
use of the premises as outlined in the application, along with a copy of the lease for the
premises;
11. A description of the security plan for the marihuana facility, including, but not limited to,
any lighting, alarms, barriers, recording/monitoring devices, and/or security guard
arrangements proposed for the facility and premises. The security plan must contain
the specification and details of each piece of security equipment. Each medical
marihuana establishment must have a security guard present during business hours or
alternative security procedures shall be proposed in the business plan;
12. A crisis response plan;
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 6
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
13. A copy of the Special Use Permit issued by the City of Manistee Planning Commission;
14. A floor plan of the marihuana facility, as well as a scale diagram illustrating the property
upon which the marihuana facility is to be operated, and the location of the Material
Safety Data Sheets;
15. A list of any chemicals that are or will be stored on the premises;
16. An affidavit that neither the applicant nor any Stakeholder of the applicant is in default
to the City. Specifically, that neither the applicant nor Stakeholder of the applicant has
failed to pay any property taxes, special assessments, fines, fee, or other financial
obligations to the City;
17. An affidavit that the transfer of marihuana to and from the marihuana facility shall be in
compliance with the MMA and the MMFLA and all other applicable Michigan law;
18. An estimate of the number and type of jobs that the medical marihuana establishment
is expected to create and the amount and type of compensation expected to be paid for
such jobs;
19. A business plan which contains, but is not limited to, the following:
a) The applicant’s experience in operating other similarly permitted or licensed
businesses and the applicant’s general business management experience;
b) The proposed ownership structure of the establishment, including percentage
ownership of each person or entity;
c) A current organizational chart that includes position descriptions and the names of
each person holding each position;
d) Planned tangible capital investment in the City, including if multiple permits are
proposed, an explanation of the economic benefits to the City and job creation, if
any, to be achieved through the award of such multiple permits, with supporting
factual data;
e) Expected job creation from the proposed medical marihuana establishment(s);
f) Financial structure and financing of the proposed medical marihuana
establishment(s);
g) If a Medical Marihuana Grower Facility is proposed, the number of plants
anticipated; and
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 7
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
h) Community outreach/education plans and strategies;
20. A written description of the training and education that the Applicant will provide to all
employees, including planned continuing education for existing employees. Further, a
written description of the method(s) for record retention of all training provided to
existing and former employees;
21. A location area map of the marihuana facility and surrounding area that identifies the
relative locations and the distances (closest property line to the subject marihuana
facility’s building) to the closest real property comprising a public or private elementary,
vocational or secondary school; and church or religious institution, if recognized as a
tax-exempt entity by the City Assessor’s Office;
22. A facility sanitation plan to protect against any marihuana being ingested by any person
or animal, indicating how the waste will be stored and disposed of, and how any
marihuana will be rendered unusable upon disposal. Disposal by on-site burning or
introduction into the sewerage system is prohibited;
23. A description of procedures for testing of contaminants, including mold and pesticides;
24. A signed acknowledgment that the applicant is aware and understands that all matters
related to marihuana growing, cultivation, possession, testing, safety compliance and
transporting, are currently subject to state and federal laws, rules and regulations, and
that the approval or granting of a permit hereunder does not exonerate or exculpate
the applicant from abiding by the provisions and requirements and penalties associated
with those laws, rules, and regulations, or exposure to any penalties associated
therewith; and further, the applicant waives and forever releases any claim, demand,
action, legal redress, or recourse against the City, its elected and appointed officials, and
its employees and agents for any claims, damages, liabilities, causes of action, damages,
or attorney fees that the applicant may incur as a result of the violation by the applicant,
its Stakeholders and agents of those laws, rules, and regulations.
25. All cultivation must be performed within an enclosed, locked facility and there shall be
no illumination from the operation outside of the facility. The applicant shall specifically
acknowledge this provision;
26. As it relates to a Marihuana Grower Facility, the following additional items shall be
required:
a) A grower/cultivation plan that includes, at a minimum, a description of the
cultivation methods to be used, including plans for the growing mediums,
treatments, and/or additives;
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 8
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
b) A production testing plan that includes, at a minimum, a description of how and
when samples for laboratory testing by a state-approved Safety Compliance Facility
will be selected, what type of testing will be requested, and how the test results will
be used;
c) An affidavit that all operations will be conducted in conformance with the MMMA,
the MMFLA, MTA, and/or other applicable Michigan law;
d) A chemical and pesticide storage plan that states the names of chemicals and
pesticides to be used in cultivation, and where and how pesticides and chemicals will
be stored in the facility, along with a plan for the disposal of unused pesticides and
chemicals;
27. Any other information which may be required by the City Clerk.
D. Upon an applicant’s completion of the above-described form and furnishing of all required
information and documentation, the City Clerk shall file the same and assign it a sequential
application number by facility type based on the date and time of acceptance. The City
Clerk shall act to approve or deny an application not later than twenty-one (21) days from
the date the completed application is filed. If approved, the City Clerk shall issue the
applicant a provisional permit and subsequently a final permit after issuance by the state of
Michigan of an operating license. If the application is denied, the City Clerk shall issue a
written notice of denial to the Applicant and mail the same by first class mail to the address
for the Applicant provided in the application. A final permit shall be valid for one (1) year
from the date of the issuance of the provisional permit. A provisional permit may not be
renewed and shall be valid for one (1) year. (Ord. 19-20 amended 8-20-19)
E. Should the City Clerk deny an application, the Applicant shall have fourteen (14) days from
the mailing of the denial to appeal the denial to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal
with the City Manager’s Office. The City Manager may require additional information or act
upon the appeal based upon the information supplied to the City Clerk. Should the City
Manager reverse the decision of the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall issue a provisional
permit. Should the City Manager affirm the decision of the City Clerk, the City Manager
shall mail a written notice affirming the decision by first class mail to the address for the
Applicant provided in the application.
F. The Applicant shall have fourteen (14) days from the mailing of a decision by the City
Manager affirming the decision of the City Clerk to appeal to the City Council. To appeal the
decision of the City Manager the Applicant must file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk.
City Council shall hear the appeal at its next regular meeting, but not sooner than 7 days
from the receipt of the appeal.
G. Maintaining a valid license issued by the state is a condition for the maintenance of a Permit
under this ordinance and continued operation of a marihuana facility. A provisional permit
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 9
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
does not authorize operations until a final permit is issued, which will only occur upon
issuance of the appropriate license by the state of Michigan and the issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy.
H. A Permit issued under this ordinance is not transferable without the prior approval of the
City under the same terms and conditions required for the initial issuance of a permit under
this Ordinance.
866.05 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR ALL MARIHUANA FACILITIES
WITHIN THE CITY OF MANISTEE
The following minimum standards shall apply to all Marihuana Facilities within the City:
A. Marihuana Facilities shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the MMMA,
MMFLA, and applicable Michigan law, and the general rules of the Department of Licensing
and Regulatory Affairs, as they may be amended from time to time. It is the responsibility
of the owner to be aware of changes in the MMFLA. The City bears no responsibility for
failure of the owner to be unaware of changes in the MMFLA;
B. Consumption and/or use of marihuana shall be prohibited at the facility;
C. The facility shall be open, at all times, to any Michigan Medical Marihuana Licensing Board
investigator, agent, auditor, state police officer, or City of Manistee Police Officer, without a
warrant and without notice to the licensee, and said individual(s) may enter the premises,
offices, facilities, or other places of business of a Permittee, for the following purposes:
1. To inspect and examine all premises of Marihuana Facilities.
2. To inspect, examine, and audit relevant records of the Permittee and, if the Permittee or
any employee fails to cooperate with an investigation, impound, seize, assume physical
control of, or summarily remove from the premises all books, ledgers, documents,
writings, photocopies, correspondence, records, and videotapes, including electronically
stored records, money receptacles, or equipment in which the records are stored.
3. To inspect persons, and inspect or examine personal effects present in a marihuana
facility.
4. To investigate alleged violations of the MMA, MMFLA, this ordinance and applicable
Michigan law.
D. The marihuana facility shall be continuously monitored with a surveillance system that
includes security cameras. The video recordings shall be maintained in a secure, offsite
location for a period of fourteen (14) days and be available upon request of the City of
Manistee Police Department. The storage facility shall not be used for any other commercial
purpose.
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 10
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
E. The marihuana facility shall not be open or accessible to the general public.
F. The marihuana facility shall be maintained and operated so as to comply with all state and
local rules, regulations and ordinances. All Marihuana Facilities shall comply with
applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, including obtaining and maintaining a
Special Use Permit.
G. All marihuana shall be contained within an enclosed, locked facility;
H. All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits shall be obtained for any
portion of the structure in which electrical wiring, lighting and/or watering devices that
support the Grower, growing or harvesting of marihuana are located;
I. All persons working in direct contact with marihuana shall conform to acceptable hygienic
practices while on duty, including, but not limited to:
1. Maintaining adequate personal cleanliness;
2. Washing hands thoroughly in adequate hand-washing areas before starting work and at
any other time when their hands may have become soiled or contaminated;
3. Refraining from having direct contact with marihuana if the person has or may have an
illness, open lesion, including boils, sores or infected wounds, or any other abnormal
source of microbial contamination, until the condition is corrected.
J. Litter and waste shall be properly removed and the operating systems for waste disposal
shall be maintained in an adequate manner so that they do not constitute a source of
contamination.
K. Floors, walls and ceilings shall be constructed in such a manner that they may be
adequately cleaned and kept clean and in good repair;
L. There shall be adequate screening or other protection against the entry of pests. Rubbish
shall be disposed of so as to minimize the development of odor and minimize the potential
for the waste development of odor and minimize the potential for waste becoming an
attractant, harborage or breeding place for pests;
M. Marihuana that can support the rapid growth of undesirable microorganisms including but
not limited to mold shall be held in a manner that prevents the growth of these
microorganisms;
N. All building fixtures and other facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition;
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 11
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
O. Odor from operations shall be controlled as provided in the Zoning Ordinance and as may
be required under the Special Use Permit issued to the Permittee.
(Ord.18-01 adopted 1-2-18) (Ord.19-17, Deleted items O & P Re-lettered sequence adopted 6-4-19)
866.06 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR GROWER FACILITIES
The following minimum standards for Grower Facilities shall apply:
A. Grower Facilities shall maintain a log book and/or database indicating the number of
Marihuana Plants therein;
B. The facility shall be subject to inspection by the City of Manistee Fire Department to insure
compliance with all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances; and
C. Multiple Grower Facility Permits in a single location shall be permitted, subject to approval
of the same by the City Clerk.
866.065 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR PROVISIONING
CENTER FACILITIES
The following minimum standards for Provisioning Center Facilities shall apply:
A. Applicant for Permit and all Stakeholders may not have an interest in a secure transporter
or safety compliance facility;
B. There shall be no sale, consumption or use of alcohol or tobacco products on the permitted
premises; and
C. Before selling or transferring marihuana to a registered qualifying patient or to a registered
primary caregiver on behalf of a registered qualifying patient, the provisioning center shall
inquire of the State of Michigan through the statewide monitoring system to determine
whether the patient and, if applicable, caregiver, hold a valid, current, unexpired, and
unrevoked registry identification card and that the sale or transfer will not exceed the daily
and monthly purchasing limit established by the medical marihuana licensing board under
this Act. .
(Ord. 19-17 added 866.065 adopted 6-4-19)
866.07 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITIES
The following minimum standards for Safety Compliance Facilities shall apply:
A. Safety Compliance Facilities shall maintain a log book and/or database which complies with
the MMMA and MMFLA or applicable Michigan law; and
B. There shall be no other accessory uses permitted within the same facility other than those
associated with testing marihuana.
866.08 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS OF PROCESSOR FACILITIES
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 12
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
The following minimum standards for Processor Facilities shall apply:
A. All activity related to the Processor Facility shall occur indoors;
B. Processor Facilities shall maintain a log book and/or database which complies with the
MMA, as amended, and MMFLA or other applicable state laws;
C. All marihuana shall be tagged as required by the MMA, the MMFLA or applicable state laws;
D. That structure shall be subject to inspection at any time by the City of Manistee Fire
Department to insure compliance with all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances; and
E. Processor Facilities shall produce no products other than useable marihuana intended for
human consumption.
866.09 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SECURE TRANSPORTER FACILITIES
The following minimum standards for Secure Transporter Facilities shall apply:
A. Secure Transporters and each Secure Transporter Stakeholder shall not have an interest in a
Grower, Processor, Provisioning Center or Safety Compliance Facility and shall not be a
registered qualifying patient or a registered primary caregiver.
B. A Secure Transporter shall enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information
as required by the state into the statewide monitoring system.
C. A Secure Transporter shall comply with all of the following:
1. Each driver transporting marihuana shall have a chauffeur's license issued by the state.
2. Each employee who has custody of marihuana or money that is related to a marihuana
transaction shall not have been convicted of or released from incarceration for a felony
under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States within the past five (5)
years or have been convicted of a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance within
the past five (5) years, or as may be otherwise required by the state of Michigan.
3. Each vehicle shall be operated with a two-person crew with at least one individual
remaining with the vehicle at all times during the transportation of marihuana.
4. A route plan and manifest shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system, and a
copy shall be carried in the transporting vehicle and presented to a law enforcement
officer upon request.
5. The marihuana shall be transported by one or more sealed containers and shall not be
accessible while in transit.
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 13
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
6. A secure transporting vehicle shall not bear markings or other indication that it is
carrying marihuana or a marihuana infused product.
D. A vehicle used by a Secure Transporter is subject to administrative inspection by a law
enforcement officer at any point during the transportation of marihuana to determine
compliance with all state and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances.
866.10 LOCATION OF GROWER FACILITY, SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY, PROCESSOR
FACILITY, PROVISIONING CENTER FACILITY AND SECURE TRANSPORTER
FACILITY
A. All Grower Facilities, Safety Compliance Facilities, Processor Facilities, Provisioning Center
Facilities and Secure Transporter Facilities shall only operate and be located within the
permitted areas as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 18-01 adopted 1-2-8) (Ord. 19-17
adopted 6-4-19)
B. Multiple Facility Permits at a single location shall be permitted subject to the review and
approval by the City Clerk and subject to the requirements of the state of Michigan.
866.11 DENIAL AND REVOCATION
A. A Permit issued under this Ordinance may be revoked after an administrative hearing at
which the City Clerk determines that grounds for revocation under this Ordinance exist.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing and the grounds for revocation must be given to
the holder of a Permit at least five days prior to the date of the hearing, by first class mail to
the address given on the permit application; a licensee whose permit is the subject of such
hearing may present evidence and/or call witnesses at the hearing;
B. A Permit applied for or issued under this Ordinance may be denied or revoked on any of the
following basis:
1. Any violation of this Ordinance;
2. Any conviction of or release from incarceration for a felony under the laws of this State,
any other state, or the United States within the past five (5) years by the Applicant or
any stakeholder of the Applicant as measured from the date of the Application or the
date of becoming a stakeholder, whichever occurs later, or while licensed under this
Ordinance; or any conviction of the Applicant or any stakeholder of the Applicant of a
controlled substance-related felony at any time, including prior to and after permitted
under this Ordinance;
3. City Clerk finding of fraud, misrepresentation or the making of a false statement by the
Applicant or any stakeholder of the Applicant while engaging in any activity for which
this Ordinance requires a Permit or in connection with the Application for a Permit or
request to renew a Permit;
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 14
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
4. Material failure to fulfill the business plan described in Section 866.04 C. 19 of this
Ordinance.
5. Sufficient evidence that the Permittee lacks, or has failed to demonstrate, the requisite
professionalism and/or business experience required to assure strict adherence to this
ordinance, and the rules and regulations governing the Medical Marihuana Program in
the state of Michigan;
6. The Permit holder or any of its Stakeholders is in default to the City personally or in
connection with any business in which they hold an ownership interest, for failure to
pay property taxes, special assessments, fines, fees or other financial obligation;
7. The marihuana facility is determined by the City to have become a public nuisance; or
8. The Michigan Medical Marihuana Licensing Board has denied, revoked or suspended the
applicant's state operating license.
C. Should the City Clerk revoke a Permit, the Permittee shall have fourteen (14) days from the
mailing of the written notice of revocation to appeal the decision to the City Manager. The
City Manager may require additional information or act upon the appeal based upon the
information supplied to the City Clerk. Should the City Manager reverse the decision of the
City Clerk, the City Clerk shall reinstate permit. Should the City Manager affirm the decision
of the City Clerk, he/she shall mail by first class mail a written notice affirming the decision
to the address for the Permittee contained in the Clerk’s records.
D. Should the City Manager affirm the denial, revocation or suspension of a Permit by the City
Clerk, the Permittee shall have fourteen (14) days from the mailing of the decision of the
City Manager to appeal the decision to Council, by filing with the City Clerk a written notice
of appeal. Council shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, but no
sooner than 7 days from the receipt of the appeal.
866.12 PERMIT RENEWAL
A. A Permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless revoked as provided
by law, including this Ordinance.
B. A valid Permit may be renewed on an annual basis by submitting a renewal application
upon a form provided by the City and payment of the annual permit fee. Applications to
renew a Permit shall be filed with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of
its expiration. As long as no changes to the Permittee have occurred and there is no
pending request to revoke or suspend a Permit, and the Permittee has paid the Permit
Renewal Fee, the City Clerk shall renew the Permit.
866.13 APPLICABILITY
Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 15
Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable to all persons and facilities described
herein, including if the operations or activities associated with a marihuana facility were
established without authorization before the effective date of this ordinance.
866.14 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the payment of a civil fine of $500, plus costs. Each
day a violation of this Ordinance continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. A
violator of this Ordinance shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and
judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan law.
B. A violation of this Ordinance is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In addition to any other
remedy available at law, the City may bring an action for an injunction or other process
against a Permittee to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this Ordinance.
C. This Ordinance shall be enforced and administered by the City Clerk, City of Manistee Police
Officer, City Manager or such other city official as may be designated from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
866.15 SEVERABILITY
In the event that any one or more sections, provisions, phrases or words of this Ordinance shall
be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the
validity or the enforceability of the remaining sections, provisions, phrases or words of this
Ordinance.
866.16 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect January 12, 2018 in accordance with law.
(Ord 18-01 adopted 1-2-18)
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 1
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
Chapter 867
Recreational Marihuana
867.01 Definitions 867.09 Minimum Operational
Standards for Marihuana
Microbusiness Establishments
867.02 No Marihuana Establishments 867.10 Minimum Operational
Standards for Marihuana
Retailers
867.03 Requirements and Procedure for
Issuing Municipal License
867.11 Location of Grower
Establishment, Safety
Compliance Establishment,
Processor Establishment, and
Secure Transport Establishment
867.04 Minimum Operational Standards
for All Marihuana Establishments
within the City of Manistee
867.12 Denial and Revocation
867.05 Minimum Operational Standards
for Marihuana Grower
Establishments
867.13 License Renewal
867.06
Minimum Operational Standards
for Safety Compliance
Establishments
867.14 Unlawful Activities
867.07 Minimum Operational Standards
for Marihuana Processor
Establishments
867.15 Applicability
867.08 Minimum Operational Standards
for Secure Transporter
Establishments
867.16 Penalties and Enforcement
867.17 Severability
CROSS REFERENCES
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951 et seq.
Medical Marihuana Facilities - Chapter 866
Penalty, Municipal Civil Infractions – Chapter 203
867.01 DEFINITIONS
A. Words and phrases used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in Initiated Law 1 of
2018, MCL 333.27953 (hereafter, the “Act”) as the same may be amended from time to time,
which words and phrases are incorporated herein by reference.
B. “City Council” shall mean the City of Manistee Council.
C. “City Clerk” shall mean the City of Manistee Clerk.
D. “LARA” shall mean the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs.
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 2
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
E. “Person” shall mean an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership of any
type, trust or other legal entity.
F. “Stakeholder” shall mean and shareholder of a corporation, partner in a partnership, member
of a limited liability company or individual of a sole proprietorship.
G. “Zoning Ordinance” shall mean the City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 19-02 adopted 2-5-19.) (Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.02. AUTHORIZATION OF MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND FEE
A. The City hereby authorizes, subject to the issuance of a municipal license by the City Clerk,
the following marihuana establishments within the boundaries of the City, as are authorized
pursuant to section 6.1. of the Act. The establishments authorized pursuant to this Chapter
are relating to the Act and are not Marihuana Facilities that may be authorized pursuant to
the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. and Chapter 866 of the
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances.
B. The marihuana establishments and the number authorized pursuant to this Ordinance are:
Type of Establishment Number Authorized
Marihuana Grower Unlimited
Marihuana Processor 12
Marihuana Microbusiness 5
Marihuana Retailer 5
Marihuana Safety Compliance Establishment 2
Marihuana Secure Transporter 2
Marihuana Designated Consumption Establishment 0
Only those establishments listed are authorized in the City of Manistee, any others are
prohibited.
(Ord. 19-02 adopted 2-5-19.) (Ord.19-23 adopted 10-1-19)(Ord. 20-01 adopted 1-21-2020)
C. A nonrefundable municipal license application fee shall be paid by each marihuana
establishment applying to be licensed under this ordinance in the amount of $5,000.00. The
municipal license fee is in addition to any other fees required, including, but not limited to,
zoning fees.
D. Should the City grant a marihuana establishment a municipal license, the municipal license
application fee shall be considered as the fee imposed for the first year the license is granted.
Prior to the expiration of the first year of the license, and as provided in this Ordinance in
Section 866.12, the licensee may apply for an extension/renewal of the municipal license for
an additional one year period at a nonrefundable fee of not more than $5,000 as set by
resolution of the City Council to defray the administrative and enforcement costs of the City
associated with the operation of the licensed marihuana establishment.
(Ord. 19-02 adopted 2-5-19.) (Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 3
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
867.03 REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE FOR ISSUING MUNICIPAL LICENSE
A. No person shall operate a marihuana establishment in the City without a valid municipal
license issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
B. No person shall be issued a municipal license by the City without first having obtained from
the City of Manistee Planning Commission a Special Use Permit authorizing the operation of
the establishment pursuant to the City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance.
C. No person who is employed by the City, acts as a consultant for the City or acts as an advisor
to the City, and is involved in the implementation, administration or enforcement of this
Ordinance shall have an interest, directly or indirectly, in a Marihuana Establishment.
D. Every applicant for a municipal license to operate a marihuana establishment shall file an
application in the City Clerk’s office upon a form provided by the City. The application shall
include:
1. The appropriate nonrefundable municipal license application fee in the amount
determined by the City;
2. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant’s name; date of birth; Social Security
number; physical address, including residential and any business address; copy of
government-issued photo identification; email address; one or more phone numbers,
including emergency contact information;
3. If the applicant is not an individual, the names; dates of birth; physical addresses,
including residential and any business address; copy of government-issued photo
identifications; email address; and one or more phone numbers of each Stakeholder of
the applicant, including designation of the highest ranking representative as an
emergency contact person; contact information for the emergency contact person;
articles of incorporation or organization; assumed name registration; Internal Revenue
Service EIN confirmation letter; copy of the operating agreement of the applicant, if a
limited liability company; copy of the partnership agreement, if a partnership; names and
addresses of the beneficiaries, if a trust, or a copy of the bylaws or shareholder
agreement, if a corporation;
4. The name and address of the proposed marihuana establishment;
5. A copy of the Special Use Permit issued by the City of Manistee Planning Commission;
6. A location area map of the marihuana establishment and surrounding area that identifies
the relative locations and the distances (closest property line to the subject marihuana
establishment’s building) to the closest real property comprising a public or private
elementary, vocational or secondary school;
7. A signed acknowledgment that the applicant is aware and understands that all matters
related to marihuana growing, cultivation, possession, testing, safety compliance and
transporting, are currently subject to state and federal laws, rules and regulations, and
that the approval or granting of a license hereunder does not exonerate or exculpate the
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 4
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
applicant from abiding by the provisions and requirements and penalties associated with
those laws, rules, and regulations, or exposure to any penalties associated therewith; and
further, the applicant waives and forever releases any claim, demand, action, legal
redress, or recourse against the City, its elected and appointed officials, and its employees
and agents for any claims, damages, liabilities, causes of action, damages, or attorney fees
that the applicant may incur as a result of the violation by the applicant, its Stakeholders
and agents of those laws, rules, and regulations; and
8. Any other information which may be required by the City Clerk.
E. Upon an applicant’s completion of the above-described form and furnishing of all required
information and documentation, the City Clerk shall file the same and assign it a sequential
application number by establishment type based on the date and time of acceptance. The
City Clerk shall act to approve or deny an application not later than twenty-one (21) days from
the date the completed application is filed. If approved, the City Clerk shall issue the applicant
a provisional License and subsequently a final license after issuance by the state of Michigan
of an operating license. If the application is denied, the City Clerk shall issue a written notice
of denial to the Applicant and mail the same by first class mail to the address for the Applicant
provided in the application. A final license shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of the
issuance of the provisional license. A provisional license may not be renewed and shall be
valid for one (1) year. (Ord. 19-02. Passed 2-5-19.)(Ord.19-23. Adopted 10-1-19)
F. Should the City Clerk deny an application, the Applicant shall have fourteen (14) days from
the mailing of the denial to appeal the denial to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal
with the City Manager’s Office. The City Manager may require additional information or Act
upon the appeal based upon the information supplied to the City Clerk. Should the City
Manager reverse the decision of the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall issue a provisional license.
Should the City Manager affirm the decision of the City Clerk, the City Manager shall mail a
written notice affirming the decision by first class mail to the address for the Applicant
provided in the application.
G. The Applicant shall have fourteen (14) days from the mailing of a decision by the City Manager
affirming the decision of the City Clerk to appeal to the City Council. To appeal the decision
of the City Manager the Applicant must file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk. City Council
shall hear the appeal at its next regular meeting, but not sooner than 7 days from the receipt
of the appeal.
H. Maintaining a valid license issued by the state is a condition for the maintenance of a license
under this ordinance and continued operation of a marihuana establishment. A provisional
license does not authorize operations until a final license is issued, which will only occur upon
issuance of the appropriate license by the state of Michigan and the issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy.
I. A License issued under this ordinance is not transferable without the prior approval of the
City under the same terms and conditions required for the initial issuance of a license under
this Ordinance.
J. The Act in Section 9. 4. (MCL 333.27959 4.) requires that the City establish a competitive
process to select applicants who are best suited to operate in compliance with the Act and
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 5
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
this Ordinance, when more than one applicant has applied for a single available license.
Pursuant to this requirement the City requires that applicants:
1. An estimate of the number and type of jobs that the marihuana establishment is expected
to create and the amount and type of compensation expected to be paid for such jobs;
2. A business plan which contains, but is not limited to, the following:
i. The applicant’s experience in operating other similarly permitted or licensed
businesses and the applicant’s general business management experience;
ii. The proposed ownership structure of the establishment, including percentage
ownership of each person or entity;
iii. A current organizational chart that includes position descriptions and the names
of each person holding each position;
iv. Planned tangible capital investment in the City, including if multiple permits are
proposed, an explanation of the economic benefits to the City and job creation,
if any, to be achieved through the award of such multiple permits, with
supporting factual data;
v. Expected job creation from the proposed marihuana establishment(s);
v. If a Marihuana Grower Establishment is proposed, the number of plants
anticipated
vi. Financial structure and financing of the proposed marihuana establishment(s);
and;
viii. Community outreach/education plans and strategies.
3. A written description of the training and education that the Applicant will provide to all
employees, including planned continuing education for existing employees. Further, a
written description of the method(s) for record retention of all training provided to
existing and former employees;
4. A location area map of the marihuana facility and surrounding area that identifies the
relative locations and the distances (closest property line to the subject marihuana
facility’s building) to the closest real property comprising a public or private elementary,
vocational or secondary school; and church or religious institution, if recognized as a taxexempt
entity by the City Assessor’s Office; and
5. A facility sanitation plan to protect against any marihuana being ingested by any person
or animal, indicating how the waste will be stored and disposed of, and how any
marihuana will be rendered unusable upon disposal. Disposal by on-site burning or
introduction into the sewerage system is prohibited.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 6
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
867.04 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR ALL MARIHUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS WITHIN THE CITY OF MANISTEE
The following minimum standards shall apply to all Marihuana Establishments within the
City:
A. Marihuana Establishments shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the
Act, and applicable Michigan law, and the general rules of the Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, as they may be amended from time to time. It is
the responsibility of the owner to be aware of changes in the Act. The City bears no
responsibility for failure of the owner to be unaware of changes in the Act;
B. Consumption and/or use of marihuana shall be prohibited at the establishment;
C. The establishment shall be open, during regular business hours, to any
representative of LARA, state police officer, or City of Manistee Police Officer, and
said individual(s) may enter the premises, offices, Establishments, or other places of
business of a Licensee, for the following purposes:
1. To inspect and examine all premises of Marihuana Establishments;
2. To inspect, examine, and audit relevant records of the Licensee and, if the Licensee
or any employee fails to cooperate with an investigation, impound, seize, assume
physical control of, or summarily remove from the premises all books, ledgers,
documents, writings, photocopies, correspondence, records, and videotapes,
including electronically stored records, money receptacles, or equipment in which
the records are stored; and
3. To investigate alleged violations of the Act, this ordinance and applicable Michigan
law.
D. The marihuana establishment shall be continuously monitored with a surveillance
system that includes security cameras. The video recordings shall be maintained in a
secure, offsite
location for a period of fourteen (14) days and be available upon
request of the City of Manistee Police Department. The storage establishment shall
not be used for any other commercial purpose.
E. The marihuana establishment shall secure every entrance to the establishment and
only permit those individuals described in this Ordinance or the Act access to the
premises.
F. The marihuana establishment shall be maintained and operated so as to comply with
all state and local rules, regulations and ordinances. All Marihuana Establishments
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 7
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
shall comply with applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, including
obtaining and maintaining a Special Use License.
G. All marihuana shall be contained within an enclosed, secure area;
H. All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits shall be obtained
for any portion of the structure in which electrical wiring, lighting and/or watering
devices that support the Grower, growing or harvesting of marihuana are located;
I. All persons working in direct contact with marihuana shall conform to acceptable
hygienic practices while on duty, including, but not limited to:
1. Maintaining adequate personal cleanliness;
2. Washing hands thoroughly in adequate hand-washing areas before starting work
and at any other time when their hands may have become soiled or
contaminated; and
3. Refraining from having direct contact with marihuana if the person has or may
have an illness, open lesion, including boils, sores or infected wounds, or any
other abnormal source of microbial contamination, until the condition is
corrected.
J. Litter and waste shall be properly removed and the operating systems for waste
disposal shall be maintained in an adequate manner so that they do not constitute a
source of contamination.
K. Floors, walls and ceilings shall be constructed in such a manner that they may
be adequately cleaned and kept clean and in good repair;
L. There shall be adequate screening or other protection against the entry of pests.
Rubbish shall be disposed of so as to minimize the development of odor and minimize
the potential for the waste development of odor and minimize the potential for
waste becoming an attractant, harborage or breeding place for pests;
M. All building fixtures and other Establishments shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition;
N. Odor from operations shall be controlled as provided in the Zoning Ordinance and as
may be required under the Special Use License issued to the Licensee.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 8
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
867.05 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MARIHUANA GROWER
ESTABLISHMENTS
The following minimum standards for Grower Establishments shall apply:
A. Grower Establishments shall maintain a log book and/or database indicating the
number of Marihuana Plants therein;
B. A Stakeholder in a Grower Establishment shall not holder an ownership interest,
directly or indirectly, in more than five (5) Marihuana Grower Establishments.
C. The establishment shall be subject to inspection by the City of Manistee Fire
Department to insure compliance with all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances;
and
D. Multiple Grower Establishment Licenses in a single location shall be permitted,
subject to approval of the same by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.06 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SAFETY COMPLIANCE
ESTABLISHMENTS
The following minimum standards for Safety Compliance Establishments shall apply:
A. Safety Compliance Establishments shall maintain a log book and/or database which
complies with the Act or applicable Michigan law; and
B. There shall be no other accessory uses permitted within the same establishment other
than those associated with testing marihuana.
C. A Stakeholder in a Safety Compliance Establishment shall not hold an ownership
interest, directly or indirectly, in a Grower, Processor, Retailer or Microbusiness
Establishment.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.07 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS OF MARIHUANA PROCESSOR
ESTABLISHMENTS
The following minimum standards for Processor Establishments shall apply:
A. All Activity related to the Processor Establishment shall occur indoors;
B. Processor Establishments shall maintain a log book and/or database which complies
with the Act or other applicable state laws;
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 9
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
C. All marihuana shall be tagged as required by the Act or applicable state laws;
D. That structure shall be subject to inspection at any time by the City of Manistee Fire
Department to insure compliance with all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances;
and
E. Processor Establishments shall produce no products other than useable marihuana
intended for human consumption.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.08 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SECURE TRANSPORTER
ESTABLISHMENTS
The following minimum standards for Secure Transporter Establishments shall apply:
A. Secure Transporters and each Secure Transporter Stakeholder shall not hold an
ownership interest, directly or indirectly, in a Grower, Processor, Retailer or
Microbusiness Establishment.
B. A Secure Transporter shall enter all transactions, current inventory, and other
information as required by the state into the statewide monitoring system.
C. A Secure Transporter shall comply with all of the following:
1. Each driver transporting marihuana shall have a chauffeur's license issued by the
state.
2. Each employee who has custody of marihuana or money that is related to a
marihuana transaction shall not have been convicted of delivery of a controlled
substance.
3. Each vehicle shall be operated with a two-person crew with at least one individual
remaining with the vehicle at all times during the transportation of marihuana.
4. The marihuana shall be transported by one or more sealed containers and shall
not be accessible while in transit.
5. A secure transporting vehicle shall not bear markings or other indication that it is
carrying marihuana or a marihuana infused product.
D. A vehicle used by a Secure Transporter is subject to administrative inspection by a law
enforcement officer at any point during the transportation of marihuana to determine
compliance with all state and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances.
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 10
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.09 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MARIHUANA
MICROBUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
The following minimum standards for Marihuana Microbusiness Establishments shall
apply:
A. A Stakeholder in a Microbusiness Establishment shall not hold an ownership interest,
directly or indirectly, in a Grower, Processor, Retailer, Safety Compliance, or Secure
Transporter Establishment.
B. A Stakeholder in a Microbusiness Establishment shall not holder an ownership
interest, directly or indirectly, in another Microbusiness Establishment.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.10 MINIMUM OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MARIHUANA RETAILERS
The following minimum standards for Marihuana Retailers shall apply:
A. Marihuana Retailers shall not sell edible marihuana-infused candy in shapes or
packages that are attractive to children or that are easily confused with commercially
sold candy that does not contain marihuana.
B. Marihuana Retailers shall not sell or otherwise transfer marihuana that is not
contained in an opaque, resealable, child-resistant package designed to be
significantly difficult for children under 5 years of age to open and not difficult for
normal adults to use property as defined by 16 C.F.R. 1700.20 (1995), unless the
marihuana is transferred for consumption on the premises where sold.
C. Marihuana Retailers and their agents shall ensure that all purchasers of marihuana
are over 21 years of age.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.11 LOCATION OF GROWER ESTABLISHMENT, SAFETY COMPLIANCE
ESTABLISHMENT, PROCESSOR ESTABLISHMENT, AND SECURE
TRANSPORTER ESTABLISHMENT
A. All Grower Establishments, Safety Compliance Establishments, Processor
Establishments, Microbusiness Establishments and Secure Transporter
Establishments shall only operate and be located within the permitted areas as
provided for in the Zoning Ordinance.
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 11
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
B. Multiple Establishment Licenses at a single location shall be permitted subject to the
review and approval by the City Clerk and subject to the requirements of the state of
Michigan.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.12 DENIAL AND REVOCATION
A. A License issued under this Ordinance may be revoked after an administrative hearing
at which the City Clerk determines that grounds for revocation under this Ordinance
exist. Notice of the time and place of the hearing and the grounds for revocation must
be given to the holder of a License at least five days prior to the date of the hearing,
by first class mail to the address given on the license application; a licensee whose
license is the subject of such hearing may present evidence and/or call witnesses at
the hearing;
B. A License applied for or issued under this Ordinance may be denied or revoked on any
of the following basis:
1. Any violation of this Ordinance;
2. Any conviction of delivery of a controlled substance to a minor;
3. City Clerk finding of fraud, misrepresentation or the making of a false statement
by the Applicant or any stakeholder of the Applicant while engaging in any Activity
for which this Ordinance requires a License or in connection with the Application
for a License or request to renew a License;
4. Sufficient evidence that the Licensee lacks, or has failed to demonstrate, the
requisite professionalism and/or business experience required to assure strict
adherence to this ordinance, and the rules and regulations governing the Act;
5. The License holder or any of its Stakeholders is in default to the City personally or
in connection with any business in which they hold an ownership interest, for
failure to pay property taxes, special assessments, fines, fees or other financial
obligation;
6. The marihuana establishment is determined by the City to have become a public
nuisance; or
7. LARA has denied, revoked or suspended the applicant's state operating license.
C. Should the City Clerk revoke a License, the Licensee shall have fourteen (14) days from
the mailing of the written notice of revocation to appeal the decision to the City
Manager. The City Manager may require additional information or Act upon the
appeal based upon the information supplied to the City Clerk. Should the City
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 12
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
Manager reverse the decision of the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall reinstate the
license. Should the City Manager affirm the decision of the City Clerk, he/she shall
mail by first class mail a written notice affirming the decision to the address for the
Licensee contained in the City Clerk’s records.
D. Should the City Manager affirm the denial, revocation or suspension of a License by
the City Clerk, the Licensee shall have fourteen (14) days from the mailing of the
decision of the City Manager to appeal the decision to City Council, by filing with the
City Clerk a written notice of appeal. City Council shall hear the appeal at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, but no sooner than 7 days from the receipt of the
appeal.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.13 LICENSE RENEWAL
A. A License shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless revoked as
provided by law, including this Ordinance.
B. A valid License may be renewed on an annual basis by submitting a renewal
application upon a form provided by the City and payment of the annual license fee.
Applications to renew a License shall be filed with the City Clerk at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date of its expiration. As long as no changes to the Licensee have
occurred and there is no pending request to revoke or suspend a License, and the
Licensee has paid the License Renewal Fee, the City Clerk shall renew the License.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.14 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
Any act which is a violation of MCL 333.27954, or any amendment thereto, shall also be
considered a violation of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful to consume marihuana in a
public place in the city of Manistee, except in a location designated by the act of the City
Council for consumption and only when not accessible to persons under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.15 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable to all persons and Establishments
described herein, including if the operations or Activities associated with a marihuana
establishment were established without authorization before the effective date of this
ordinance. (Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.16 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
Ordinance Amended January 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Eight Business Regulation and Taxation Code Page 13
Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the payment of a civil fine of $500, plus
costs, except that a violation of Section 867.14 by consuming marihuana in a public
place is a civil infraction and subject to the payment of a civil fine of up to $100. Each
day a violation of this Ordinance continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. A
violator of this Ordinance shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies
and judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan law.
B. A violation of this Ordinance is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In addition to any
other remedy available at law, the City may bring an Action for an injunction or other
process against a Licensee to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this
Ordinance.
C. This Ordinance may be enforced and administered by the City Clerk, any City of
Manistee Police Officer, City Manager or such other city official as may be designated
from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 19-02 adopted 2-5-19.) (Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
867.17 SEVERABILITY
In the event that any one or more sections, provisions, phrases or words of this Ordinance
shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not
affect the validity or the enforceability of the remaining sections, provisions, phrases or
words of this Ordinance. (Ord. 19-14 adopted 5-21-19)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1022 Excavations
Chapter 1022
Excavations
1022.01 Permission required for
excavations and extensions of
cellars
1022.04 Liability for damages; failure to
restore surface; action by City
1022.02 Restoration of surface upon
completion of work
1022.05 Enforcement by Chief of Police or City
Manager
1022.03 Barricades and warning lights 1022.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Streets and alleys in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4d, 117.4e,
117.4h
Excavations generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 554.251 et seq.
Barricades and warning lights around excavations near streets - see GEN. OFF.
674.04
Lighting of obstructions at night - see GEN. OFF. 674.06
1022.01 PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATIONS AND EXTENSIONS OF CELLARS
No person shall make any excavation, place any obstruction, lay or replace any pipe, dig or tear
up any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or dig any hole, ditch or sewer, in any street, alley or
public place in the City, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining permission
therefore from the City Council or the City Manager, nor shall any person dig or extend any
cellar into any street or under any sidewalk without first obtaining permission from the City
Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-14.)
1022.02 RESTORATION OF SURFACE UPON COMPLETION OF WORK
Any person making, or causing to be made, any trench, hole or excavation in any public street
or alley shall, as speedily as possible, repair, refill and put the same in as good a condition as
before. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-14.)
1022.03 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS
Any person making any excavation in any street, alley or other public place shall erect and
maintain a good and sufficient barrier, railing or fence and at night maintain red or amber lights
about such excavation, sufficient to warn the public, for the purpose of preventing accidents.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-14.)
1022.04 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; FAILURE TO RESTORE SURFACE; ACTION BY CITY
Any permission given pursuant to Section 1022.01 shall be upon the express condition that the
person asking for such permission, or for whose benefit such materials are deposited, shall, in
addition to the penalties prescribed in this chapter, be severally liable for all damages which the
City may incur by reason thereof in an action of assumpsit. All persons asking for and accepting
such permission, or permitting materials to be deposited or work to be done under the same,
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1022 Excavations
shall be deemed or considered to have consented and agreed to the terms of this section,
whether the same shall have been referred to expressly or not, or to such conditions as are set
forth in such permission. This section shall have the same force and effect as though a written
contract were entered into and executed by the City and such person. Further, if any person
should excavate, dig into or tear up any public street or alley, sidewalk or crosswalk in the City,
and shall neglect or refuse to repair the same as provided for in Section 1022.02, the City
Manager or his or her designee may repair the same and charge the expense thereof to the
person making the improvement, after five days notice to repair the same, in writing, is served
on the owner by the City Manager or his or her designee.
1022.05 ENFORCEMENT BY CHIEF OF POLICE OR CITY MANAGER
It is hereby made the duty of the Chief of Police or the City Manager or his or her designee to
see that the provisions of this chapter are faithfully observed and to make complaint for
violations of the same.
1022.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1024 Sidewalks
Chapter 1024
Sidewalks and Riverwalk
1024.01 Maintenance and repair by
owners; notice by City
1024.05 Maintenance of area between gutter
line and line of lots abutting streets;
injury to vegetation.
1024.02 Failure of owners to construct or
repair; action by City
1024.06 Prohibition against dogs, bicycles,
skateboarding and rollerblading along
parts of the Riverwalk
1024.03 Service of notices 1024.99 Penalty
1024.04 Liability of owners for defects
CROSS REFERENCES
Failure of property owner to keep sidewalks free of obstructions - see M.C.L.A.
Sec. 103.4
Liability of City re sidewalks - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 691.1401 et seq.
Animals on sidewalks - see GEN. OFF. 606.08
Obstruction of sidewalks by building materials and firewood - see GEN. OFF.
674.05
Snow and ice removal from sidewalks - see GEN. OFF. 674.07, 674.08
Restoration of pavement upon completion of excavations - see S.U. & P.S.
1022.02, 1022.04
1024.01 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR BY OWNERS; NOTICE BY CITY
All sidewalks in the City shall be kept in good repair by the owner, agent or occupant of the
premises adjoining or fronting such sidewalks, and whenever any sidewalk in the City needs
repair, does not conform to the established grade or otherwise conflicts with any ordinance of
the City, it shall be the duty of the City Manager or his or her designee to notify the owner,
agent or occupant of the premises adjoining or fronting such sidewalk needing repair to repair
the same within forty-eight hours after receiving such notice. If the owner or agent thereof
cannot be found in the City or is unknown, the notice may be served by posting the same in a
conspicuous position upon said lot or premises for a period of ten days.
1024.02 FAILURE OF OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR; ACTION BY CITY
If any owner, agent, occupant or person in charge of any lot or premises in the City shall neglect
or refuse to build any sidewalk ordered by the Council within the time specified in a notice
served upon such owner, occupant or person in charge of such lot or premises by the City
Manager or his or her designee, as provided in Section 1024.01, or shall allow any sidewalk
constructed in front of or adjacent to any such lot or premises to become out of repair for
forty-eight hours, the City Manager or his or her designee may proceed forthwith to build or
repair such sidewalk, as the case may be, and the reasonable and necessary cost thereof, or
such portion or amount as shall be determined by the Council, shall be a lien upon such lot or
premises and be collected the same as other taxes are assessed and collected within the City.
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1024 Sidewalks
1024.03 SERVICE OF NOTICES
All notices provided for in this chapter or required herein to be served by the City Manager or
his or her designee may be served by the City Manager or his or her designee or by any police
officer of the City.
1024.04 LIABILITY OF OWNERS FOR DEFECTS
Whenever a sidewalk is in a state of disrepair or in a defective condition, the abutting
landowner has the duty of repairing such sidewalk as provided for in this chapter, and the City
shall not be liable for any such sidewalk defects, even though no notice of defect or order to
repair was given as provided in Section 1024.01.
(1973 Code §93.33)
1024.05 MAINTENANCE OF AREA BETWEEN GUTTER LINE AND LINE OF LOTS ABUTTING
STREETS; INJURY TO VEGETATION
The portion of every street lying between the gutter line and the line of lots abutting on any
street will be regarded and treated as City walks for the purpose of entry thereon, and such
walks shall be used by the City for the purpose of public improvements. However, where the
owner of any abutting property, on a street devoted to residences, shall properly grade the
space between the line of his or her lot and the sidewalk, and the gutter line, such space shall
be, in fact, lawn, and such owner shall keep the grass thereon properly trimmed and mowed.
Further, such lawn shall be deemed to be public property and any defacement thereof or injury
thereto is hereby prohibited. The driving of animals or vehicles thereon or the use of any
portion thereof as places upon which to walk, causing injury to the grass or flowering plants
growing thereon, or any act which shall cause any defacement or injury to any such lawns, is
hereby prohibited. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-3-14.)
1024.06 PROHIBITION AGAINST DOGS, BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDING AND
ROLLERBLADING ALONG PARTS OF THE RIVERWALK
No dogs shall be permitted along the City of Manistee Riverwalk from the west end of the City
of Marina to the west end of the Riverwalk. No bicycles, skateboarding or rollerblading shall be
permitted along any part of the Riverwalk. (Ord.19-08 adopted 3-19-19)
1024.99 PENALTY
A violation of a provision of this Chapter 1024 is a civil infraction as provided in Section 202.99
of these Ordinances. (Ord. 19-08 adopted 3-19-19)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1026 Trees
Chapter 1026
Trees
1026.01 Definitions 1026.07 Permit required for planting, removing,
pruning, etc., on public property;
exemption of City
1026.02 Purpose 1026.08 Landmark trees
1026.03 Tree Commission 1026.09 Nuisance trees on private property;
abatement by City
1026.04 Duties of Tree Commission 1026.10 Promulgation of rules and regulations
by City Manager
1026.05 Protection during construction 1026.11 Replacement of damaged or dead
trees
1026.06 Planting, maintenance and
removal
1026.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Box elder trees, female, as nuisance - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 124.151
Cutting or destroying trees - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 247.235, 247.241, 752.701 et
seq.
Weeds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 247.51, 247.52, 247.61 et seq., 286.701 et seq.;
GEN. OFF. Ch. 692
Malicious destruction of trees - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 750.382
Injury to vegetation in area between gutter line and line of lots abutting streets
- see S.U. & P.S. 1024.05
1026.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
A. "Public nuisance" means a tree, shrub, plant or plant part located anywhere upon public or
private property which interferes with a clear view of traffic of drivers approaching an
intersection, and any tree, shrub, plant or plant part afflicted with any dangerous or
infectious insect infestation or disease.
B. "Street right of way" means a public or private way dedicated for public purposes, generally
between the sidewalk and the curb, where sidewalks exist.
C. "Topping" means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and/or disfigure the tree.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.02 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees in
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1026 Trees
street rights of way within the City, as trees contribute to beautification, air cooling and
purification, noise abatement and property value enhancement and present a public asset
enhancing the quality of life in the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.03 TREE COMMISSION
A. Establishment; Composition; Meetings. There is hereby established a Tree Commission for
the City, which shall consist of not more than seven members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Members of the Commission will meet
quarterly or at the request of the City Council or the City Manager or his or her designee.
B. Terms of Office. The term of office for persons appointed to the Commission shall be three
years, except that the term of three members appointed to the first Commission shall be for
only two years and the term of the remaining members first appointed shall be for three
years. The term for Commission members shall begin on January 1 of each year. (Ord. 96-2
Passed 7-2-96)
C. Advisory Capacity. This chapter provides that the Commission shall serve in an advisory
capacity regarding trees, plants and shrubs located within City rights of way, parks and
public places of the City, and trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that
constitute a hazard or nuisance as described in this chapter.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.04 DUTIES OF TREE COMMISSION
The Tree Commission will recommend to the City Council areas for beautification and
improvement of the City's landscape. The Commission will serve as a group to provide
information and to answer questions from City property owners pertaining to trees. The
Commission will provide advice on pruning in street rights of way by private property owners if
a permit has been granted for the same. The Commission will provide information concerning
trees to the public via the media. The Commission will provide advice to City personnel on the
planting, pruning and care of trees in City rights of way or any plantings on public property.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.05 PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION
In the case of all new construction in the City, the Tree Commission will advise the City and a
party undertaking construction as to the protection of trees in street rights of way at the
construction site. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.06 PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL
A. Size and Species Requirements. The Tree Commission will develop and maintain a list of
desirable trees for planting along streets in three classes of size: small, medium and large.
The Commission will provide, upon request, a list of trees which can and cannot be planted
in street rights of way. Species prohibited in street rights of way shall include any tree of
the species of Box Elder (Acer Negundo), Silver Maple (Acer Succharinum), Horsechestnut
(Aesculus Hippocastanum), Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus Altissima), White Birch (Betual
Paperifera), Catalpa (Catalpa Speciosa), Mulberry (Morus), Poplar (Populus species,
including Cottonwood), Black Locust (Robinia Pseudoacacis), Willows (Salix species),
Siberian Elm (Ulmus Pumila),
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 3
Chapter 1026 Trees
Any tree planted in a street right of way which is on the list of prohibited trees will be
removed at the property owner's expense at the request of the Commission. Existing
planted trees are exempted from this requirement. (Ord. 97-1 Passed 4-15-97.)
B. Spacing. The spacing of street trees in street rights of way will be in accordance with the
three species size classes listed in subsection (a) hereof, and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following: small trees, twenty feet; medium trees, thirty feet; and large
trees, forty feet. However, special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect
and the Commission shall be exempted from this spacing requirement. Any tree planted
must be centered in the street right of way and be thirty feet from any intersection or as
approved by the City Manager or his or her designee.
C. Topping. No person shall top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property,
including street rights of way. Trees severely damaged by a storm or other causes which
require immediate remedy may be exempted from this provision at the determination of
the City Manager or his or her designee. Trees under utility wires or other obstructions
where the wire area cannot be cleared in a six-foot diameter through the tree may be
exempted from this chapter at the determination of the Commission. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-
91.)
1026.07 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PLANTING, REMOVING, PRUNING, ETC., ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY; EXEMPTION OF CITY
No person shall plant, remove, prune, mutilate, cut above the ground or disturb any tree in the
boulevard area, in public rights of way or on any other public property of the City, without first
procuring a permit from the Tree Commission. In the event that a person makes proper
application for a tree permit, including providing all necessary information, and the Commission
fails to act on that application within thirty days from the date of its submission, the application
shall be considered approved. The City shall be exempt from these permit provisions in the
exercise of its normal tree maintenance program on condition that the Commission has had an
opportunity to review and advise on that tree maintenance program. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.08 LANDMARK TREES
The Tree Commission shall have the duty to locate, select and identify any trees which meet the
definition of landmark trees. A tree may qualify as a landmark tree if it meets one or more of
the following criteria: species rarity, old age, association with an historical event or person or
abnormally great scenic enhancement or beauty. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.09 NUISANCE TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; ABATEMENT BY CITY
Subject to due process of law, the City Manager or his or her designee may enter onto private
property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a
public nuisance, and if a public nuisance exists, to take appropriate action, including, but not
limited to, trimming or removing the tree, shrub, plant or plant part so as to abate the
nuisance. Any costs of nuisance abatement on private property shall be the responsibility of
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 4
Chapter 1026 Trees
the owner of that property and may be made a lien against that property. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-
15-91.)
1026.10 PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY CITY MANAGER
On request of the Tree Commission or on his or her own authority, the City Manager or his or
her designee shall have the power to promulgate and enforce rules, regulations and
specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting and protection of trees,
shrubs and other plantings in street rights of way or on any public property, subject to the
approval of the City Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.11 REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED OR DEAD TREES
In addition to the penalty provided in Section 1026.99, if, as a result of a violation of any
provision of this chapter, the injury, mutilation or death of a tree in City rights of way or on City
property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub or other plant shall be
borne by the party in violation. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-15-91.)
1026.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Amended June 17, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1028 River Street Traffic Flow, Parking and Amenities
Chapter 1028
River Street Traffic Flow, Parking and Amenities
1028.01 River Street Traffic Flow, Parking
& Amenities
CROSS REFERENCES
One Way Streets - see TRAF. 440.01
Two Hour Parking - see TRAF. 430.02
1028.01 RIVER STREET TRAFFIC FLOW, PARKING & AMENITIES
The City of Manistee ordains that for any future changes to River Street and its environs, the
following conditions shall be met:
A. There shall be no angle parking on either side of the street.
B. There shall be no bumpouts or protrusions into the present traffic lanes or parking lanes.
Any future curb lines shall be straight and parallel.
C. River Street shall remain open as it is presently platted between Pine Street and Spruce
Street.
D. Any planting along the street shall be kept back near the building line and not placed out
near the curb line.
(Ord. 99-5. Approved by vote of the general electorate)
(Ord. 14-05. Passed 6-17-14, effective 6-27-14 deleted item C. There shall be no trees in the sidewalk portion
of the street between Division Street and Pine Street, except in the present marina park. Any existing trees
shall remain, but when they are removed because of deterioration, they shall not be replaced in this area. )
Adopted June 5, 2012
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1030 Complete Streets
Chapter 1030
Complete Streets
1030.01 Definitions 1030.03 General Requirements
1030.02 Purpose
CROSS REFERENCES
American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
Guide for Development of Bicycle Facilities
Michigan Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Device (MMUTCD) MDOT
Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG)
Sidewalks – see Ch. 1024
Trees – see Ch. 1026
Subdivision Design Standards – see Ch. 1248
Non-Motorized Transportation Committee – see Ch. 263
1030.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, “complete streets” are streets that safely accommodate all
uses of the right-of-way, including pedestrians, people requiring mobility aids, bicyclists, and
drivers and passengers of transit vehicles, trucks, automobiles and motorcycles. [Ord. 12-02,
adopted 6-5-12]
1030.02 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this chapter is to enable the streets of the City of Manistee to provide safe,
convenient, and comfortable routes for walking, bicycling, driving, and public transportation,
enable convenient travel as part of daily activities, improve the public welfare by addressing a
wide array of health and environmental problems, and meet the needs of all users of the street
right-of-way, including children, older adults, and people with disabilities. [Ord. 12-02, adopted 6-5-
12]
1030.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Complete Streets. The City of Manistee will plan for, design, and construct all
transportation improvement projects, both new and retrofit activities, to provide
appropriate accommodation for bicyclists, pedestrian, transit users, and motorists of all
ages and abilities. The City shall approach every transportation project and program as an
opportunity to improve public streets and the transportation network for all Users, and
shall work in coordination with other departments, agencies, and jurisdictions to achieve
Complete Streets.
1. The City of Manistee Non-Motorized Transportation Plan shall be referenced and its
implementation considered prior to construction or re-construction within city rights-of
way.
Adopted June 5, 2012
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1030 Complete Streets
2. All street plans will include, at a minimum, accommodations for accessibility, sidewalks,
curb ramps and cuts, signage, bike lanes, and shall incorporate principles of complete
streets and maximize walkable and bikeable streets wherever feasible within the City of
Manistee.
3. The accommodations shall also be designed and built using guidance from the most
recent editions of the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) Guide for Development of Bicycle Facilities, the Michigan Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Device (MMUTCD) MDOT, and the Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). Methods for providing flexibility within safe design
parameters, such as context sensitive solutions and design, will be considered.
4. Proposed subdivisions, site condominium projects, and planned unit development
projects shall comply with Complete Street Design Principles.
5. The City of Manistee Infrastructure Design Standards shall include Complete Streets
Infrastructure, such as bicycle lanes, sidewalks, street crossings, and planting strips.
6. If the safety and convenience of Users can be improved within the scope of pavement
resurfacing, restriping, or signalization operations on public streets, such projects shall
implement Complete Streets Infrastructure to increase safety for Users.
B. Exceptions.
Facilities for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users, and motorists of all ages and abilities are
not required to be provided in instances where the City Manager has made a written finding
that an exception is authorized by one or more of the following conditions:
1. Where their establishment would be contrary to public health and safety,
2. When the cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need for probable use,
3. When the cost would result in an unacceptable diminishing of other city services,
4. Where there is no identified long-term need,
5. Where the inclusion of such infrastructure would be unreasonable or inappropriate in
light of the scope of the project, or
6. Where reconstruction of the right-of-way is due to an emergency.
[Ord. 12-02, adopted 6-5-12]
Amended July 25, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1040 Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
Chapter 1040
Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to bonds issued for the purpose of paying the cost of
acquiring, constructing, improving, enlarging and extending the combined water supply and
sewage disposal and funds relating thereto, are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation may be obtained from the City Clerk.
1040.01 Definitions 1040.09 Unmetered commercial or
industrial use
1040.02 Operation as a single
system
1040.10 Operating year
1040.03 Management of System 1040.11 Fluoridation of public water
supply
1040.04 Rates and fees 1040.12 Tampering with hydrants,
stop cocks, stop gates, etc.;
authority of Fire Chief
1040.05 Billing; failure to pay;
discontinuance of
service; other remedies
1040.13 Tampering with and
polluting wells
1040.06 Affidavit filed by
landlord; Tenant
responsibility to pay
1040.14 Tampering with or
destruction of combined
water and sewer system
1040.07 Freeze up list, Run Water
Notice
1040.15 Prohibition of private wells
and septic systems in City
1040.08 Fire hydrants; fire
protection systems
1040.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Water quality - see Mich. Const., Art. 4, Sec. 52; MCL Secs. 67.38, 323.1 et seq.
Sewers and sewer systems generally - see Mich. Const., Art. 7, Sec. 24; MCL
Secs. 46.171 et seq., 67.34, 123.241 et seq., 323.151 et seq., 325.201 et seq.
Water supply generally - see Mich. Const., Art. 7, Sec. 24; MCL Secs. 46.171
et seq., 123.11 et seq., 325.201 et seq., 486.51 et seq., 486.101 et seq.
Council policy re new water and sewer connections - see ADM. 210.03
Department of Public Works - see ADM. Ch. 238
Water Department - see ADM. Ch. 240
Sewer Department - POTW - see ADM. Ch. 242
Water pollution - see GEN. OFF. 670.01, 670.02
Wastewater discharge regulations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042
Cross connection control - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044
Amended July 25, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1040 Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
1040.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
A. "Act 94" means Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended.
B. "System" means the complete water supply and sewage disposal system of the City, both
inside and outside the City, including all plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used
or useful in connection with transportation and treatment of sewage, together with
improvements and extensions thereto, all facilities used or useful in the supply and
distribution of water and all additions, extensions and improvements hereafter acquired.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 2-9-87.)
C. “Council” means the City Council for the City of Manistee. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.02 OPERATION AS A SINGLE SYSTEM
The existing water supply and sewage disposal system of the City shall remain consolidated and
shall continue to be operated as a single combined water supply and sewage disposal system
under the provisions of Act 94. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-16-63.)
1040.03 MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM
The City may employ such persons in such capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the
efficient management and operation of the system. Council may make such rules, orders and
regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and
operation of the system. (Ord. Unno. Passed 2-9-87.) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.04 RATES AND FEES
A. Generally The rates to be charged for water and sewer service furnished by the System
shall be set each year by Council in its annual budget, and may be changed during the year
by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
B. Types of Charges Charges for water and sewer service shall consist of the following:
Readiness-To-Serve Charge
All customers connected to the City’s water and/or sanitary sewer system shall pay a
monthly charge to recover a portion of the capacity costs of each respective system. The
respective readiness-to-serve charges for water and sewer service shall be adjusted by
meter size in recognition of the higher potential demands associated with larger meters.
(Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
Volume Rate
All customers connected to the City’s water and/or sanitary sewer system shall pay a
volume rate for each thousand gallons (or portion thereof) of metered volume to recover
the remaining costs of each respective system. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
Amended July 25, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 3
Chapter 1040 Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
Unmetered Residential Service
The monthly charge for unmetered residential service shall be determined based upon the
sum of, i) the readiness to serve charge for a 5/8” meter and, ii) the volume rate multiplied
against 6,000 gallons. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
C. Annual Adjustment. Each year the respective readiness-to-serve charges and volume rates
for water and sewer service shall be increased to an amount determined by Council. At a
minimum, the rate increase shall be equal to the inflation rate as established by the
Michigan Department of Treasury or its successor, for purposes of determining tax
limitations as provided by Act 213 of the Public Acts of 1981, as amended (Truth in
Assessing) and Act 5 of the Public Acts of 1982, (Truth in Taxation) or an equivalent standard
established by the City Council. The annual rate increase shall be submitted to Council with
the budget for the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with Sections 7-3 and 7-4 of the City
Charter. The rate increase can be modified by Council resolution as needed. (Ord. No. 14-06,
Effective 7-25-14)
D. Special and Outside City Rates. For miscellaneous services, a special rate may be
established from time to time by the Council. For outside City users in the absence of an
agreement stating otherwise, all water and\or sewer services provided outside the City
limits shall be billed the prevailing readiness-to-serve charge and volume rates, with an 18%
surcharge on water readiness-to-serve charges and volume rates, and 154% surcharge on
sewer readiness-to-serve charges and volume rate. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
E. Water Turn-Off/On Fee. Water supply turn-off and turn-on charges shall be set by Council
resolution. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-1-93.)
F. Tap-In Charge. A tap-in charge shall be established by Council. The tap-in charge shall be
established in an amount which shall recover the City's actual cost for time and material
associated with the tap-in. (Ord. Unno. Passed 4-3-90.) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
G. System Development Charge. Water and sewer system development charges shall be
established by Council. These charges are one-time charges paid for by new or redeveloped
properties connecting to the City’s water and/or sewer systems to cover the proportionate
share of the City’s cost for the established capital facilities needed to serve new connections
for such things as transmission, water supply/treatment, and wastewater
treatment/disposal. These charges shall be based upon either the estimated potential
demands (if available), or the number and size of meters for each new customer, and shall
be due prior to connection to the System. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
H. Exterior Water Consumption. Exterior water consumption which does not connect with the
sewer system may be billed and metered separately without a sewer consumption or sewer
readiness-to-serve charge under rules and regulations approved by the City Council. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 2-2-88.)
I. Free Service. No free service or service at less than cost shall be furnished by the system to
any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.
Amended July 25, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 4
Chapter 1040 Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
J. Fixing and Revising Rates; Rate Covenant. The rates charged pursuant to this section are
estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of the administration,
operation, maintenance and capital needs of the system as necessary to preserve the
system in good repair and working order, and, when taken together with net revenues, to
provide an amount equal to the annual principal and interest requirement on all bonds that
the water and sewer utility is responsible for as the same become due and payable, the
creation and maintenance of the reserves therefor, and all other obligations and
expenditures for the system required by law, including this chapter. Notwithstanding
1040.04(C), the rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to
produce these amounts. (Ord. Unno. Passed 2-9-87.) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.05 BILLING; FAILURE TO PAY; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; OTHER REMEDIES
A. All metered customers will be billed monthly. All bills must be paid within fifteen days from
the date of the bill. Ten percent (10%) of the amount due will be added to the amount of
the bill if payment is not received within fifteen (15) days from the date of the bill. Water
and/or sewer services shall be shut off if a bill is not paid within forty-five (45) days of the
due date. Water and/or sewer service shut off shall not be turned on again until all sums
due and a delinquent reconnection charge are paid in full. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-1-93; Ord. 98-07
Passed 5-12-98, Ord. 02-03 Passed4-2-02) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
B. The charges for service of the system pursuant to the provisions of Act 94 shall be made a
lien on all premises served thereby, except as provided in Section 1040.06, whenever such
charges against the premises shall be delinquent for six (6) months. City officials in charge
of the collection of water and sewer charges shall certify the delinquency annually, by May
15th to the tax assessing officer of the City who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll as a
charge against such premises. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as general
City taxes. In addition to other remedies provided, the City shall have the right to shut off
and discontinue the supply of water or sewer service or both to any premises for the
nonpayment of water and/or sewer charges when due as provided in subsection (a) hereof.
(Ord. 02-03 Passed 4-2-02) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
C. Water and\or sewer service will not be placed in an individual’s name until all previous
balances due from the individual are paid in full. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.06 AFFIDAVIT FILED BY LANDLORD; TENANT RESPONSIBILITY TO PAY
A. If a landlord properly files an affidavit pursuant to MCL 123.161 Et Seq. (Michigan Municipal
Water Liens Act) that a tenant is responsible for water and/or sewer charges related to a
rental premises, no lien shall attach to the premises served after the filing of the affidavit
and security deposit and the water and/or sewer service shall be placed in the name of the
tenant. The amount of a security deposit made pursuant to this Section shall be established
Amended July 25, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 5
Chapter 1040 Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
by City Council pursuant to resolution or ordinance and shall be made at the time of filing of
the affidavit. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
B. Payment by a tenant of a security deposit for water or sewer service does not relieve the
tenant of the obligation to pay for water and sewer charges as required by this chapter in
the same manner and on the same terms as any other users of City water and sewer
services. (Ord. 02-03 Passed 4-2-02) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
C. If a tenant, or owner, shall fail to pay for water and sewer charges when due, all water
services to the affected premises shall be terminated in accordance with this chapter and
any deposit paid to the City by a tenant or landlord shall be forfeited to the City and be
applied against any unpaid water and sewer charges and against any unpaid fees and any
remaining security deposit shall be turned over to the party who made the deposit. (Ord. 02-
03 Passed 4-2-02) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
D. The affidavit process described in this Section, is not available for rental properties with
multiple units unless there is a separately metered service for each unit and the unit’s shutoff
is accessible to the City from the outside of the building. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.07 FREEZE UP LIST, RUN WATER NOTICE
A. The City shall maintain a “freeze-up” list of addresses that have water service which have
been known to freeze in the past. These customers will be directed to run their water during
the winter months to prevent a freeze-up from happening and their bills will be estimated
during that time period and adjusted, if needed, after the run water requirement ends. (Ord. No.
14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
B. Any customer on the “freeze-up” list that experiences a frozen water service will be
responsible for the entire cost of thawing their line, including reimbursement of any City
incurred costs. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
C. From time to time, the City may issue a Run Water notice if weather conditions dictate. A
run water notice will be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and on the
City’s website, at a minimum. Bills will be estimated during that time period and adjusted, if
needed, after the run water requirement ends. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
D. Any customer that experiences a frozen water service after a run water notice is issued will
be responsible for the entire cost of thawing their line, including reimbursement of any City
incurred costs. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.08 FIRE HYDRANTS; FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
A. For the use of water through fire hydrants and for the availability of such water, the City
shall pay, in equal quarterly installments, the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) per hydrant, per
Amended July 25, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 6
Chapter 1040 Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
year, said payments to be made from funds legally available for such purpose or from the
proceeds of taxes which the City shall levy.
City fire hydrants shall be used solely for the suppression of fires within the City, and any
non-authorized use of fire hydrants is hereby prohibited. The use of fire protection
systems, public or private, for other than fire protection, is prohibited. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-
85.)
B. Owners of private fire protection systems, including standpipes, sprinkler systems and other
unmetered systems, designed solely for fire suppression inside structures, shall pay a
special rate established in accordance with 1040.04(D). This amount is payable whether or
not the building is occupied. This amount shall not be payable in the event the City has
physically disconnected the building from the water system or in the event that the
plumbing inside the building has been legally altered to make the system unusable. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 4-3-90.) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.09 UNMETERED COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USES
The unmetered commercial or industrial use of either sewer or water service (other than for
fire protection) is hereby prohibited. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-15-82.)
1040.10 OPERATING YEAR
The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall coincide with the
City's fiscal year. (Ord. Unno. Passed 2-9-87.)
1040.11 FLUORIDATION OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
The City Manager or designee is hereby directed to provide the means for, and to proceed with
the introduction of, fluorines into the public water supply distributed by the City in such
quantities as are required to maintain throughout the pipe distribution system a fluorine
concentration of approximately one part per million, provided that plans for the necessary
equipment, installation and operation are first approved by the Michigan Department of
Health. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-91.)
1040.12 TAMPERING WITH HYDRANTS, STOP COCKS, STOP GATES, ETC.; AUTHORITY OF
FIRE CHIEF
No person shall meddle or interfere with any hydrant, stop cock, stop gate or tools or
appliances of the City, except by authority of the City Manager or designee, provided, however,
that in case of fire, the Chief of the Fire Department, or any person acting under his or her
authority, may open or close any hydrant where, in his or her judgment, it may be necessary to
do so. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-91.) (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.13 TAMPERING WITH AND POLLUTING WELLS
No person shall commit any nuisance or deposit any substance or matter or do any other act at,
about or near wells or sources of water supply of the City that may tend to make such water
impure or unwholesome. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-91.)
Amended July 25, 2014
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 7
Chapter 1040 Combined Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
1040.14 TAMPERING WITH OR DESTRUCTION OF COMBINED WATER AND SEWER
SYSTEM
No person shall deface or injure any building or other improvements, or disturb or injure any
lawn, grass plot, flowers, vines, bushes or trees, belonging to the combined water supply and
sewage disposal system. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-91.)
1040.15 PROHIBITION OF PRIVATE WELLS AND SEPTIC SYSTEMS IN CITY
Private water wells and septic systems are prohibited in the City limits. All users must connect
to the public water supply and sanitary sewer unless provided a waiver by the City. Any
individual or company using an existing well or septic system for potable water or wastewater
disposal must connect to the City water supply or sanitary sewer upon failure, abandonment or
substantial repair needed to the existing well or septic system. Wells for non-potable or
process water may be allowed upon approval by the City. (Ord. No. 14-06, Effective 7-25-14)
1040.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
Chapter 1042
Water Discharge Regulations
1042.01 Purpose; objectives 1042.18 Rates and charges for sewage disposal
service
1042.02 Definitions 1042.19 Disclosure of information from
industrial users prior to connection and
contribution to POTW; additional
powers of City re control of discharges
1042.03 Abbreviations 1042.20 Reporting requirements
1042.04 Unlawful deposits or discharges
of solid or liquid wastes; septic
tanks prohibited; installation of
toilet facilities and connection to
public sewers required
1042.21 Monitoring facilities
1042.05 Private sewage disposal systems 1042.22 Inspections and sampling
1042.06 Building sewers and connections 1042.23 Pretreatment facilities
1042.07 General discharge prohibitions 1042.24 Publication of names of industrial users
in significant noncompliance; records
of compliance
1042.08 Incorporation of national
categorical pretreatment
standards
1042.25 Confidential information
1042.09 State discharge limitations 1042.26 Signing of reports; certification
statement
1042.10 Local discharge limitations 1042.27 Discharges of hazardous waste
1042.11 Grease, oil and sand
interceptors
1042.28 Opening and closing holes in sewers
1042.12 Review and approval of certain
discharges
1042.29 Falsification
1042.13 Dilution of discharges 1042.30 Retention of records
1042.14 Accidental discharges 1042.31 Suspension and termination of service;
violations; enforcement actions; other
remedies
1042.15 Special agreements for
acceptance of unusual industrial
wastes
1042.32 Separability
1042.16 Upsets 1042.99 Penalty
1042.17 Bypasses
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
CROSS REFERENCES
Water quality - see Mich. Const., Art. 4, Sec. 52; M.C.L.A. Secs. 67.38, 323.1 et
seq.
Sewers and sewer systems generally - see Mich. Const., Art. 7, Sec. 24; M.C.L.A.
Secs. 46.171 et seq., 67.34, 123.241 et seq., 323.151 et seq., 325.201 et seq.
Water supply generally - see Mich. Const., Art. 7, Sec. 24; M.C.L.A. Secs. 46.171
et seq., 123.11 et seq., 325.201 et seq., 486.51 et seq., 486.101 et seq.
Department of Public Works - see ADM. Ch. 238
Sewer Department - POTW - see ADM. Ch. 242
Water pollution - see GEN. OFF. 670.01, 670.02
Combined water supply and sewage disposal system - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040
Cross connection control - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044
1042.01 PURPOSE; OBJECTIVES
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of sewers, sewage, water,
hydrants and industrial waste pretreatment facilities; the discharge of industrial waste into
the Manistee publicly-owned treatment works (POTW); pollutant limitations, data
collection, monitoring and sampling; issuance of discharge permits; establishment of
administrative review procedures; and penalties and other remedies for violations of this
chapter. (Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-4-00)
B. The objectives of this chapter are to:
1. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City wastewater system which will
interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting
Municipal sludge;
2. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City wastewater system which do not
receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
3. Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the
system. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
4. Protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course
of their employment; (Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-4-00)
5. Provide for the investigation of instances of pass-through or interference, the
notification of the responsible industry, and for appropriate enforcement actions; (Ord.
00-01. Passed 1-4-00)
1042.02 DEFINITIONS
A. As used in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:
1. "Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
2. "Authorized representative of an industrial user" includes, but is not limited to:
(a) A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial
user is a corporation;
(b) A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively; or
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 3
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
(c) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such
representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which
the indirect discharge originates, or for environmental matters of the company.
Authorization for this representative must be submitted, in writing, to the City by
the individual designated in either paragraph 2 (a) or (b) hereof.
(d) A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of a federal, state, or local government facility,
or their designee.
3. "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days
at twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in terms of weight and concentration
(milligrams per liter).
4. "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys the same to the building sewer, beginning five feet
outside the inner face of the building wall.
5. "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
6. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's pretreatment facility.
7. "Categorical standards" means national categorical pretreatment standards or other
pretreatment standards.
8. "Chemical oxygen demand (COD)" means a measure of the oxygen- consuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is
expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified
test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus
does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. The term "chemical
oxygen demand" is also known as O, oxygen consumed (OC) and dichromate oxygen
consumed (DOC), respectively.
9. "City" means the City of Manistee.
10. "Combined sewer" means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
11. "Compatible pollutant" means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater
treatment plant, such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal
coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the
POTW was designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does remove such pollutants
to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants include chemical
oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds,
nitrogen compounds and fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin.
12. "Composite sample" means a series of samples taken over a specific time period
whose volume is proportional to the flow in the waste stream, which are combined
into one sample.
13. "Cooling water" means the water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning,
cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
14. “Dilution” means any thinning or weakening of a wastewater discharge by mixing it
with water or other liquid, including any process of mixing or diluting as a partial or
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 4
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
complete substitute for adequate treatment necessary to achieve compliance with
applicable standards and limitations. Dilution is prohibited unless specifically
approved by the city in writing.
15. “Direct discharge" means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to
the waters of the State.
16. "Environmental Protection Agency" and "EPA" mean the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, the EPA Administrator or other duly authorized official of the EPA.
17. "Garbage" means solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
18. "Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
19. "Holding tank waste" means any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
20. "Incompatible pollutants" means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant.
21. "Indirect discharge" means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants into the POTW (including holding-tank waste discharged into the system).
22. "Industrial user" means any user who or which discharges industrial waste as defined
in this section.
23. "Industrial waste" means the wastewater discharge from industrial, manufacturing,
trade, service or business processes, or the wastewater discharge from any structure
with these characteristics, as distinct from their employees' domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
24. "Interference" means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or
operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES
permit or reduces the efficiency of the POTW. The term "interference" also includes
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW.
25. "Laboratory determination" means the measurement, test and analysis of the
characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the methods contained in the
latest edition, at the time of any such measurement, test or analysis, of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, a joint publication of the
American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the
Water Pollution Control Federation, or in accordance with any other method
prescribed by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
26. “Local Limits” mean the numerical or non-numerical standards and requirements
established by the City in order to protect the safety and welfare of the public and
POTW workers, or to prevent pollutant interference, inhibition or pass-through in
regard to plant operations, or to comply with state and federal regulations.
27. "Manager" means the Manager of the City of Manistee, or his or her authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
28. "National categorical pretreatment standard" and "pretreatment standard" mean any
Federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which
applies to a specific category of industrial users.
29. "National pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit" means a permit
issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 5
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
30. "National prohibitive discharge standard" and “prohibitive discharge standard" mean
any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR
Section 403.5.
31. "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
32. "New source" means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
publication of proposed national categorical pretreatment standards that will be
applicable to such source, provided that:
(a) Construction is at a site where no other source is located;
(b) Process or production equipment causing discharge is totally replaced due to
construction;
or
(c) Production or wastewater generating processes of the facility are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.
Construction is considered to have commenced when the installation or
assembly of facilities and/or equipment has begun, significant site preparation
has begun for installation or assembly or the owner/operator has entered into a
binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Construction on a
site at which an existing source is located results in a modification, rather than a
new source, if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility
or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (30)B. or C. hereof but otherwise
alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
33. "Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or
any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where
indicated by the context.
34. "pH" means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
35. "Pollutant" means any of various chemicals, substances and refuse materials, such as
solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat and industrial, Municipal and agricultural wastes, which
impair the purity of the water and soil.
36. "Pollution" means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical,
biological and radiological integrity of water.
37. "POTW treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
38. "Pretreatment" and "treatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutants or pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can
be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 6
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
39. "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement for
treating a waste prior to inclusion in the POTW.
40. “Process waste” means any water, which, during manufacturing or processing, comes
into direct contact with, or results from the production of use of any raw material,
intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product. This definition
specifically eludes noncontact cooling water, domestic wastewater, infiltration and
inflow.
41. "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no
particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
42. "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and which is controlled by public authority.
43. "Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW)" means a treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned in this instance by the City.
The term "POTW" includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "POTW" shall also include
any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the City who
are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City's POTW.
44. "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
45. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the user's pretreatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, which can reasonably be
expected to occur in absence of a bypass. The term "severe property damage" does
not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
46. "Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings; institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground,
surface and storm waters as may be present.
47. "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
48. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
49. "Significant industrial user" means any industrial user of the City's wastewater
disposal system who:
(a) Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403 and 40
CFR Part 405 through 40 CFR Part 471, along with amendments to the existing or
hereafter promulgated standards;
(b) Has an average discharge flow of 10,000 gallons or more per average work day
of process water to the POTW, excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling water and
boiler blow-down wastewater;
(c) Has a flow greater than five percent of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity in the City's wastewater treatment system;
(d) Has in his or her wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of
the Act or other applicable Federal and State laws and regulations; or
(e) Is found by the City, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or the
EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 7
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of
sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.
50. "Significant noncompliance" means one or more of the following:
(a) Chronic violations of a wastewater discharge limit, defined herein as when sixtysix
percent or more of all the measurements for the pollutant parameter taken
during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, the corresponding daily
maximum limit or the corresponding average limit;
(b) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations of a wastewater discharge limit, defined
here as when thirty-three percent or more of all the measurements for the
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the corresponding daily maximum limit multiplied by the applicable
TRC factor, or the product of the corresponding average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC factor. (TRC factor = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH);
(c) Any other violation of a daily maximum limit or an average limit that the City
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health, public welfare or the environment, or has resulted in the POTW
exercising its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(e) Failure to meet, within ninety days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a City-issued discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;
(f) Failure to provide, within thirty days after the due date, required reports, such as
baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports and/or reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
(h) Any other violation, or group of violations, which the City determines as
adversely affecting operation or implementation of the City's pretreatment
program.
51. "Slug load" means any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or
concentration which causes interference to the POTW.
52. "Standard industrial classification (SIC)" means a classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
53. "State" means the State of Michigan.
54. "Storm sewer" and "storm drain" mean a sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
55. "Storm water" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
56. "Superintendent" means the person designated by the City to supervise the operation
of the POTW and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this
chapter, or his or her duly authorized representative.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 8
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
57. "Surcharge" means an additional charge paid, as part of the service charge, by any
customer discharging wastewater having strength in excess of limits set forth by the
City to cover the cost of treatment of such excess strength wastewater.
58. "Suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or
is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
59. "Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can
potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment, including those listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA under the
provisions of Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act or other Acts.
60. "Upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with national categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user. The term "upset" does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or
careless or improper operation.
61. "User" means any person who contributes causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW62.
63. "Wastewater" means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present, whether treated
or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
64. "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
65. "Waters of the State" means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, either surface or underground, natural
or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon
the State or any portion thereof. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.) (Ord. 00-01, Passed1-18-00)
1042.03 ABBREVIATIONS
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l liter
mg milligrams
mg/l milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard industrial classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
O & M Operation and maintenance
CWA Clean Water Act
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 9
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.04 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS OR DISCHARGES OF SOLID OR LIQUID WASTES; SEPTIC
TANKS PROHIBITED; INSTALLATION OF TOILET FACILITIES AND CONNECTION TO
PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
A. No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this
chapter and statutes and regulations of the State.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or
right of way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary
or combined sewer for the City, is hereby required, at his or her expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The City Council may require any such owner, pursuant to the authority
conferred upon it by law or ordinance, to make such installation or connection. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.05 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
A. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
1042.04(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system
constructed in compliance with State law and the regulations of the City Council.
B. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
disposal system, as provided in Section 1042.04(d), a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
Upon application of the owner of such property, the City Council may grant a delay of not
more than two years before making connection to a public sewer. Such delay shall be
granted only if private facilities are satisfactory and create no nuisance or health hazard.
C. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
D. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the City Council or the Michigan Department of
Health with respect to private sewage disposal. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 10
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.06 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter
or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Manager or from such official as he or she may designate.
B All connections with any sewer of the City shall be made only after written authorization
and permits issued by the City are obtained, and upon completion of such forms and the
paying of such fees as shall be established from time to time by the City Council.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a building sewer shall
be borne by the owner of such property. The owner shall indemnify the City from all loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
D. All applicants for sewer connection permits shall, when required, submit plans and
specifications for all plumbing construction within such building or premises, and such plans
and specifications shall meet the requirements of the Michigan Building Code, as adopted in
Section 1420.01 of the Building and Housing Code, and all orders, rules and regulations of
the Michigan Department of Health. When such plans and specifications have been
approved by the City Council or by such official as it may designate, a sewer or plumbing
permit shall be issued, subject to final inspection and approval when construction is
completed.
E. The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the Manager or the Code Official when
the building sewer is ready for inspection. The Manager or the Code Official, or their
designated representatives, shall then inspect the building and plumbing construction
therein, and if such construction meets the previous requirement as approved in the
construction permit, a sewer connection approval shall be issued, subject to the applicable
provisions of other sections of this chapter.
F. The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of existing building sewers and their
connections to public sewers shall be borne by the property owner. Such owner shall make
application to the City through its designated representative for a permit to perform work.
G. The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the City's representative.
H. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades
and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 11
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.07 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage water, cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the City. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon
approval of the City, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
C. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to
the national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following
substances to any POTW:
1. Any liquids, solids or gases, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed
cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit, which, by reason of their nature
and quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or
to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and
sulfides.
2. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as,
but not limited to, the following: grease, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil,
products of mineral oil origin, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste
paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from the refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. (Ord. 00-
01, passed 1-18-00)
3. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.0, or wastewater having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment or personnel of the POTW.
4. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters of the POTW or exceed a limitation set forth in a categorical
pretreatment standard.
5. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to
life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair,
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 12
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
including pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within
the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
6. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the
POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse
or to interfere with the reclamation process.
7. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving
water quality standards.
8. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
9. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the
POTW, resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature which
exceeds sixty-six degrees centigrade (150 degrees Fahrenheit).
10. Any pollutants, including suspended solids and/or oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference to the POTW.
11. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
12. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
13. Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water.
14. Any trucked or hauled wastewater, except as specifically allowed by the City. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
D. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the local limits established
below.
1. Non-permitted Users. Unless specially authorized via approval of the Superintendent
and issue of a wastewater discharge permit, no wastewater containing pollutants in
excess of the following background concentrations shall be discharged:
Concentration Pollutant Sample Basis
* arsenic 24-hour composite
0.001 mg/l cadmium 24-hour composite
* chromium, total 24-hour composite
0.065 mg/l copper 24-hour composite
0.007 mg/l lead 24-hour composite
* mercury 24-hour composite
0.002 mg/l nickel 24-hour composite
0.001 mg/l silver 24-hour composite
0.082 mg/l zinc 24-hour composite
* cyanide, total average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
0.1 mg/l phenols, total average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
* xylenes, total average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
* tetrachloroethylene average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 13
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
* Any discharge of indicated pollutant at or above the level of detection shall be a
specific violation of this ordinance. The sampling procedures,
preservation/handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be
in accordance with the following EPA methods; the detection levels shall not
exceed the indicated values, unless higher levels are appropriate because of
sample matrix interference:
Pollutant Test Method Level of Detection
arsenic EPA 206.2 0.001 mg/l
chromium EPA 218.2 0.001 mg/l
mercury EPA 245.1 0.0005 mg/l
cyanides, total EPA 335.2 0.005 mg/l
xylenes, total EPA 602 0.001 mg/l
tetrachloroethylene EPA 601 0.001 mg/l
2. Permitted Users. Upon approval of the Superintendent and issue of a wastewater
discharge permit, wastewater not in excess of the following local limits may be
discharged:
Concentration Pollutant Sample Basis
0.94 mg/l arsenic 24-hour composite
0.026 mg/l cadmium 24-hour composite
4.3 mg/l chromium, total 24-hour composite
0.73 mg/l copper 24-hour composite
0.75 mg/l lead 24-hour composite
* mercury 24-hour composite
1.2 mg/l nickel 24-hour composite
0.032 mg/l silver 24-hour composite
2.0 mg/l zinc 24-hour composite
0.05 mg/l cyanide, total average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
0.53 mg/l phenols, total average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
0.75 mg/l xylenes, total average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
0.88 mg/l tetrachloroethylene average of grab(s) over 24 hour period
* Any discharge of indicated pollutant at or above the level of detection shall be a
specific violation of this ordinance. The sampling procedures,
preservation/handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be
in accordance with the following EPA methods; the detection levels shall not
exceed the indicated values, unless higher levels are appropriate because of sample
matrix interference:
Pollutant Test Method Level of Detection
mercury EPA 245.1 0.0005 mg/l
(Ord. #97-4. Passed 1/21/97)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 14
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.08 INCORPORATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
A. Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards for a particular
industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations
imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede
the limitations imposed under this chapter and shall be considered part of this chapter. The
Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements.
B. Existing users subject to new national categorical pretreatment standards shall achieve
compliance within three years of the date the standard is promulgated, unless a shorter
compliance schedule is specified in the standard. New sources subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards shall install, have in operating condition and have
started-up all pretreatment equipment required to achieve compliance before beginning to
discharge, and shall meet all applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible
time, but not to exceed ninety days after beginning to discharge. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.09 STATE DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more
stringent than Federal requirements and limitations or those provided in this chapter. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.10 LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS
The City reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements
on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if such limitations or requirements are
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section 1042.01.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.11 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of
a type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, shall be gastight and watertight.
B. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at
his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.12 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF CERTAIN DISCHARGES
A. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
1. containing five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by
weight, or
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 15
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
2. containing suspended solids greater than 350 parts per million by weight, or
3. containing chemical oxygen demand greater than 600 parts per million by weight, or
4. containing total Kjeldahl nitrogen greater than 40 parts as N per million by weight, or
5. containing total phosphorus greater than 15 parts per P per million by weight, or
6. containing oil and grease greater than 100 parts per million by weight, or
7. having an average daily flow which imposes an unreasonable burden upon the public
sewers, pumping stations, or the POTW treatment plant, shall be prohibited unless
reviewed and approved by the City and covered by a wastewater discharge permit.
B. Such excess discharges may be assessed per-pound and/or per-gallon surcharge fees, as
appropriate, in accordance with Section 1042.18 of this Ordinance. The sample basis for
per-pound surcharge fees shall be 24-hour composites or, when appropriate in the opinion
of the City, the average of grab(s) collected of a 24-hour period.
In no case, however, shall a User discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
Concentration Pollutant Sample Basis
980 mg/l 5-Day Biochemical OxygeDemand 24-Hour Composite, or Average of
Grab(s) over 24 Hour Period
1,200 mg/l Total Suspended Solids 24-Hour Composite, or Average of
Grab(s) over 24 Hour Period
2,280 mg/l Chemical Oxygen Demand 24-Hour Composite, or Average of
Grab(s) over 24 Hour Period
290 mg/l Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 24-Hour Composite, or Average of
Grab(s) over 24 Hour Period
45 mg/l Total Phosphorus 24-Hour Composite, or Average of
Grab(s) over 24 Hour Period
550 mg/l Oil & Grease 24-Hour Composite, or Average of
Grab(s) over 24 Hour Period
1042.13 DILUTION OF DISCHARGES
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any
other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the City or State. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.14 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES
A. Protective Facilities and Procedures; Emergency Notification. Where required, a user shall
provide protection from accidental discharges of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this chapter. The City will evaluate, at least once every two years, whether a
user without such protection will be subjected to these requirements. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
owner's or users own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 16
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
approved by the City before construction of the facility. All required users shall complete
such a plan within six months of the adoption of this chapter. If required by the City, a user
who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this chapter shall not
be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures
have been approved by the City. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In the case of an accidental
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW
of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, the type of
waste, the concentration and volume of such waste and corrective actions.
B. Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to
the Superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to persons or
property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
C. Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees of whom to call in the event of a dangerous
discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a
dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.15 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF UNUSUAL INDUSTRIAL WASTES
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern, provided that such waste will not damage the sanitary or
storm sewers, the sewage treatment plant or the receiving waters and provided that the
Federal categorical standards will not be violated. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.16 UPSETS
A. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense by users in unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements, provided that it can be proved that:
1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the causes of the upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and
in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
3. The user submitted the following information to the City within twenty-four hours of
becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within five days):
(a) A description of the discharge and the cause of noncompliance;
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 17
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not
corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce eliminate and prevent recurrence of
the noncompliance.
B. In any enforcement proceedings, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset
shall have the burden of proof. Users shall not have an affirmative defense for the
discharge of pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within
the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute health and safety problems to workers.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.) (Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-18-00)
1042.17 BYPASSES
A. A bypass producing a discharge which violates applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment requirements is prohibited, and the City may take enforcement
action against a user for such bypass, unless the bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury or severe property damage; there were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime (except where adequate
backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to operate during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance); and the user submitted required notices.
B. If the user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, a prior notice shall be submitted to
the City at least ten days before the date of the bypass. The City may approve or
disapprove this anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects.
C. A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment requirements to the City within twenty-four hours from the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. Unless waived by the City, a written submission shall then be
provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate
and prevent recurrence of the bypass.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.18 RATES AND CHARGES FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE
A. The sanitary sewer system of the City shall, as far as possible, be operated and maintained
on a public utility basis as authorized by law. Each premise within the City connected to and
using the facilities of the system shall pay the rates and charges for such use as fixed and
established from time to time by the City Council.
B. Where sewage disposal service is furnished to users not connected to the water system, or
in cases where users make use of large quantities of water which may be discharged into
storm sewers or approved outlets other than the sanitary sewer system, or for other
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 18
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
miscellaneous users of water for which special consideration should be given, special rates
may be fixed by the City Council.
C. the character of sewage from any manufacturing or industrial plant, or from any other
building or premises, is such that it imposes an unreasonable burden upon the City's
sewerage system, in the discretion of the City Council, an additional charge shall be made
over and above the regular rates herein established; or, in the alternative, such owner may
be required to separately and satisfactorily treat such sewage before emptying it into any
public sewer, or the right to empty such sewage may be denied, if necessary, for the
protection of the system, public health or safety.
D. The City shall provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW for the
implementation of the Industrial Pretreatment Program. The applicable charges or fees
shall be set forth for:
1. Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Pretreatment Program;
2. Monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
3. Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
4. Filing appeals;
5. Consistent removal by the City of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal
pretreatment standards; and
6. Other purposes as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained in this chapter.
The charges and fees for the services provided by the system for the Industrial
Pretreatment Program shall be levied upon any user who or which may have any sewer
connections with the POTW and who or which discharges industrial waste to the POTW or
any part thereof. Such charges shall be based upon the quantity and quality of industrial
wastewater used thereon or therein.
E. The rate to be billed for the use of the system shall be determined as follows for all
industrial users within the sanitary sewer service area of the City:
1. A per pound excess BOD surcharge shall be made for
discharges in excess of mg/l BOD.
2. A per pound excess suspended solids surcharge shall be
made for discharges in excess of mg/l suspended solids.
3. Additional surcharges may be made by the City to compensate the City for the cost of
treatment of pollutant loadings not normally treated at, or in excess of those treated
by, the POTW.
4. There shall be additional charges for laboratory testing of wastewater. The laboratory
charge shall be for the cost thereof and will be determined for each industrial user.
5. Rates will be established and amended by resolution by City Council.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 19
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.19 DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION FROM INDUSTRIAL USERS PRIOR TO
CONNECTION AND CONTRIBUTION TO POTW; ADDITIONAL POWERS OF CITY
RE CONTROL OF DISCHARGES
A. No person shall discharge to the waters of the State within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said City, and/or to the POTW, any wastewater, except as authorized by the
Superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except as provided by an
NPDES permit.
B. All industrial users proposing to connect or contribute to the POTW shall submit
information on the user, processes and wastewater to the City before connecting to or
contributing to the POTW. All existing industrial users connected to or contributing to the
POTW shall submit this information within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter.
The information submitted must be sufficient for the City to determine the impact of the
user's discharge on the POTW and the need for pretreatment. The user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, on a disclosure form prescribed by the City, the
following information:
1. The user's name, address and location (if different from the address).
2. The user's SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
3. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those
mentioned in Section 1042.07, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and
methods detailed in:
(a) Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American
Public Health Association;
(b) Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, United States
Environmental Protection Agency;
(c) Annual Book of Standards, Part 131, "Water, Atmospheric Analysis," 1975,
American Society for Testing and Materials
4. The time and duration of contribution;
5. Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations,
if any;
6. For industries identified as significant industries or subject to the national categorical
pretreatment standards, or those required by the City, site plans, floor plans,
mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation;
7. A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all
materials which are or could be discharged;
8. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by any City, State or Federal pretreatment standards, and a statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required by the industrial user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 20
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
9. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following
conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards.
(b) No increment referred to in paragraph (b)(9)A. hereof shall exceed nine months.
(c) Not later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final
date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Superintendent, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
10. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;
11. The type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day;
12. The number and type of employees, hours of operation of the plant and the proposed
or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system.
13. Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the
impact of the discharge on the POTW.
The disclosure form shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the user and a
qualified engineer.
The City will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data furnished and may
require additional information. Within ninety days after full evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the City shall notify the user of the acceptance
thereof.
C. Within 180 days after the effective date of the promulgation or revision of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, all affected existing users must submit to the City the
information required by paragraphs (b)(8) and (9) hereof. At least ninety days prior to
commencement of discharge, new sources and existing sources that become affected users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard shall submit to the City information on the method of pretreatment they intend to
use to meet the applicable pretreatment standard and estimates of flow and pollutants to
be discharged. Industrial users shall report any changes in the Baseline Monitoring Report
to the POTW within 60 days. (Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-18-00)
D. Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. The City may:
1. Set unit charges or a schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be
discharged to the POTW;
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 21
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
2. Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for
flow regulations and equalization;
4. Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
5. Establish specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling
locations, the frequency of sampling, the number, types and standards for tests and
reporting schedules;
6. Establish compliance schedules;
7. Require the submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
8. Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the City, and affording City access thereto and
copying thereof;
9. Require notification of the City in advance of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system, including
ground waters purged for remedial action programs and ground waters containing
pollutants that infiltrate into sewers; (Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-18-00)
10. Require immediate notification of all discharges that could cause problems to the
POTW, including any slug discharges;
11. Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
12. Convert concentration-based national categorical pretreatment standards to
equivalent mass-based or production-based pretreatment requirements.
13. Control through permit, order, or similar means, the contribution to the POTW by
each User to ensure compliance with applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, Pretreatment Requirements, or this Ordinance. The control mechanism
may have the following minimum conditions, which are enforceable:
(a) A statement of the duration of the control mechanism, which shall not be more
than 5 years;
(b) A statement of not-transferability without prior notification to the publicly
owned treatment works, and provisions that a copy of the existing control
mechanism conditions shall be provided to the new
(c) Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, local limits,
and state and local law;
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping
requirements, including identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency , and sample type based on the applicable
general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits,
and state and local law;
(e) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, and applicable compliance schedules
that do not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines;
(f) A provision for the modification of the control mechanism by the City in the
event of revised NPDES permit conditions, water quality standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, or objectives of the City’s Industrial Pretreatment
Program; and
(g) Provisions whereby the City may issue, revoke, suspend, or formulate a control
mechanism based upon the User's compliance with National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, Pretreatment Requirements, or this Ordinance, using
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 22
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
discharge data provided via periodic compliance reports pursuant to Paragraph
1042.20(b) of this Section. (Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-18-00)
14. Adjust national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of
pollutants in a user's intake water. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.20 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
A. Generally. Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited
by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for
these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards
or requirements. For users subject to equivalent mass-based or concentration-based limits
established by the City, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the long-term
production rate. For users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed per unit
of production, the report shall include the actual production during the sample period. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified to by a qualified representative.
B. Periodic Compliance Reports.
1. Any Significant Industrial User discharging into the POTW shall submit to the
Superintendent during June and December, unless required more frequently in a
control mechanism or by the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, Pretreatment Requirements, or a control mechanism. The
nature and concentration of pollutants reported shall be on the basis of
representative sampling. Where required, this report shall include a record of all daily
flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow reported in
Paragraph 1042.19(d)(3) of this section. At the discretion of the Superintendent and
in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles,
etc., the Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are to be submitted. (Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-18-00)
Any User who discharges into the POTW shall, upon direction from the
Superintendent, submit data indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent which are limited by this Ordinance. This data may be collected by the
User or may be collected by the City with the costs reimbursed by the User. The
Superintendent may, based upon this data, require additional reporting or may
designate the User as a Significant Industrial User and issue a control mechanism to
apply to the discharge.
2. The Superintendent may also impose mass limitations on users who or which are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases
in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report
required by paragraph (b)(1) hereof shall also indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
3. If a user is subject to reporting requirements and is required to demonstrate
continued compliance and monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by
the City, using approved procedures, the results of this additional monitoring shall also
be included in the periodic compliance report.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 23
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
4. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the City
within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also
repeat the sampling and submit the results of re-analysis to the City within thirty days
after becoming aware of the violation, except when the City will be performing
scheduled surveillance sampling/analysis within this thirty-day period. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.21 MONITORING FACILITIES
The City may require monitoring facilities to be provided and operated at the user's own
expense to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage systems. Normally, the monitoring facility should be situated on the user's
premises, but the City may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship
on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located
so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room
in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis. The facility and sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether
constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be
provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the City
and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within ninety days following written notification by the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.22 INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING
The City shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purposes of this chapter
are being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises
where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the City or its representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination, records copying or the performance of any of the City's or its
representative's duties. The City, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the
EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a
user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into such user's premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City,
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the EPA will be permitted to enter the
premises of such user without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.) (Ord 00-01. Passed 1-18-00)
1042.23 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES
Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards
within the time limitations as specified by Federal pretreatment regulations and as required by
the City. Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall
be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and
shall be approved by the City before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this
chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or the method of operation
shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 24
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.24 PUBLICATION OF NAMES OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT
NONCOMPLIANCE; RECORDS OF COMPLIANCE
The City will annually publish in the major local newspaper a list of the users subject to
Categorical Standards which were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment
requirements or standards at any time during the previous twelve months. The notification will
also summarize any enforcement actions taken against such users during the same twelve
months.
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to
officials of the EPA or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality upon request.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)(Ord. 00-01. Passed 1-18-00)
1042.25 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications,
permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the NPDES permit or the pretreatment programs, provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the State or any State
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.
C. Information accepted by the City as confidential shall not be transmitted to any government
agency or to the general public by the City until and unless a ten-day notification is given to
the user. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.26 SIGNING OF REPORTS; CERTIFICATION STATEMENT
All reports required by this section shall be signed by the authorized representative of an
industrial user and include the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
If the authorized representative of an industrial user changes because a different individual has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or for environmental matters of the
company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of Section 1042.02(2)C. must be
submitted to the City prior to or together with any reports to be signed by that representative.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 25
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.27 DISCHARGES OF HAZARDOUS WASTE
All users shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and the
State Hazardous Waste Authority in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance
which would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261 if disposed via other means. Notification
details, as well as allowable exceptions, shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p). In the
case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must provide notification of the discharge of such
substance within ninety days of the effective date of such regulations. In the case of any
notification of hazardous waste discharges, the user shall further certify that it has a program in
place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.28 OPENING AND CLOSING HOLES IN SEWERS
No person shall cut, break or make any opening into any of the sewers, trunk line or otherwise,
in any street or alley in the City, without first having permission from the City Manager of the
City to do so. After having received such permission to open, make or break a hole in such
sewer, the same shall not be closed except under the supervision and direction of the City
Manager, or his or her designee. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.29 FALSIFICATION
No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
to this chapter, or who falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.30 RETENTION OF RECORDS
All users subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any
records, books, documents, memoranda, reports and correspondence, and any and all
summaries thereto, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in
behalf of a user in connection with such user's discharge. All records which pertain to matters
which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation
activities brought by the City pursuant to this chapter shall be retained and preserved by the
user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to
any and all appeals have expired. (Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
1042.31 SUSPENSION AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE; VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT
ACTIONS; OTHER REMEDIES
A. The City may suspend wastewater treatment services to any User when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons or the environment, causes or may cause interference to the POTW, or
causes or may cause the City to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit.
B. The City may revoke, suspend, or terminate the wastewater discharge permit of any User
which
1. fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge;
2. fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics;
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 26
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
3. refuses reasonable access to the User's premises by representatives of the City for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
4. violates the conditions of this Ordinance or any final judicial order entered with
respect thereto.
C. Any person notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment service shall immediately stop
or eliminate contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The City shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge. A detailed
written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City
within fifteen days of the date of occurrence.
1. Whenever the City finds that a User has violated any provision of this Ordinance,
Industrial Waste Permit or order issued hereunder, or other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, the Superintendent will issue a Notice of Violation to formally document
the noncompliance. This document will specify the nature of the violation, establish a
date by which the violation shall be corrected, and notify the affected User that failure
to correct the violation would constitute a further violation which may result in
additional enforcement action. A notice of Violation will be sent via first-class mail or
personally served on an Authorized Representative of the User.
Receipt, or not-receipt, of a Notice of Violation shall in no way relieve the affected
User of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a Notice of
Violation shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement
actions by the City against the affected User.
2. When the City finds that a User has violated any provision of this Ordinance, Industrial
Waste Permit or Order issued hereunder, or other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, the Superintendent may issue and Administrative Order to Show Cause
requiring the affected User to appear at a hearing to demonstrate why escalated
enforcement action should not be pursued. This document will specify the nature of
the violation, establish the time and place for the hearing, and notify the affected User
that failure to comply would constitute a violation of this Ordinance which may result
in additional enforcement action. An Order to Show Cause will be issued at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing, and will be sent via certified mail/return receipt
requested or personally served on an Authorized Representative of the User.
Receipt, or non-receipt, of an Order to Show Cause shall in no way relieve the affected
User of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an Order to Show
Cause or conducting of the show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the City against the affected User.
3. When the City and an affected User agree to a violation and to the remedial solution,
the Superintendent may issue and Order of Consent or similar document to formally
establish such agreement. This document will specify the nature of the violation and
required actions such as compliance schedules, stipulated fines, additional selfmonitoring,
and improvements to treatment facilities or management practices
designed to control the User's discharge to the sewer. An Order of consent will be
sent via certified mail/return receipt requested, or personally served on an Authorized
Representative of the User, and will require signatures of representatives from both
the City and the affected User.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 27
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
An Order of consent or similar document shall have the same force and effect as other
administrative orders issued by the City pursuant to this Ordinance, shall be judicially
enforceable, and shall not modify the requirements or extend the deadline for
compliance established by a Pretreatment Standard or Requirements. Receipt, or
non-receipt, of an Order of Consent or similar document shall in no way relieve the
affected User of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a
Consent Order or similar document shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
any other enforcement actions by the City against the affected User.
4. When the City and affected User do not agree to the violation or to the remedial
solution, the Superintendent may issue an Order to Achieve Compliance. This
document will specify the nature of the violation and include required actions such as
compliance schedules, stipulated fines, additional self-monitoring, and improvements
to treatment facilities or management practices designed to control the User's
discharge to the sewer. An Order to Achieve Compliance will be issued unilaterally in
that terms need not be agreed to by the affected User, and will be sent via certified
mail/return receipt requested, or personally served on an Authorized Representative
of the User.
An Order to Achieve Compliance shall have the same force and effect as other
administrative orders issued by the City pursuant to this Ordinance, shall be judicially
enforceable, and shall not modify the requirements or extend the deadline for
compliance established by the Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. Receipt, or
non-receipt, of an Order to Achieve Compliance shall in no way relieve the affected
User of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an Order to
Achieve compliance shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, any other
enforcement actions by the City against the affected User.
5. When the City finds that a user has violated and continues to violate any provision of
this Ordinance, Industrial Waste Permit or order issued hereunder, or other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the Superintendent and City Attorney may
jointly issue a Cease and desist order requiring the affected User to eliminate the
violation within twenty-four 24 hours following issuance of the order, the City may
suspend sewer service without further notice until such time as the affected User is
able to demonstrate to the City that it can comply with the discharge requirements. A
Cease and Desist Order will be personally served on an Authorized Representative of
the User.
Receipt, or non-receipt, of a Cease and Desist Order shall in no way relive the affected
User of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a Cease and
Desist Order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement
actions by the City against the User.
6. Whenever the City finds that a User's discharge is in violation of any provision of this
Ordinance or any permit issued hereunder and that the violation creates or threatens
to create an emergency situation such as damage to the sanitary sewer system, passthrough
or interference to the wastewater treatment plant, hazard to Manistee Lake,
endangerment to the public health and safety, or violation of any condition of the
NPDES permit issued to the City, the Superintendent and City Attorney will jointly
issue an Emergency cease and desist order notifying the affected User to eliminate the
violating discharge immediately or face service severance via a temporary plug in its
sewer connection at any time and without further warning. this document will specify
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 28
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
the nature of the violation, an require that the violating discharge cease until such
time as the affected User is able to demonstrate to the City that it can comply with the
discharge requirements. This document will also establish the time and place for a
hearing where the affected User shall present a written Statement regarding the
causes of the violation and measures taken to prevent future occurrences, and further
will notify the affected User of its liability for any costs incurred by the City to conduct
this enforcement action. An Emergency Cease and Desist Order will be personally
served to an Authorized Representative of the User, or may be delivered verbally via
telephone to an Authorized Representative of the User and then served personally.
Receipt, or non-receipt, of an Emergency Cease and Desist Order shall in no way
relieve the affected User of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance
of an Emergency Cease and Desist Order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, any other enforcement actions by the City against the affected User.
7. Except for emergency situations covered under Subparagraph 2f. of this Section,
whenever the city finds that a User's continuing violation warrants revocation of its
permit or privilege to discharge into the Wastewater System, the Superintendent and
City Attorney will jointly issue a Notice of Termination to warn of the impending
suspension of the sewer service up to and including severance via temporary plug in
the affected User's sewer connection. This document will specify the date and time of
scheduled service suspension in order to allow the affected User to either voluntarily
cease the violating discharge or arrange appropriate actions such as production
shutdown or alternative means of wastewater disposal. This document will also
establish the time and place for a hearing where the affected User shall present a
written statement regarding the causes of the violation and measures taken to
prevent future occurrences, and further will notify the affected User of its liability for
any costs incurred by the City to conduct this enforcement action. A Notice of
Termination will be personally served on an Authorized Representative of the User at
least ten (10) days before the scheduled service suspension.
Receipt, or non-receipt, of a Notice of Termination shall in no way relieve the affected
User of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a Notice of
Termination shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement
actions by the City against the affected User.
8. In addition to the sanctions, orders, liabilities, and other remedies prescribed under
Subparagraphs 4.a through 4.g in this section, a User shall be liable to the city for any
and all fines, penalties, and associated legal and other costs incurred or expended by
the City as the result of any violation of the City's NPDES permit that is attributable, in
whole or in part, to the User's violation of this Ordinance or a permit issued to the
User hereunder.
D. When the City finds that a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
Ordinance, an Industrial Waste Permit or Order issued hereunder, or other Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, and administrative fine may be assessed against the affected
User in an amount up to $500 per violation. Each day during which the violation occurred
or continues to occur may be deemed a separate violation and, in the case of a violation of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, the fine may be assessed for each day
during the period of averaging.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 29
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
Receipt, or non-receipt, of an administrative fine shall in no way relieve the affected User of
any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the City against the
affected User.
E. Except for emergency situations covered under Subparagraph 2.f of this section, any User
desiring to dispute a Notice of Violation or order of the City, pursuant to this Ordinance,
including but not limited to fines, may present a written request for reconsideration. such a
request shall be submitted to the City manager within ten (10) days of first being notified of
the corresponding order for all but a Notice of Termination, where such a request shall be
submitted within five (5) days of notification. If, in the opinion of the City Manager, the
request has merit, he will convene a hearing on the matter as soon as possible to collect
testimony of appropriate persons, take evidence, and render a final determination. In the
even the affected User's appeal is unsuccessful, any original fine will become immediately
due and the City may also add any additional costs incurred to administer this appeal.
Further appeal of the City Manager's final determination shall be to the City Council.
Submittal of an appeal in no way relieves the affected User of any and all liability associated
with the violation. An appeal shall not stay the corresponding order, or limit any other
reinforcement proceedings by the City against the affected User.
F. When the City finds that a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
Ordinance, Industrial Waste Permit or order issued hereunder, or other Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, the City Attorney may petition the Circuit Court of Manistee
County for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief.
1. A User who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance,
Industrial Waste Permit or order issued hereunder, or other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement will be liable to issuance of a preliminary injunction or permanent
injunction, or both as may be appropriate. This action will be sought to restrain or
compel activities on the part of the affected User.
A petition of injunctive relief shall in no way relieve the affected User of any and all
liability associated with the violation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, any other actions by the City against the affected User.
2. A User who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance,
Industrial Waste Permit or order issued hereunder, or other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement will be liable for a civil penalty of up to five-hundred dollars ($500) per
violation. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues to occur may be
deemed a separate distinct violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other
long-term average discharge limits, the penalty may be assessed for each day during
the period of the averaging. the affected User will also be liable for all costs incurred
by the City for associated enforcement action such as reasonable attorney's fees,
court costs, additional sampling and monitoring expenses, as well as costs or any
environmental damage and any fines imposed upon the City for NPDES permit
violations that result in whole or in part from the User's violation and expenses
associated with remediation of sites thereby contaminated. The City Attorney may
petition the court to impose, assess, and recover sums up to this limit of liability. In
determining the appropriate amount of civil penalty to seek, the City may take into
account all relevant circumstances including but not limited to the extent of harm
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 30
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic
benefit gained by the affected User as a result of the violation, corrective actions
implemented or proposed to be implemented by the affected User, and history of
compliance or noncompliance by the affected User.
A suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other
actions by the City against the affected User.
3. A User who has willfully or negligently violated or continues to willfully or negligently
violate any provision of this Ordinance, Industrial Waste Permit or order issued
hereunder, or other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement will be liable to criminal
prosecution. If convicted, the affected User will be guilty of a misdemeanor and may
be punished by a monetary penalty of up to five-hundred dollars ($500) per violation,
imprisonment for up to ninety (90) days, or both. Each day during which the violation
occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in
the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, the
penalty may be assessed for each day during the period of averaging.
Criminal prosecution shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other actions
by the City against the affected User.
4. A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications
in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this Ordinance, Industrial Waste Permit or order issued
hereunder, or Pretreatment Standard or Requirement will be liable to criminal
prosecution. If convicted, the affected User will be guilty of a misdemeanor and may
be punished by a monetary penalty of up to five-hundred ($500) per violation,
imprisonment for up to ninety (90) days, or both. Each day during which the violation
occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in
the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, the
penalty may be assessed for each day during the period of averaging.
Criminal prosecution shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, other actions by
the City against the affected User.
5. A User who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any data device or
test method used to monitor a discharge pursuant to this Ordinance, Industrial Waste
Permit or order issued hereunder, or Pretreatment Standard or Requirement will be
liable to criminal prosecution. If convicted, the affected User will be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be punished by a monetary penalty of up to five hundred
dollars ($500) per violation, imprisonment for up to ninety (90) days, or both. Each
day during which the violation occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a
separate distinct violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term
average discharge limits, the penalty may be assessed for each day during the period
of averaging.
Criminal prosecution shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other actions
by the City against the affected User.
1042.32 SEPARABILITY
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters
shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 31
Chapter 1042 Wastewater Discharge Regulations
1042.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Whoever violates Section 1042.29 shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000)
or imprisoned not more than six months, or by both, for each offense.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-2-91.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1044 Cross Connection Control
Chapter 1044
Cross Connection Control
1044.01 Adoption of State Water Supply
Cross Connection Rules
1044.05 Testing of Protective Devices
1044.02 Inspections 1044.06 Violations; discontinuance of service;
other remedies
1044.03 Right of entry 1044.07 Conflicts
1044.04 Protection of public water supply;
notice of unsafe water
1044.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Water quality - see Mich. Const., Art. 4, Sec. 52; M.C.L.A. Secs. 67.38, 323.1 et
seq.
Water supply generally - see Mich. Const., Art. 7, Sec. 24; M.C.L.A. Secs. 46.171
et seq., 123.11 et seq., 325.201 et seq., 486.51 et seq., 486.101 et seq.
Council policy re new water connections - see ADM. 210.03.B
Department of Public Works - see ADM. Ch. 238
Water Department - see ADM. Ch. 240
Water pollution - see GEN. OFF. 670.01, 670.02
Combined water supply and sewage disposal system - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040
Wastewater discharge regulations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042
1044.01 ADOPTION OF STATE WATER SUPPLY CROSS CONNECTION RULES
The City of Manistee hereby adopts, by reference, the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of
the MDEQ being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. These
administrative rules were adopted under the authority of Act 399, P.A. 1976 which is the
Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-4-79.) (Ord. 01-03 adopted 7-3-01).
1044.02 INSPECTIONS
It shall be the duty of the Water Department to cause inspections to be made of all properties
served by the public water supply system where cross connections with the public water supply
system are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections, based on the
potential health hazards involved, shall be as established by the Water Department and as
approved by the Michigan Department of Public Health. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-4-79.)
1044.03 RIGHT OF ENTRY
A representative of the Water Department shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time,
any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the City for the
purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request,
the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency
any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1044 Cross Connection Control
Water Unsafe
For Drinking
refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of
the presence of cross connections. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-4-79.)
1044.04 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY; NOTICE OF UNSAFE WATER
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply
system shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this chapter and by the
Michigan Building Code, as adopted in Section 1420.01 of the Building and Housing Code. Any
water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows:
(Ord. Unno. Passed 9-4-79.)
1044.05 TESTING OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES
All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that
the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time
interval specified by the Water Department and in accordance with MDEQ requirements. Only
individuals approved by the Water Department shall be qualified to perform such testing, and
those individuals shall certify, in writing, the results of that testing. (Added by Ord. 01-03 adopted 7-
3-01)
1044.06 VIOLATIONS; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; OTHER REMEDIES
A. The Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue the water service
after reasonable notice to the owner of any property wherein any connection in violation of
this chapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 9-4-79.)
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Section 1044.99, the City may pursue any and all legal
and equitable remedies against any person who violates any provision of this chapter,
including an action for an injunction to restrain a violation of this chapter.
C. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be subject to the penalty provided in Section 1044.99.
1044.07 CONFLICTS
This chapter is intended to be a supplement to the applicable provisions of State or local law
governing plumbing, and is not intended to supersede any of the provisions of the same.
1044.99 PENALTIES
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to penalties in accordance with section 202.99. (Ord. 00-09 Passed 6-6-00.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1062 Parks and Recreation
Chapter 1062
Parks and Recreation
1062.01 Regulation of noise during certain
hours
1062.04 Camping restricted on beaches, parks
or public grounds
1062.02 Consumption of alcoholic
beverages during certain hours
1062.05 Marina operation
1062.03 Promulgation of rules and
regulations by Council re use of
playground equipment and
beaches, parks and other
recreation areas
1062.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Parks generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 23
Recreation facilities in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4e
Sale of park property - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5
Misapplication of park funds - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 123.67
Parks Department - see ADM. Ch. 244
Board of Harbor Commissioners - see ADM. Ch. 266
Parks Commission - see ADM. Ch. 276
Watercraft operation - see TRAF. Ch. 450
River, lake and harbor regulations - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 670
1062.01 REGULATION OF NOISE DURING CERTAIN HOURS
The playing of any radio, phonograph or musical instrument between certain hours on any
beach, park or recreation area, or in any parking area adjacent to these areas, is hereby
prohibited in the City. Such hours shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-19-73.)
1062.02 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING CERTAIN HOURS
The use of alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine or liquor, on any beach, park or recreation
area, or in any parking area adjacent to these areas, during certain hours, is hereby prohibited
in the City. Such hours shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord.
Unno. Passed 6-19-73.)
1062.03 PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY COUNCIL RE USE OF
PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT AND BEACHES, PARKS AND OTHER RECREATION
AREAS
The City Council shall establish rules and regulations governing the use of playground
equipment, including hours for the use thereof, and any other regulations that are necessary
for the protection, safety and welfare of persons in and around beaches, parks and recreation
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1062 Parks and Recreation
areas in the City. These rules and regulations shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
City Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed 6-19-73.)
1062.04 CAMPING RESTRICTED ON BEACHES, PARKS OR PUBLIC GROUNDS
A. As used in this section, the term "camp" specifically shall not mean or include the casual
ordinary use made of parks, beaches or picnic facilities. The term "camp" means and
includes the use of the beaches, parks, lands or properties leased, owned or controlled by
the City within the City limits for the purpose of lodging, sleeping overnight and general
camping, as the same is commonly known and defined, in tents, shelters of any kind,
trailers, boats, cars, trucks or appurtenances thereto, sleeping quarters, tents or out of
doors. The term "camp" also means and includes the use of the City's parks, beaches and
lands which it owns, leases or controls as a "trailer camp," as the same, and for purposes
which the same, are ordinarily used, i.e., for lodging and as a temporary residence or for
and as a substitute for sleeping accommodations.
B. No person, association, group of persons or partnership shall camp, as defined in subsection
(a) hereof, on any of the beaches, parks or lands owned, leased or controlled by the City
within the City limits.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to boats moored at any City marina. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 3-5-68.)
1062.05 MARINA OPERATION
A. Rules and Regulations. On navigable waters of the United States, Federal laws and
regulations controlling boat equipment and operations shall prevail. The management of
the Marina, the City and the Department of Parks have herein set forth the following local
rules and regulations to govern berthing, maneuvering and serving of boats and the conduct
of owners. In general, these rules define the authority of the Marina's management to
establish standards for the safety, health and comfort of its patrons.
1. The word "operator" shall be used herein to indicate any person authorized to
represent the actual owner of the Marina. The word "tenant" shall be used to indicate
the owner of a boat legally within the Marina or any person who is otherwise using
the facilities.
2. When a boat enters the Marina, it shall immediately come under the jurisdiction of
the operator and shall be berthed or anchored only where ordered and maneuvered
as directed by the Marina operator or his or her assistant.
3. Only pleasure boats shall be admitted to the Marina. This rule may be amended
under conditions whereby space is available to allow another craft occupancy. Such
other craft is to be given twenty-four hour notice to vacate, by the operator, as the
need arises.
4. No advertising or soliciting shall be permitted on any boat within the Marina or on the
grounds of the Marina.
5. Boats not marked or identified as required by law will not be permitted within the
Marina.
6. Tenants will fill out all required information requested by the operator upon dockage.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 3
Chapter 1062 Parks and Recreation
7. Boats shall be in a seaworthy condition and not constitute a fire hazard or they shall
be removed from the Marina.
8. No swimming, diving or fishing shall be permitted within the Marina.
9. Boat owners shall not store supplies, materials, accessories or debris upon any
walkway and shall not construct thereon any lockers, chests, cabinets, steps, ramps or
similar structures.
10. No refuse or excrement shall be thrown, pumped or discharged overboard. Garbage
shall be deposited in cans supplied therefor, and other debris shall be placed where
specified by the operator.
11. Tenants shall use discretion in operating motors, generators or bilge pumps so as not
to create a disturbance.
12. Disorderly conduct by a tenant or his or her visitors that might cause injury to a person
or damage to property or otherwise create a nuisance shall be cause for immediate
removal from the Marina of his or her boat.
13. Vessels entering the Marina during an emergency shall be reported immediately by
their owners to the operator.
14. Slip rentals, mooring charges and rates for storage, water, etc., shall be strictly in
accordance with published schedules. All rentals for space shall be paid in advance.
No refunds will be made. No subleasing of slips or transfer of boats between slips will
be allowed.
15. The operator is not responsible for any loss on, or any damage to, boats in the Marina.
Each owner will be held responsible for damage which he or she may cause to other
boats in the Marina or for any damage to any structure. Any boat which may sink in
the Marina shall be removed by the tenant.
16. Boats in the Marina shall be equipped with lights and be operated according to the
rules of the road and the navigation laws of the United States.
17. Boat wells shall be operated in accordance with prescribed rules and regulations. For
violations of any such rule, the occupancy may be immediately terminated without
refund of fees paid.
B. Boat Permits.
1. No boat well may be occupied without a permit.
2. A permit is good for twenty-four hours only.
3. A tenant may not exceed his or her stay more than seven days, except at the
discretion of the dock manager.
4. A permit applies only to the boat specified in the permit.
5. Permit fees shall be as established from time to time by resolution of Council. (1973
Code §94.30)
1062.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Adopted January 7, 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 1
Chapter 1064 Charges for Fire Runs and Emergency Services
Chapter 1064
Charges for Fire Runs and Emergency Services
1064.01 Statement of Purpose 1064.07 Non-Exclusive Charges
1064.02 Definitions 1064.08 Multiple Responsible Persons
1064.03 Cost Recovery Charges 1064.09 Non-Applicability of No Fault Act
1064.04 Time for Payment of Cost
Recovery Charges
1064.10 Non-Applicability of Natural
Resources and Environmental
Protection Act
1064.05 Collection of Charges 1064.11 No Limitation of Liability
1064.06 Exemptions 1064.12 Severability
CROSS REFERENCES
Michigan Police and Fire Protection Act, MCL 41.806a
Michigan No Fault Act, MCL 500.3101 et seq.
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq.
1064.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This Chapter is adopted to enable the City of Manistee (the “City") to bill for and collect "cost
recovery charges," as defined herein, from those receiving direct benefits from fire department
services and other emergency services provided by the City.
It is expressly the purpose of this Chapter to provide for and promote the safety and welfare of
the general public.
1064.02 DEFINITIONS
A. “Bomb threat” means the verbal, electronic or written threat of a bomb or other explosive
device which, if discharged as threatened, would violate a federal, state, or local law.
B. “City” means the City of Manistee and all of its departments, specifically including its police
and fire departments.
C. “Cost recovery charges” include the non-exhaustive list of fire protection services and other
emergency services enumerated in Section 1064.03 of this Chapter.
D. “Demolition of a structure” means the tearing down of a structure damaged by fire that
must, as determined by the City Fire Chief of Public Safety Director, be promptly
demolished to protect public safety.
E. “Receiving a direct benefit” means causing, requesting, or being involved in an accident or
incident within the City limits that causes a response by the City (i.e. a fire run) to provide
fire or other emergency services.
Adopted January 7, 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 2
Chapter 1064 Charges for Fire Runs and Emergency Services
F. “Downed power line or other non-HAZMAT public utility hazard response” means the
disabling of any transmission, distribution, or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire or
the like used to provide, collect, or transport electricity, natural gas, communication or
electronic signals (including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable television, and
stereo signals or electronic impulses), water or sanitary or storm sewage if the owner or
party responsible for the maintenance of such utility line does not respond within one hour
to a request to repair or correct such failure.
G. “Excessive requests” for emergency assistance means any request for emergency assistance,
except for medical assistance requests, made to a particular location if emergency
assistance has been requested to such location more than three times in the preceding
thirty days.
H. “False alarm” means any automated or manual device that requests or summons emergency
assistance whether such device is activated intentionally or otherwise, in the absence of an
actual need for emergency assistance. The determination that there was no actual need for
emergency assistance shall be made by the City Fire Chief or Public Safety Director. A false
alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred if: (i) it was caused by an act of God, i.e. a
lightning storm; or (ii) it originates from a motor vehicle or building alarm system and it has
not occurred more frequently than three times within thirty days or four times within a
calendar year.
I. “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or used on the public
streets, roads, and highways to transport passengers or property which is required to be
registered for use upon such public streets, roads, and highways. For the purposes of this
Chapter, all trailers and appurtenances attached to any motor vehicle are deemed to be a
motor vehicle.
J. “Responsible person” means an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, entity,
consortium, or joint venture responsible for cost recovery charges and receiving a direct
benefit from the fire protection services, city public works and/or other emergency services
provided by the City, and the heirs, estates, successors, and assigns of such responsible
person(s), subject to any limitations expressly stated in Section 1064.06 (Exemptions) and
1064.08 (Multiple Responsible Persons) of this Chapter.
1064.03 COST RECOVERY CHARGES
Subject to Section 1064.06 of this Chapter (Exemptions), the following is a non-exhaustive list of
fire protection services and other emergency services that, when provided by the City within
the City limits, are billable and collectible as "cost recovery charges" in accordance with the
City's resolution adopting a fee schedule for the cost recovery charges described in this
Chapter.
A. Responding to a multi or single motor vehicle and/or pedestrian accident, or other incident
involving motor(s) and/or pedestrian(s).
Adopted January 7, 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 3
Chapter 1064 Charges for Fire Runs and Emergency Services
B. Responding to a grass, rubbish, motor vehicle, aircraft, train, tree or forest, house, multiplefamily
building, hotel, motel, or other commercial establishment fire.
C. Responding to a downed power line or other non-HAZMAT public utility hazard response.
D. Responding to a false alarm.
E. Responding to excessive requests for emergency assistance.
F. Responding to a bomb threat.
G. Demolition of a structure.
H. Other emergency rescue service(s).
I. Other services not specifically listed that are determined by the City Fire Chief or Public
Safety Director to be fire protection or other emergency services.
1064.04 TIME FOR PAYMENT OF COST RECOVERY CHARGES
The cost recovery charges under this Chapter are due and payable by the responsible person(s)
within 30 days from the date on the City's invoice mailed to the responsible person(s) at
his/her/its last known address.
1064.05 COLLECTION OF CHARGES
If payment is not made within 30 days from the date on the City's invoice mailed to the
responsible person(s) at his/her/its last known address, such cost recovery charges are
collectible through proceedings in the 85th District Court or in any court of competent
jurisdiction as a matured debt and the City shall have any and all other remedies provided by
and subject to law for the collection of such charges. After the time limit for payment provided
in Section 1064.04 of this Chapter (Time for Payment of Cost Recovery Charges), unpaid cost
recovery charges constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible person(s) in the
City from which, upon which, or related to which, the cost recovery charges were incurred.
Such lien shall be the same character and effect as a lien created by City Charter for city real
property taxes, and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The City Treasurer shall, prior
to March 1 of each year, certify to the City Assessor the fact that such cost recovery charges are
delinquent and unpaid. The City Assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next
general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall
be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real
property taxes.
1064.06 EXEMPTIONS
The following properties and services are exempt from cost recovery charges under this
Chapter:
1. Responding to a fire involving City buildings, grounds, and/or property.
Adopted January 7, 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 4
Chapter 1064 Charges for Fire Runs and Emergency Services
2. Responding to a fire or providing other emergency services that are provided and performed
outside of the City. Notwithstanding such exemption for services provided outside of the
City, the City and other municipalities may adopt (an) ordinance(s) to impose fees for fire
and emergency service runs within their respective territories under MCL 41.801 et seq., as
amended.
3. Responding to a fire or providing other emergency services within the City limits that are
provided to or performed for a resident of the City. This exemption is made due to the fact
that City residents provide pro rata support for fire and other emergency services through
taxes paid to the City. Provided, however, that this exemption does not apply if the City
responds to a fire or provides other emergency services resulting from recurrent false alarms
or excessive requests for other emergency services
1064.07 NON-EXCLUSIVE CHARGES
Cost recovery charges are not the only charges that may be made by the City for the costs and
expenses of providing fire protection and other emergency services within the City limits.
Additional charges may be collected by the City through general taxation after an approving
vote of the electorate or by a special assessment established under the applicable Michigan
statute(s). General fund appropriates may also be made to cover such additional costs and
expenses of providing fire protection and other emergency services.
1064.08 MULTIPLE RESPONSIBLE PERSONS
When a particular fire protection or other emergency service rendered by the City directly
benefits more than one person, each person so benefited is liable for the payment of the full
charge for such service. Provided, however, that if a court of competent jurisdiction determines
that one or more persons who received fire protection or other emergency service rendered by
the City was at fault for the incident resulting in such service, the other person(s) involved in
the incident shall not be considered "responsible persons" for the purposes of this Chapter. The
interpretation and application of this section is delegated to the City Fire Chief or Public Safety
Director, subject only to written appeal within the time limits for payment in Section 1064.04 of
this Chapter (Time for Payment of Cost Recovery Charges) to the City Council, which written
appeal tolls the time limit for payment, and shall be administered so that cost recovery charges
shall only be collected from the recipients of the service.
1064.09 NON-APPLICABILITY OF NO FAULT ACT
This Chapter provides authority to the City to collect "cost recovery charges" for fire and
emergency services provided by the City, and within the City, to a responsible person(s). No
claim under this Chapter is for, or relates to, property damage(s). Michigan's No Fault Act, as
amended, MCL 500.3101 et seq., does not apply to, conflict with, or preempt this Chapter.
Adopted January 7, 2020
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Part Ten Streets, Utilities and Public Service Code Page 5
Chapter 1064 Charges for Fire Runs and Emergency Services
1064.10 NON-APPLICABILITY OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION ACT
This Chapter provides authority to the City to collect "cost recovery charges" for fire and
emergency services provided by the City, and within the City, to a responsible person(s). No
claim under this Chapter is for, or relates to, the cleanup or remediation of hazardous
substances, as defined in Part 201 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
as amended, MCL 324.20101 et seq. Michigan's Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, as amended, MCL 324.20101 et seq., does not apply to, conflict with, or
preempt this Chapter.
1064.11 NO LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
The collection of cost recovery charges pursuant to this Chapter does not limit the liability of a
responsible person under applicable local, state, or federal law.
1064.12 SEVERABILITY
If any provision or part of this Chapter is declared invalid or unenforceable by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the validity or enforceability of the balance of the ordinance is not
affected and remains in full force and effect. (Ord. 19-24 adopted 1-7-2020)
As amended thru January 12, 2013
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1220 Planning Commission
Chapter 1220
Planning Commission
1220.01 Composition; appointment;
compensation; terms; removals;
vacancies
1220.02 Powers and duties
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal planning commissions - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.31 et seq.
County planning commissions - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.101 et seq.
Master Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1222
Review of sketch of plats of subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1242.02
Subdivision Committee - see P. & Z. 1242.02, 1242.03
1220.01 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION; TERMS; REMOVALS;
VACANCIES
The City Planning Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be, insofar as possible,
in different professions and occupations and who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the elected members of City Council then serving. All members
of the Planning Commission shall serve as such without compensation and shall hold no
Municipal office, except that one of such members may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The term of each member shall be three years. All members shall hold office until
their successors are appointed. The legislative body may remove a member of the planning
commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and
after a public hearing. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably
be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of
interest to the planning commission. The member is disqualified from voting on the matter if
so provided by the bylaws or by a majority vote of the remaining members of the planning
commission. Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this ordinance or
the By-Laws of the Planning Commission constitutes malfeasance in office. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-
8-56.) (Ord. No. 08-09, passed 12-2-08) (Ord. No. 12-10, passed 1-2-13)
1220.02 POWERS AND DUTIES
The powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
A. All powers and duties set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.
and the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. Except the Planning
Commission shall not prepare or adopt a capital improvement program. Preparation and
adoption of a capital improvement program shall be the responsibility of City Council,
unless City Council delegates the duty to the City’s Chief Elected Official or a non-elected
administrative official of the City. If the duty is delegated, the City Council retains the right
of final approval of the capital improvements program; and
B. Acting in an advisory capacity as to any matter referred to it by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 08-09, passed 12-2-08) (Ord. No. 11-04, adopted 5-4-11)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1222 Master Plan
Chapter 1222
Master Plan
EDITOR'S NOTE: The Master Plan was adopted by resolution on December 5, 2002. Copies of
such Plan may be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.
There are no sections in Chapter 1222. This chapter has been established to provide a place for
cross references and any future legislation.
CROSS REFERENCES
Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.4i
Notice of hearing of municipal planning commission re master plan - see
M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.38
Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1220
Address map and index - see B. & H. 1464.02
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1240 General Provisions and Definitions
Chapter 1240
General Provisions and Definitions
1240.01 Title 1240.03 Application of Regulations
1240.02 Purposes 1240.04 Definitions
CROSS REFERENCES
Acceptance of plats; recording - see CHTR. Secs. 13-6, 13-7; M.C.L.A. Sec.
125.43
Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.44
Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.45
Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.51 et seq.
1240.01 TITLE
This Title Four of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code - shall be known and may be cited
as "The Subdivision and Platting Ordinance of the City of Manistee," and may be referred to as
the "Subdivision Ordinance" or "these Subdivision Regulations." (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1240.02 PURPOSES
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious
development of the City; to secure adequate traffic circulation through integrated street
systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to
achieve individual properties of maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions
for water supply, sanitary sewer and drainage facilities and other public health requirements; to
secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities in
appropriate locations; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of these
purposes. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1240.03 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
The rules and regulations governing plats and the subdivision of land contained in these
Subdivision Regulations shall apply within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-
16-60.)
1240.04 DEFINITIONS
As used in these Subdivision Regulations:
A. "Alley or service drive" means a passage or minor way affording generally a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street
and not intended for general traffic circulation.
B. "Arterial streets and highways" means those streets and highways which are used primarily
for fast or heavy traffic.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1240 General Provisions and Definitions
C. "Highways, major streets and parkways" means the highways, major streets and parkways
designated as such on the Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan and includes secondary
streets.
D. "Local or collector street" means a street intended to serve or provide access to
neighborhoods or sub-neighborhoods, one which carries traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.
E. "Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan" or "Major Street Plan" means the Major Street and
Thoroughfare Plan adopted by the Planning Commission.
F. "Marginal access street" means a minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to arterial
streets and highways and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
G. "Minor street" means any street that is not a highway, major street, parkway or local street
and that is intended to serve and provide access primarily to the properties abutting
thereon.
H. "Planning Commission" means the City Planning Commission.
I. "Street" means any street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue,
boulevard or other public way.
J. "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plots,
sites or other divisions of land, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership or building development, including all changes in street or lot lines, provided,
however, that this definition shall not include bona-fide divisions of land for agricultural
purposes, in parcels of more than ten acres not involving any new streets or easement of
access, or parcels already platted.
K. "Subdivision Committee" means a committee of not less than three Planning Commission
members appointed by the Chairperson of the Commission for the purpose of giving
detailed consideration to subdivision proposals in the pre-application and preliminary plat
stages in accordance with the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations and such other
duties relating to land subdivision as may be conferred on this Committee by the
Commission.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)

Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1242 Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
Chapter 1242
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
1242.01 Tentative approval of preliminary
plat required prior to sale or
construction
1242.04 Variances; re-subdivision of land; lot
splits
1242.02 Pre-application procedure; review
of sketch of plat by Subdivision
Committee and Planning
Commission
1242.99 Penalty
1242.03 Subdivision Committee;
composition; duties
CROSS REFERENCES
Acceptance of plats; recording - see CHTR. Secs. 13-6, 13-7; M.C.L.A. Sec.
125.43
Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.44
Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.45
Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.51 et seq.
1242.01 TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED PRIOR TO SALE OR
CONSTRUCTION
No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or have made a subdivision or re-subdivision
within the jurisdictional limits of these Subdivision Regulations shall enter into any contract for
the sale of, or shall offer for sale, such subdivision, or any part thereof, or shall proceed with
any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, until he or she or it has
obtained from the Planning Commission the tentative approval of the preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1242.02 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE; REVIEW OF SKETCH OF PLAT BY SUBDIVISION
COMMITTEE AND PLANNING COMMISSION
It is required that the subdivider or his or her agent consult with the Subdivision Committee
while the plat is in sketch form and before the preliminary plat is prepared to ascertain the
location of proposed highways, major streets, parkways, parks, playgrounds and other planned
developments. At this time the subdivider may request that the Planning Commission review
the proposal in sketch form and give general comments regarding its probable acceptability.
No commitments can be made by either the Subdivision Committee or the Planning
Commission at this stage as to the official acceptance of the preliminary plat.
1242.03 SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE; COMPOSITION; DUTIES
A. A Subdivision Committee composed of three members of the Planning Commission,
together with a planning consultant, is hereby delegated to represent the Commission in 
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1242 Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
pre-application negotiations with the subdivider and to perform such other functions as
may be assigned by the Chairperson of the Commission.
B. The function of the Subdivision Committee shall be to represent the Commission and make
recommendations regarding subdivision proposals in the pre-application stages. The
Committee, or any of its members, shall discuss such proposals with the subdivider, review
preliminary plats and other data, inspect sites and make such other investigations as
necessary, and shall furnish information to the subdivider regarding plat procedures and
requirements. The Committee shall present its recommendations regarding a proposal to
the Commission at its next regular meeting.
C. The information which may be furnished to the subdivider by the Committee includes the
following:
1. Procedural steps, design standards, preliminary plat requirements, zoning
requirements and public health requirements.
2. Any known unusual or difficult problems pertinent to the site, such as adjacent land
use, drainage, soil percolation, water supply, public utilities and streets. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 8-16-60.)
1242.04 VARIANCES; RE-SUBDIVISION OF LAND; LOT SPLITS
A. Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict
compliance with these Subdivision Regulations, it may vary these Regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such
variation will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of the Major Street
and Thoroughfare Plan, the Master Plan or these Regulations.
B. The general principles of design and the minimum requirements for the laying out of the
subdivision, stipulated in Chapter 1248, may be varied by the Planning Commission in the
case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a more or less self-contained neighborhood
to be developed in accordance with a comprehensive plan, safeguarded by appropriate
restrictions, which, in the judgment of the Commission, make adequate provision for all
essential community requirements, provided, however, that no modification shall be
granted by the Commission which would conflict with the proposals of the Major Street and
Thoroughfare Plan or the Master Plan or with the interests and purposes of general
principles of design and minimum requirements.
C. In the case of a small subdivision of minor importance situated in a locality where
conditions are well defined, the Planning Commission may exempt the subdivider from
complying with some or all of the requirements stipulated in Section 1244.02 pertaining to
the preparation of the preliminary plat, except that, in such cases, a public hearing on the
final plat shall be held prior to the installation of any improvements or approval of such final
plat.
D. In any particular case where the subdivider can show that, by reason of an exceptional
situation or characteristic of his or her property, strict compliance with any requirement of 
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 3
Chapter 1242 Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
these Regulations would cause practical difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship, the
Planning Commission may relax such requirement to the extent deemed just and proper so
as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided that such relief may be granted without
detriment to the public good and without impairing the intent and purposes of these
Regulations or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community
in accordance with the Master Plan and the Zoning Code. Any modification thus granted
shall be entered in the minutes of the Planning Commission, justifying the modification.
E. In the case of a proposal to re-subdivide land which is already platted but is relatively
underdeveloped, the Planning Commission will give due consideration to the need for
utilizing existing street improvements, utility installations and developed residential lots, in
keeping with good subdivision design. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
F. A subdivision lot, once platted, shall not be split, sold in part or combination or in any
way modified, except as follows:
1. Each resulting parcel must meet each and every requirement of the Zoning Code for
the land use district in which the parcel is located;
2. The Planning Commission has reviewed, and made recommendations to the City
Council relating to, the proposed modifications, either with or without a public
hearing, at the discretion of the Planning Commission; and
3. The proposed modifications have been approved by the City Council. (Ord. Unno. Passed
3-3-92.)
4. This Section shall not apply to subdivision lot combinations which may be approved by
the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 97-5 Passed 6-17-97)
1242.99 PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any provision of these
Subdivision Regulations shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1973 Code §151.99)

City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1244 Preliminary Plats
Chapter 1244
Preliminary Plats
1244.01 Procedure for conditional approval 1244.02 Contents
CROSS REFERENCES
Acceptance of plats; recording - see CHTR. Secs. 13-6, 13-7; M.C.L.A. Sec.
125.43
Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.44
Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.45
Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.51 et seq.
1244.01 PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL
In planning and developing a subdivision, the subdivider or his or her agent shall comply with
the general principles and requirements set forth in these Subdivision Regulations, and in every
case shall pursue the following procedure:
A. On reaching conclusions informally as recommended during pre-application negotiations as
provided in Section 1242.02, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat,
together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in Chapter
1248.
B. Five copies of black line or blue line prints of the preliminary plat and supplementary
material specified shall be submitted to the Planning Commission with written application
for conditional approval at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the Planning
Commission at which action is desired.
C. The preliminary plat will be checked by the Planning Commission as to its conformity with
the Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan and the principles, standards and requirements set
forth in these Subdivision Regulations. Copies of such preliminary plat will be referred by
the Planning Commission for recommendation or other action to the Manistee County Road
Commission, and to the City Manager for checking of matters within his or her jurisdiction
and submittal by him or her to the City Council for approval of the improvements proposed
to be installed and action on the City's participation, if any, in the cost and installation
thereof.
D. Upon receipt of the recommendations and advice of action concerning matters covered in
subsection (c) hereof, and before acting on the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission
will hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such hearing will be sent
by registered mail to the subdivider and owners of land immediately adjoining or directly
across a public street from the proposed subdivision.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1244 Preliminary Plats
E. Following review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity
thereof to these Regulations, and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed
advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him or her, the Planning
Commission will conditionally approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, or approve it with
modifications, noting thereon any changes that will be required or, if disapproved,
expressing its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
F. The action of the Planning Commission will be noted on copies of the preliminary plat,
referenced and attached to any conditions, with the date of the action shown thereon. One
such endorsed copy of the preliminary plat will also be transmitted to the Manistee County
Plat Board and the City Manager. One copy will be retained by the Planning Commission.
G. The conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission is revocable
and does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision. Rather, it is deemed an expression
of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of
the final plat, which will be submitted for approval to the Planning Commission and for
recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these Regulations and conditions of the
conditional approval, if any. Such approval is given with the understanding that the City
Manager, or other officials having jurisdiction, will examine the grades of streets, the types
of improvements and the design of the drainage, sewerage and water system as proposed
by the subdivider, whenever required for the protection of the public interest. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 8-16-60.)
1244.02 CONTENTS
A. Five copies of black line or blue line prints of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, prepared by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, shall accompany an
application, in writing, to the Planning Commission for the conditional approval of the
subdivision.
B. A vicinity sketch at the scale of 400 feet or more to the inch shall be shown on or shall
accompany the preliminary plat. The vicinity sketch shall show all existing subdivisions and
the street and tract lines of acreage parcels of land, together with the names of record
owners of such parcels, immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision and between it,
and the nearest existing highway or thoroughfares. It shall also show how the streets and
alleys in the proposed subdivision may connect with the existing and proposed streets and
alleys in neighboring subdivisions or unplatted property to produce the most advantageous
development of the entire neighborhood.
C. The horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall be 100 feet or less to the inch. The vertical
scale of street and sewer profiles shall be twenty feet or less to the inch.
D. The preliminary plat shall clearly show the following features and information:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate or
closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the County.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 3
Chapter 1244 Preliminary Plats
2. The tract designation according to the real estate records of the Register of Deeds of
the County.
3. The names and addresses of the owners of record, the subdivider and the engineer or
surveyor.
4. The names of adjacent subdivisions and the names of record of owners of adjacent
parcels of unplatted land.
5. The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract to be subdivided.
6. The locations, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways
within or adjacent to the tract, and other important features, such as existing
permanent buildings, large trees, water courses, railroad lines, corporation lines,
township lines, section lines, etc.
7. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the
tract and immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes and grades indicated.
8. Contours, with intervals of five feet or less, referenced to Manistee City Datum or U.S.
Geological Survey Datum, as and when required by the Planning Commission.
However, where land slopes less than approximately two percent and a contour map
is not required by the Planning Commission, spot ground elevations on the tract at all
breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more
than 100 feet apart in all directions, shall be shown.
9. Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning Commission; the
location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water
conditions; the depth to ground water, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet;
and the location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal
systems are proposed.
10. The layout, proposed names and widths of proposed streets, alleys and easements;
the location and approximate sizes of catch basins, culverts and other drainage
structures; the layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots.
(Proposed street names shall not duplicate or closely approximate any existing street
names in the County, except coterminous streets.)
11. The profile of each street with tentative grades indicated.
12. The cross-section of each proposed street, showing the width of pavement, the
location and width of sidewalks and the location and size of utility mains.
13. The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers, with grades and sizes indicated, or
method of sewage disposal in lieu of such sewers.
14. A plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the location
of valves and fire hydrants.
15. Zoning boundary lines, if any, the proposed use of property, proposed front yard
setback lines and zoning adjacent to the tract.
16. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use, or
to be reserved in the deeds for the common use of the property owners in the
subdivision, with the purpose, conditions or limitations of such reservations indicated.
17. The northpoint, scale and date.
18. Copies of any private restrictions to be included in the deeds, which should be
attached to the preliminary plat. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1246 Final Plats
Chapter 1246
Final Plats
1246.01 Procedure for approval 1246.02 Contents; conformity to State Plat Act
and State Plat Manual
CROSS REFERENCES
Acceptance of plats; recording - see CHTR. Secs. 13-6, 13-7; M.C.L.A. Sec.
125.43
Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.44
Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.45
Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.51 et seq.
1246.01 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
A After completion of all improvements to the satisfaction of the officials having jurisdiction,
or upon the posting of a surety as provided for in Section 1250.01, or upon entering into a
contract as otherwise provided for in Section 1250.01, the subdivider shall file with the
Planning Commission the original and eight lithoprints on cloth of the final or record plat of
the subdivision, on which shall be inscribed the County Treasurer's certificate to the effect
that all taxes for the preceding five years have been paid, and which shall otherwise
conform in every respect with the requirements of the State Plat Act and the State Plat
Manual of the State Department of Commerce. These shall be accompanied by a
certification of title showing the ownership of all lands to be dedicated to the public and
that the title thereof is free and unencumbered and a fee in the amount as required by the
Planning Commission. The final or record plat of any portion of a larger subdivision, the
preliminary plat of which has been conditionally approved by the Planning Commission,
may be submitted for approval.
B. The original of the final or record plat thus filed will be transmitted to the City Manager,
who will check such plat as to computations, certifications, lot areas and number,
monuments, etc. If found satisfactory, he or she will return such plat to the Planning
Commission, together with a two-fold certificate showing that the technical details of the
plat itself have been checked and found satisfactory and that all required improvements
have been completed to the satisfaction of the City officials having jurisdiction or, in case a
surety bond is posted or a contract is entered into by the subdivider in lieu of completing
such improvements prior to the filing of the final plat, that the amount of such bond or
contract is sufficient to cover the subdivider's share of the cost of such improvements as
estimated by the City officials having jurisdiction.
C. After the original of the final plat, together with the foregoing two-fold certificate, have
been received by the Planning Commission from the City Manager, and provided that the
final plat is found to conform with the preliminary plat as conditionally approved and with
the requirements of the State Plat Act and the State Plat Manual, the Planning Commission
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1246 Final Plats
will approve the final plat and will enter such approval thereon, in writing, by its
Chairperson or Secretary. The approval of the final or record plat by the Planning
Commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the
dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space shown on such plat. The
Planning Commission shall thereupon deliver the original and necessary copies of the final
plat, along with certificates of title, to the City Council for approval and necessary action on
any proposed dedication. Thereupon the Planning Commission will transmit the original
and necessary copies to the Manistee County Plat Board, and will also transmit a copy
thereof to the subdivider, the City Manager and, where appropriate, other officials.
D. When the plat has been approved by the Manistee County Plat Board and forwarded to the
Department of Commerce, and copies thereof returned to the County Register of Deeds and
to the City Clerk, the subdivision will be recorded as a plat of record.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1246.02 CONTENTS; CONFORMITY TO STATE PLAT ACT AND STATE PLAT MANUAL
The final or record plat of the subdivision or any part of a larger subdivision, the preliminary
plat of which has been conditionally approved by the Planning Commission, shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission in the form prescribed by the State Plat Act and State Plat Manual,
and such plat shall conform in every respect with all the requirements of such Act and Manual.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1248 Design Standards
Chapter 1248
Design Standards
1248.01 Compliance required 1248.06 Street grades; curves; sight distances
1248.02 Suitability; conformity to Master
Plan; open spaces and special
features
1248.07 Intersections
1248.03 Street, alley and block layout 1248.08 Lots; conformity to Zoning Code
1248.04 Minimum right-of-way widths of
streets, alleys and easements for
utilities
1248.09 Commercial centers
1248.05 Surfacing of roadways; installation
of curbs; payment of costs by
subdivider
CROSS REFERENCES
Acceptance of plats; recording - see CHTR. Secs. 13-6, 13-7; M.C.L.A. Sec.
125.43
Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.44
Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.45
Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.51 et seq.
Master Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1222
1248.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
In the laying out of a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the general principles and
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1248.02 SUITABILITY; CONFORMITY TO MASTER PLAN; OPEN SPACES AND SPECIAL
FEATURES
A. Suitability. No land shall be subdivided for residential use which is held by the Planning
Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse
earth or rock formations or topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the
health, safety or welfare of future residents in the proposed subdivision or of the
community.
B. Conformity to Master Plan.
1. The subdivision layout shall conform to the Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan and to
the Master Plan of the City.
2. Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a highway, major street or
parkway so designated on the Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan, such part of such
public way shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and at the width indicated
on the Plan.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1248 Design Standards
3. Where a proposed park or other recreational area, school site or other public ground
shown on the adopted Master Plan of the City is located, in whole or part, within the
proposed subdivision, such proposed public ground or park shall be dedicated to the
City or school district or reserved for acquisition by the City or school district within a
period of five years by purchase or other means.
C. Provision for Open Spaces and Reservation of Special Features. Where held appropriate by
the Planning Commission, open spaces suitably located and of adequate size for parks,
playgrounds or other recreational purposes, for local or neighborhood use, or to preserve
scenic or historic features, shall be provided for in the design of the proposed subdivision
and shall be dedicated to the City or reserved for the common use of all property owners in
the proposed subdivision by covenant in the deeds. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1248.03 STREET, ALLEY AND BLOCK LAYOUT
A. Streets and Alleys.
1. The street layout of a subdivision shall be in general conformity with a plan for the
most advantageous development of adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood.
2. All proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned or
platted streets, when, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, such continuity is
essential to the free movement of traffic in the neighborhood as a whole.
3. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to be subdivided,
unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion
of the Planning Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most
advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Dead-end streets of reasonable
length will be approved where necessitated by topography or where, in the opinion of
the Planning Commission, they are appropriate for the type of development
contemplated.
4. In subdivisions abutting or including a major thoroughfare, local streets entering such
thoroughfare shall be kept at a minimum. This may be accomplished by one of the
following methods:
(a) Service drives off the right of way of the main thoroughfare;
(b) Streets paralleling the main thoroughfare and one block distant from it to serve
as headers for the majority of cross streets;
(c) Streets paralleling the main thoroughfare and 400 to 800 feet distant therefrom
combined with loop streets or cul-de-sacs located between the main
thoroughfare and such parallel street and to be entered over the latter.
5. Where a residential subdivision abuts or includes a railroad right of way or other
incompatible use, the Planning Commission may require the provision of a buffer strip
or the platting of a parallel street, loop streets or cul-de-sacs, or any combinations
thereof.
6. The alignment and grades of proposed streets shall be adjusted to contour lines as
closely as practicable.
7. Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles as topography
and other limiting factors of good design permit.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 3
Chapter 1248 Design Standards
8. Whenever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided a dedicated or platted
and recorded half-width street or alley, the other half-width of such street or alley
shall be platted.
9. Alleys shall be platted in all business districts unless another acceptable arrangement
is provided for commercial loading or off-street parking. To provide safe access to
residential lots fronting on thoroughfares, major streets and parkways, alleys shall be
platted in the rear of such lots or service drives in front thereof. Alleys will not be
approved in other locations in residence districts, unless required by rugged
topography or other exceptional conditions.
B. Blocks.
1. Blocks shall be relatively long in the interests of economy of street costs and to
minimize the number of intersections. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for
two tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except in special cases where it is desirable to
locate the rear of lots on a major thoroughfare, with the fronts facing a parallel street.
2. The lengths of blocks shall be such as, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated but shall not
exceed 1,254 feet where the average size of lots does not exceed two acres in area.
3. In any block over 900 feet in length, the Planning Commission may require that a
crosswalk or pedestrian way, not less than ten feet wide, be provided near the center
and entirely across such block.
4. The number of intersecting streets along the highways, major streets and parkways
shall be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, blocks along such traffic ways shall
be not less than 1,200 feet in length. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1248.04 MINIMUM RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND EASEMENTS FOR
UTILITIES
A. The minimum right-of-way widths of highways, principal major streets and parkways shall
be as specified in the Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan, but not less than eighty feet in
any case.
B. The minimum right-of-way widths of secondary major streets shall be as specified in the
Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan, but not less than sixty-six feet in any case.
C. The minimum right-of-way widths of local or collector streets shall be sixty-six feet.
D. The minimum right-of-way widths of minor streets, marginal access streets and dead-end
streets shall be sixty feet. All dead-end streets shall terminate in a circular turn-around
having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet, unless the Planning Commission
approves a "T" or "Y" shaped paved space in place of the required turning circle.
E. The minimum right-of-way widths of alleys and service drives shall be twenty feet.
F. Easements for utilities at least ten feet wide shall be provided along rear lot lines and,
where necessary, alongside lot lines. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 4
Chapter 1248 Design Standards
1248.05 SURFACING OF ROADWAYS; INSTALLATION OF CURBS; PAYMENT OF COSTS BY
SUBDIVIDER
Roadways shall be surfaced, and where required by the officials having jurisdiction, curbs shall
also be installed. The subdivider shall bear the cost and expense of such surfacing up to widths
indicated as follows:
A. Highways, major streets and parkways shown as such on the Major Street and Thoroughfare
Plan: thirty feet, such width not including the curb.
B. Local and minor streets, marginal access streets and dead-end streets: thirty feet, such
widths including the curbs. Any streets fronting on family or apartment developments: not
less than thirty-six feet, such width including the curb. The roadway surface of a turning
circle at the end of a dead-end street shall have a minimum outside diameter of eighty feet
and shall be at least twenty-two feet wide. A "T" or "Y" shaped paved space, when
approved by the Planning Commission in place of a turning circle, shall extend entirely
across the width of the right-of-way and shall be at least ten feet wide, with the flared
portion rounded by a minimum radius of twenty feet.
C. Alleys and service drives: eighteen feet. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1248.06 STREET GRADES; CURVES; SIGHT DISTANCES
A. The grades of streets shall not exceed the following percentages:
1. Highways, major streets and parkways, shown as such on the Major Street and
Thoroughfare Plan: five percent.
2. Local streets, minor streets, service drives and alleys: seven percent.
3. Pedestrian ways or crosswalks: ten percent, unless steps of an acceptable design are
to be constructed.
B. All changes in street grades in excess of one percent shall be connected by a vertical curve
of a minimum length equal to fifteen times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for
highways, major streets and parkways, and one-half of this minimum for all other streets.
C. The radii of curvature on the centerline shall not be less than the following:
1. Highways, major streets and parkways: 300 feet.
2. Local streets, minor streets and service drives: 100 feet.
D. A tangent at least 100 feet in length shall be provided between reversed curves. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 8-16-60.)
1248.07 INTERSECTIONS
A. At street and at alley intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by an arc, the
minimum radius of which shall be ten and five feet, respectively. In the business districts a
chord may be substituted for such an arc.
B. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least twenty feet.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 5
Chapter 1248 Design Standards
C. The above minimum radii shall be increased where major or secondary thoroughfares are
involved and in all cases where the smallest angle of intersection is less than sixty degrees.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1248.08 LOTS; CONFORMITY TO ZONING CODE
A. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the proposed
subdivision and for the type of development contemplated, and in any event lots must
conform in every way with the Zoning Code, including requirements as to width, depth and
area.
B. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion of two to one shall
normally be considered as appropriate, except in the case of narrow lots.
C. Every lot shall abut on a street or public way.
D. Lots for residence purposes shall be at least seventy feet wide at the building line, in order
to permit compliance with the side yard requirements of the Zoning Code and still be
adequate for a building of practical width.
E. Double-frontage lots, key lots and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided.
F. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right-of-way line of the street on
which the lot faces.
G. Corner lots for residential uses shall be platted wider than interior lots in order to permit
near conformance with the front yard setback on the side street required by the Zoning
Code.
H. Residential lots fronting on highways, major streets and other important traffic ways should
have extra depth to permit deep setbacks for the buildings. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
1248.09 COMMERCIAL CENTERS
The Planning Commission may require the special design of neighborhood shopping centers,
located for maximum accessibility and of an extent necessary to serve surrounding residential
neighborhoods. Block and lot arrangement shall be such as to insure the provision of adequate
off-street parking and commercial loading space. Latitude will be given the subdivider in the
layout of such centers in keeping with good design. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1250 Improvements
Chapter 1250
Improvements
1250.01 Installation upon conditional
approval; payment of costs by
subdivider; bonds
1250.02 Installation of improvements
CROSS REFERENCES
Acceptance of plats; recording - see CHTR. Secs. 13-6, 13-7; M.C.L.A. Sec.
125.43
Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.44
Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect – see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.45
Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.51 et seq.
Public improvement procedure - see ADM. Ch. 208
Council Policy on New Municipal Infrastructure - see ADM. 210.03
1250.01 INSTALLATION UPON CONDITIONAL APPROVAL; PAYMENT OF COSTS BY
SUBDIVIDER; BONDS
Upon conditional approval, which is effective for two years unless extended by the Planning
Commission, the subdivider may proceed in making arrangements for the City to install streets,
sanitary sewers and other improvements required under Section 1250.02. The costs of such
improvements shall be borne by the subdivider in one of the following ways:
A. By payment thereof at the time such improvements are to be installed; or
B. By payment at a later date either in a lump sum, in installments or by assessments, as may
be agreed upon, in which case payment shall be assured either by the posting by the
subdivider of a surety bond running to the City, sufficient in amount to cover the cost of
such improvements, or by suitable contract between the subdivider and the City. (Ord. Unno.
Passed 8-16-60.)
1250.02 INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Improvements shall be installed in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Streets shall be graded to full width and fully constructed with a type of roadway which can
be travelled upon in all kinds of weather, and approved by the City Manager.
B. Sidewalks of such width and type of construction as required by the City Manager shall be
constructed on at least one side of every street where the average width of lots is sixty feet
or less. Sidewalks shall also be constructed on one or both sides of any street, irrespective
of the width of lots, where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, such sidewalks are
necessary to provide for the safety of pedestrians.
C. Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, including a
connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants. The entire water system
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1250 Improvements
shall be designed to meet the approval of the City officials having jurisdiction.
Arrangements for the installation of such water distribution system shall be consummated
with the City department having jurisdiction prior to the submittal of the final plat.
D. Where a public sewer main, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, is reasonably
accessible, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete sewer system connected with
such sewer main, including a connection for each lot. Where a public sewer main, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, is not reasonably accessible, proper provision shall be
made for the disposal of sanitary wastes by one of the following methods:
1. In the case of a subdivision in which the average size of lots is less than one acre in
area, or in which, in the opinion of the City Manager, disposal of sanitary sewage
cannot be achieved satisfactorily by individual disposal installations on each lot, the
subdivision shall be provided with a complete sewer system, including a connection
for each lot, and a community sewage treatment plant of a type meeting the approval
of the officials having jurisdiction and subject to the approval of the State Health
Department.
The right of the City to charge the actual cost of operating and maintaining such
treatment plant shall be entered on the final or record plat and incorporated in each
deed.
2. In the case of a subdivision in which the average size of lots is one acre or more in
area, or in which, in the opinion of the City Manager, the satisfactory disposal of
sanitary sewage can be achieved by individual disposal installations on each lot,
private restrictions shall be entered on the final or record plat and incorporated in
each deed, calling for the installation on each lot of an individual sewage disposal
system fully meeting the requirements of the officials having jurisdiction and approval
of the City.
E. Poles and underground conduits for electric light or telephone lines shall be placed in
easements along real lot lines, wherever practical.
F. Trees of a species appropriate for the specific location shall be planted on both sides of
every street, as and when required by the Planning Commission.
G. Permanent and other monuments shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of
the State Plat Act.
H. All improvements required under these Subdivision Regulations and under the State Plat
Act shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of
the officials having jurisdiction.
I. In lieu of the completion of some or all of the required improvements stipulated above prior
to the filing with the Planning Commission of the final or record plat for final approval, such
Commission may accept alternative arrangements for their late completion as set forth in
Section 1250.01. (Ord. Unno. Passed 8-16-60.)


City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Adopted February 21, 2006
Effective March 27, 2006 As Amended thru August 31, 2018
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page i
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE ONE: TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
100 Short Title .................................................................................................. Article 1, page 1
101 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... Article 1, page 1
102 City Code ................................................................................................... Article 1, page 2
ARTICLE TWO: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
200 Rules Applying to the Text ........................................................................ Article 2, page 1
201 Definitions ................................................................................................. Article 2, page 1
202 A ................................................................................................................ Article 2, page 1
203 B ................................................................................................................ Article 2, page 3
204 C ................................................................................................................ Article 2, page 5
205 D ................................................................................................................ Article 2, page 7
206 E ................................................................................................................. Article 2, page 9
207 F ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 10
208 G .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 11
209 H .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 12
210 I ................................................................................................................ Article 2, page 13
211 J ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 13
212 K ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 13
213 L ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 14
214 M ............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 15
215 N .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 16
216 O .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 17
217 P ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 17
218 Q .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 20
219 R .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 20
220 S ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 20
221 T ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 27
222 U .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 27
223 V .............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 28
224 W ............................................................................................................. Article 2, page 29
225 X ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 30
226 Y ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 30
227 Z ............................................................................................................... Article 2, page 31
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page ii
Table of Contents
ARTICLE THREE: DISTRICTS, DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS, USES TABLE AND ZONING MAP
300 Establishment of Districts ......................................................................... Article 3, page 1
301 Official Zoning Map ................................................................................... Article 3, page 1
302 Application of Regulations ........................................................................ Article 3, page 3
303 Zoning District Regulations ....................................................................... Article 3, page 3
304 Table of Land Uses .................................................................................... Article 3, page 3
ARTICLE FOUR: NONCONFORMITIES
400 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... Article 4, page 1
401 Regulations ................................................................................................ Article 4, page 1
402 Repairs and Maintenance ......................................................................... Article 4, page 2
403 Reconstruction and Replacement ............................................................. Article 4, page 3
404 Completion ................................................................................................ Article 4, page 3
405 Abandonment ........................................................................................... Article 4, page 3
406 Historic Buildings ....................................................................................... Article 4, page 4
407 Change of Ownership or Tenancy ............................................................. Article 4, page 4
408 Nonconforming Special Uses .................................................................... Article 4, page 4
409 Marihuana Facilities .................................................................................. Article 4, page 4
ARTICLE FIVE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
500 Purpose ..................................................................................................... Article 5, page 1
501 Scope ......................................................................................................... Article 5, page 1
502 Uses, Spatial and Physical Requirements ................................................. Article 5, page 1
503 Performance Standards ............................................................................ Article 5, page 3
504 Water Supply and Sewage Facilities ......................................................... Article 5, page 5
505 Water Protection ...................................................................................... Article 5, page 5
506 Dumpsters and Enclosures ........................................................................ Article 5, page 6
507 Conditions of Approval ............................................................................. Article 5, page 7
508 Fences ....................................................................................................... Article 5, page 7
509 Height ........................................................................................................ Article 5, page 8
510 Access to Public Streets ............................................................................ Article 5, page 9
511 Driveways and Curb Cuts .......................................................................... Article 5, page 9
512 Private Streets ......................................................................................... Article 5, page 10
513 Clear Visibility at Corners ........................................................................ Article 5, page 11
514 Parking, Bike Parking and Sidewalks ....................................................... Article 5, page 12
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page iii
Table of Contents
515 Accessory Buildings and Structures ........................................................ Article 5, page 16
516 Accessory Uses ........................................................................................ Article 5, page 18
517 Temporary Dwellings .............................................................................. Article 5, page 19
518 Temporary Storage Structures ................................................................ Article 5, page 20
519 Dwellings ................................................................................................. Article 5, page 20
520 Hazardous Substance Groundwater Protection ..................................... Article 5, page 20
521 RESERVED ................................................................................................ Article 5, page 22
522 Temporary Activity Permits .................................................................... Article 5, page 22
523 Parcel Divisions ....................................................................................... Article 5, page 23
524 Structures Projecting into Setbacks ........................................................ Article 5, page 25
525 Outdoor Lighting Requirements ............................................................. Article 5, page 26
526 Outdoor Storage ..................................................................................... Article 5, page 27
527 Essential Services .................................................................................... Article 5, page 28
528 Performance Guarantee for Compliance ................................................ Article 5, page 29
529 Solar Energy Systems .............................................................................. Article 5, page 29
530 Unclassified Uses ..................................................................................... Article 5, page 30
531 Landscaping and Screening ..................................................................... Article 5, page 30
532 Key Street Segments ............................................................................... Article 5, page 31
533 Condominiums ........................................................................................ Article 5, page 32
534 Community Gardens ............................................................................... Article 5, page 34
535 Keeping of Chickens or Ducks ................................................................. Article 5, page 34
ARTICLE SIX: PD- PENINSULA DISTRICT
600 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... Article 7, page 1
601 Uses Permitted by Right ........................................................................... Article 7, page 2
602 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ............................................. Article 7, page 3
603 Dimensional Standards ............................................................................. Article 7, page 4
ARTICLE SEVEN: G-C GOLF COURSE DISTRICT
700 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... Article 7, page 1
701 Uses Permitted by Right ........................................................................... Article 7, page 3
702 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ............................................. Article 7, page 3
703 Dimensional Standards ............................................................................. Article 7, page 3
ARTICLE EIGHT: R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
800 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... Article 8, page 1
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page iv
Table of Contents
801 Uses Permitted by Right ........................................................................... Article 8, page 3
802 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ............................................. Article 8, page 3
803 Dimensional Standards ............................................................................. Article 8, page 4
804 Wellhead Protection Overlay .................................................................... Article 8, page 5
ARTICLE NINE: R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
900 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... Article 9, page 1
901 Uses Permitted by Right ........................................................................... Article 9, page 3
902 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ............................................. Article 9, page 3
903 Dimensional Standards ............................................................................. Article 9, page 4
904 Wellhead Protection Overlay .................................................................... Article 9, page 5
ARTICLE TEN: R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
1000 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 10, page 1
1001 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 10, page 3
1002 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 10, page 3
1003 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 10, page 4
ARTICLE ELEVEN: R-4 MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY DISTRICT
1100 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 11, page 1
1101 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 11, page 2
1102 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 11, page 3
1103 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 11, page 3
1104 Manufactured Housing Communities ................................................... Article 11, page 4
ARTICLE TWELVE: W-F WATERFRONT DISTRICT
1200 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 12, page 1
1201 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 12, page 2
1202 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 12, page 3
1203 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 12, page 4
ARTICLE THIRTEEN: C-1 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
1300 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 13, page 1
1301 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 13, page 2
1302 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 13, page 3
1303 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 13, page 4
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page v
Table of Contents
1304 Site Standards ....................................................................................... Article 13, page 5
1305 Existing Residential Structures .............................................................. Article 13, page 6
ARTICLE FOURTEEN: C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
1400 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 14, page 1
1401 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 14, page 2
1402 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 14, page 3
1403 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 14, page 4
ARTICLE FIFTEEN: C-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
1500 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 15, page 1
1501 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 15, page 2
1502 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 15, page 4
1503 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 15, page 4
1504 Upper Story Dwellings .......................................................................... Article 15, page 5
ARTICLE SIXTEEN: L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
1600 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 16, page 1
1601 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 16, page 2
1602 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 16, page 3
1603 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 16, page 4
ARTICLE SEVENTEEN: G-I GENERAL INDUSTRIAL
1700 Purpose and Intent ............................................................................... Article 17, page 1
1701 Uses Permitted by Right ....................................................................... Article 17, page 2
1702 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit ......................................... Article 17, page 3
1703 Dimensional Standards ......................................................................... Article 17, page 3
1704 General Industrial Renaissance Zone Standards .................................. Article 17, page 4
ARTICLE EIGHTEEN: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL USES
1800 Special Uses .......................................................................................... Article 18, page 1
1801 Special Use Procedures......................................................................... Article 18, page 1
1802 Special Use Review Standards .............................................................. Article 18, page 5
1803 Reserved ............................................................................................... Article 18, page 7
1804 Accessory Buildings with Footprint
Greater than the Principal Structure .................................................... Article 18, page 7
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page vi
Table of Contents
1805 Accessory Uses, Related to Uses Permitted ......................................... Article 18, page 8
1806 Reserved ............................................................................................... Article 18, page 8
1807 Adaptive Reuse ..................................................................................... Article 18, page 8
1808 Adult Foster Care Facility .................................................................... Article 18, page 10
1809 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 11
1810 Animal Grooming Facility ................................................................... Article 18, page 11
1811 Automobile Repair Facility ................................................................. Article 18, page 12
1812 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 13
1813 Bed and Breakfast ............................................................................... Article 18, page 13
1814 Billboard .............................................................................................. Article 18, page 14
1815 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 16
1816 Car Wash ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 16
1817 Cemetery ............................................................................................ Article 18, page 17
1818 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 18
1819 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 18
1820 Contractor’s Facility ............................................................................ Article 18, page 18
1821 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 19
1822 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 19
1823 Convenience Store .............................................................................. Article 18, page 19
1824 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 19
1825 Day Care, Commercial ........................................................................ Article 18, page 20
1826 Day Care, Group .................................................................................. Article 18, page 20
1827 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 21
1828 Drive-through Establishment ............................................................. Article 18, page 21
1829 Duplex ................................................................................................. Article 18, page 22
1830 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 22
1831 Dwelling, Accessory ............................................................................ Article 18, page 22
1832 Dwelling, Multiple Unit ....................................................................... Article 18, page 23
1833 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 24
1834 Dwelling, Single Unit ........................................................................... Article 18, page 24
1835 Eating and Drinking Establishment ..................................................... Article 18, page 24
1836 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 25
1837 Educational Facility ............................................................................. Article 18, page 25
1838 Financial Institution ............................................................................ Article 18, page 26
1839 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 26
1840 Gallery or Museum ............................................................................. Article 18, page 27
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page vii
Table of Contents
1841 Gasoline Station .................................................................................. Article 18, page 27
1842 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 28
1843 Golf Course ......................................................................................... Article 18, page 28
1844 Greenhouse and Nursery .................................................................... Article 18, page 29
1845 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 29
1846 Home Based Business ......................................................................... Article 18, page 29
1847 Home Occupation ............................................................................... Article 18, page 30
1848 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 32
1849 Hotel ................................................................................................... Article 18, page 32
1850 Laundry and Dry-Cleaning Establishment .......................................... Article 18, page 33
1851 Marihuana Facilities............................................................................ Article 18, page 33
1852 Marina ................................................................................................. Article 18, page 35
1853 Medical or Dental Office ..................................................................... Article 18, page 36
1854 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 36
1855 Mini/Self Storage Facility .................................................................... Article 18, page 37
1856 Mine, Sand, and Gravel ...................................................................... Article 18, page 37
1857 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 40
1858 Mixed-Use Development .................................................................... Article 18, page 40
1859 Mortuary ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 41
1860 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 42
1861 Motel .................................................................................................. Article 18, page 42
1862 Nursing Home or Convalescent Home ............................................... Article 18, page 42
1863 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 43
1864 Outdoor Sales Facility ......................................................................... Article 18, page 43
1865 Parking Facility .................................................................................... Article 18, page 44
1866 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 44
1867 Personal Service Establishment .......................................................... Article 18, page 44
1868 Place of Public Assembly (Large and Small) ....................................... Article 18, page 45
1869 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 46
1870 Planned Unit Development ................................................................ Article 18, page 46
1871 Power Generation Facility .................................................................. Article 18, page 52
1872 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 53
1873 Processing and Manufacturing ........................................................... Article 18, page 54
1874 Professional Office .............................................................................. Article 18, page 54
1875 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 55
1876 Professional Services Establishment .................................................. Article 18, page 55
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page viii
Table of Contents
1877 Retail Business .................................................................................... Article 18, page 56
1878 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 57
1879 Sexually Oriented Business ................................................................. Article 18, page 57
1880 Sports and Recreation Club ................................................................ Article 18, page 58
1881 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 59
1882 Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts ............................................. Article 18, page 59
1883 Tattoo Parlor ....................................................................................... Article 18, page 60
1884 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 60
1885 Theater ................................................................................................ Article 18, page 61
1886 Uses Similar to Uses Permitted as Special Land Uses ........................ Article 18, page 61
1887 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 62
1888 Veterinary Clinic.................................................................................. Article 18, page 62
1889 Warehouse, Public .............................................................................. Article 18, page 62
1890 Reserved ............................................................................................. Article 18, page 63
1891 Wells, Extraction ................................................................................. Article 18, page 63
1892 Windmill (Wind Energy Conversion System) ...................................... Article 18, page 64
1893 Wireless Communication Facility ....................................................... Article 18, page 68
ARTICLE NINETEEN: U.S. 31 CORRIDOR OVERLAY ZONE
1900 Findings ................................................................................................. Article 19, page 1
1901 Purpose ................................................................................................. Article 19, page 2
1902 Applicability .......................................................................................... Article 19, page 3
1903 Additional submittal Information ......................................................... Article 19, page 4
1904 Access Management Standards ........................................................... Article 19, page 5
1905 Modification of Access Standards ........................................................ Article 19, page 7
ARTICLE TWENTY: Repealed by Ord. 07/04 Dated 2/20/07
ARTICLE TWENTY-ONE: SIGNS
2100 Purpose ................................................................................................. Article 21, page 1
2101 Procedures ............................................................................................ Article 21, page 1
2102 General Standards ................................................................................ Article 21, page 2
2103 Exempt Signs ........................................................................................ Article 21, page 3
2104 Prohibited Signs .................................................................................... Article 21, page 4
2105 Sign Regulation Table ........................................................................... Article 21, page 5
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page ix
Table of Contents
ARTICLE TWENTY-TWO: SITE PLAN REVIEW
2200 Purpose ................................................................................................. Article 22, page 1
2201 Scope ..................................................................................................... Article 22, page 1
2202 Optional Sketch Plan Review ................................................................ Article 22, page 2
2203 Application Procedure .......................................................................... Article 22, page 2
2204 Action on Application and Site Plans .................................................. Article 22, page 15
2205 Review Criteria .................................................................................... Article 22, page 17
2206 Conformity to Approved Site Plans ..................................................... Article 22, page 18
2207 Term of Approval of the Site Plan ....................................................... Article 22, page 18
2208 Amendment to the Site Plan ............................................................... Article 22, page 18
2209 Appeals ................................................................................................ Article 22, page 19
ARTICLE TWENTY-THREE: RESERVED
ARTICLE TWENTY-FOUR: ADMINISTRATION
2400 Zoning Administrator ............................................................................ Article 24, page 1
2401 Duties and Limitations of the Zoning Administrator ............................ Article 24, page 1
2402 Land Use Permit .................................................................................... Article 24, page 2
2403 Reapplication ........................................................................................ Article 24, page 3
2404 Rehearing .............................................................................................. Article 24, page 3
ARTICLE TWENTY-FIVE: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2500 Establishment........................................................................................ Article 25, page 1
2501 Membership, Terms of Office ............................................................... Article 25, page 1
2502 Meetings ............................................................................................... Article 25, page 2
2503 Duties, Rules, Hearings and Decisions or Appeals, Right to
and Grounds of Appeal ......................................................................... Article 25, page 2
2504 Time to and Notice of Appeal: Transmission of Record ....................... Article 25, page 2
2505 Stay of Proceedings Pending Appeal .................................................... Article 25, page 3
2506 Hearings and Notices, Right to be Heard, Disposition of Appeals,
Decision Not Final ................................................................................. Article 25, page 3
2507 Duties and Powers ................................................................................ Article 25, page 3
2508 Performance Guarantee for Compliance .............................................. Article 25, page 6
ARTICLE TWENTY-SIX: MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page x
Table of Contents
2600 Municipal Civil Infractions ..................................................................... Article 26, page 1
2601 Injunctive Relief .................................................................................... Article 26, page 1
ARTICLE TWENTY-SEVEN: FEES, CHARGES, AND ESCROW ACCOUNTS
2700 Fees ....................................................................................................... Article 27, page 1
2701 Applicant Escrow Accounts ................................................................... Article 27, page 1
ARTICLE TWENTY-EIGHT: AMENDMENTS
2800 Amendments ......................................................................................... Article 28, page 1
2801 Rezoning Agreements ........................................................................... Article 28, page 1
ARTICLE TWENTY-NINE: RESERVED
ARTICLE THIRTY: VALIDITY, SEVERABILITY, REPEALER, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
3000 Separability ........................................................................................... Article 30, page 1
3001 Repealer and Savings ............................................................................ Article 30, page 1
3002 Effective Date ........................................................................................ Article 30, page 1
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article One Title, Purpose & Intent
CITY OF MANISTEE ZONING ORDINANCE
The City of Manistee Ordains:
An ordinance to establish zoning districts and regulations governing the incorporated City of Manistee, County of Manistee and State of Michigan in accordance with the provisions of Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, as amended; to define certain terms used herein; to provide for regulations governing nonconforming uses and structures; to establish a Zoning Board of Appeals and define its duties and powers; to provide for the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance and to provide penalties for the violation of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE ONE
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
SECTION 100 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the “City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance” and will be referred to hereinafter as “this Ordinance.”
SECTION 101 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The fundamental purposes of this Ordinance are:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare;
B. To encourage the use of lands and natural resources in accordance with their character and adaptability;
C. To implement the goals, objectives, and future land use recommendations of the City Comprehensive Development Plan (Master Plan) and to regulate the intensity of land use and parcel areas in a manner compatible with said Plan;
D. To determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings and structures necessary to provide adequate light, scenic views and air and to protect the public health;
E. To protect the character and stability of the recreational, residential, commercial and industrial areas within the City of Manistee and promote the orderly and beneficial development of the City;
F. To lessen and avoid congestion on the public highways and streets;
G. To provide for the needs of recreation, residence, commerce, and industry in future growth;
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article One Title, Purpose & Intent
H. To promote healthful surroundings for family life in residential areas;
I. To set reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform;
J. To provide for reasonable uses and forms, buildings, and structures which are compatible with the character of development or the uses, buildings, or structures permitted within specified Districts and to provide for sanitary, safety and protective measures that shall be required for such structures;
K. To prevent such additions or alterations or remodeling of existing structures in such a way as to avoid the regulations and limitations imposed hereunder;
L. To reduce the risk of fire, explosion, noxious fumes and odors, heat, dust, smoke, glare, noise, vibration, radioactivity, and other nuisances and hazards to life and property;
M. To prevent improper uses of land and the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of buildings and structures so far as is possible and appropriate in each District;
N. To provide for the completion, restoration, reconstruction, and extension of nonconforming uses;
O. To create an Appeals Board and to define the powers and duties thereof;
P. To designate and define the power and duties of the official or officials in charge of the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance;
Q. To provide for the payment of fees for zoning permits and escrow accounts to support the expense of administration and proper review of applications for zoning permits;
R. To provide penalties for the violation of this Ordinance;
S. To provide safety in traffic and vehicular parking;
T. To accomplish any other purposes contained in Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
SECTION 102 CITY CODE
This Ordinance shall be cited in general as Part Twelve, Title Six of the Codified Ordinances of Manistee, Michigan.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
ARTICLE TWO
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION 200 RULES APPLYING TO THE TEXT
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain rules of structure apply to the text. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and vice versa; and the singular includes the plural, and vice versa, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The words “person” and “entity” include a corporation, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or firm as well as an individual. The words “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building include the words “intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.” The word “lot” includes the words “plot,” “tract,” or “parcel.” The term “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word “may” is permissive. Any word or term not interpreted or defined by this Article shall be used with a meaning of common or standard utilization.
SECTION 201 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
SECTION 202 A
ACCESS: A way or means of approach to provide year-round vehicular physical entrance to a property or lakefront area.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: An accessory structure, as defined herein, which is a supplementary building on the same parcel as the principal building, or part of the principal building, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is clearly subordinate or incidental to a principal structure or principal use. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to, the following: storage structures, parking lots, loading docks, radio and television antennas, or any part thereof; but shall not include fences and hunting blinds which are clearly not permanent and are easily removed. Under no circumstances shall a septic system and tile field be considered an accessory structure.
ACCESSORY USE: A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to, the principal use of the land or buildings and located on the same parcel as the principal use. [Annotation: the language “and located on the same parcel as the principal use” was added to the definition of “Accessory Use” by amendment 08-01, effective 2/29/08]
ADAPTIVE REUSE: The development of a new use for a building originally designed for a special or specific purpose which has become obsolete. Adaptive Reuse is the redevelopment, including expansion, into uses which might not otherwise be permitted in a Zoning District. Such uses may include residential, retail, office, eating and drinking establishments and service uses. [Annotation: Definition of “Adaptive Reuse” was changed by amendment 08-03, effective 2/29/08]
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
ADMINISTRATOR: The Manistee City Zoning Administrator as established in Section 2400 of this Ordinance.
ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY: A governmental or non-governmental establishment having as its principal function the receiving of adults for foster care. It includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults, who are aged, emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. Adult foster care does not include any of the following:
A. Nursing homes and hospitals licensed Article 17 of Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended;
B. Hospital for the mentally ill or a facility for the developmentally disabled operated by the department of mental health under Act 258 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended;
C. County infirmary operated by a county department of social services under section 55 of Act 280 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended;
D. A child caring institution, children’s camp, foster family home, or foster family group home licensed or approved under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended;
E. An establishment commonly described as an alcohol or a substance abuse rehabilitation center, a residential facility for persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions, a maternity home, or a hotel or rooming house which does not provide or offer to provide foster care; and
F. A veteran’s facility created by Act 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, as amended.
ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME: An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity of not more than twelve (12) adults who shall be provided foster care.
ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME: An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity of more than thirteen (13) adults who shall be provided foster care.
ALLEY: A public way which is not a street, private street, or sidewalk, which provides secondary access to property, generally but not always to the rear of parcels.
ALTERATIONS: Any construction; modification; remodeling; repair; improvement; relocation; or, replacement of a structure, building, dwelling, accessory building, or structure which needs a permit under the provisions of Section 2402 or under the provisions of the Building Code.
ALTERED: Any change in the location or use of a building, or any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, posts, girders, and similar components, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
ANIMAL GROOMING FACILITY: Any property, structure, building, or premise in or on which pets and other domesticated animals are bathed and/or groomed for commercial gain, but excluding any veterinary or clinical services.
APARTMENT BUILDING: (see Dwelling, Multiple Unit).
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
APPEALS BOARD: The Manistee City Board of Appeals, created in Article 25.
APPLICANT: means a wireless provide that submits an application described in the act.
ARBOR: An man-made structure or shelter consisting of a lattice or trellis intended and used as a landscape decorative amenity and used to support vines, floral plants or branches.
ARTICLE: The main divisions of this Ordinance, cited by the words “Article XX.” Sections further divide Articles.
ASSEMBLY OPERATION: Buildings, structures and premises used for the combining of parts and raw materials into finished products and/or sub-assembly components for subsequent finishing on or off site and for the packaging, shipping and receiving of such products.
ATTIC: That part of a building that is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing.
AUTHORITY: means City
AUTHORITY POLE: means a utility pole owned or operated by an authority and located in the ROW
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR FACILITY: Any establishment, building, premises, or land where commercial services are furnished involving automobile and truck repair, maintenance, and painting for the general public, and where rental, leasing, storage and salvage operations and parking services are incidental to the principal activities.
SECTION 203 B
BASEMENT: A portion of a building which is not intended to serve as the main living space in a dwelling, duplex or apartment building, and is built below the main floor joists such that it is partially or wholly below average grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling.
Figure B-1
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-occupied residential building wherein up to six (6) rooms or suites are offered, for compensation, as overnight lodging for transient guests and which may provide one or more meals per day for overnight guests only.
BILLBOARD: An outdoor sign used as advertising for hire, e.g., on which display space is made available to parties other than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel in exchange for a rent, fee, or other consideration. [Annotation: Definition of “Billboard” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
BLUFF LINE: The line which is the edge or crest of the elevated segment of the shoreline above the beach which normally has a precipitous front declining steeply on the lakeward side. Where there is no precipitous front indicating the bluff line, the line of perennial vegetation may be considered the bluff line.
BOAT: Means every description of water craft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. (reference; vessel definition from the Marine Safety Act P.A. 303 of 1967, as amended, Compiled Laws Annotated, 281.1008).
BOAT LAUNCH: Shall mean and include boat access, within fifty (50) feet of the shore from or incidental to a single private riparian property, public or private road end abutting Manistee Lake, the Manistee River Channel, or Lake Michigan, and/or a public or private access site.
BUFFER AREA: An open landscaped area that is in addition to setback requirements, that may include berms, but that may not include any structures, designed to buffer noise, light, visual, and other nuisances. (See also Vegetation Belt, Greenbelt.)
Figure B-2
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
BUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a parcel contained by the required front, rear and side yards and excluding any wetland, 100-year flood plain, critical dune, high risk erosion area, drainage way, lake or similar natural feature which poses an impediment or hazard to safe construction or use of property. Contour changes to create a buildable area are permissible only if not contrary to this Ordinance, or any other state or federal statue.
BUILDING: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of person, animals, chattel, or property of any kind. Buildings shall include: decks and porches, including steps and trailers, whether mounted or on wheels and situated on private property and used for purposes of a building.
BUILDING AREA (also FOOTPRINT): The total area contained within the exterior foundation or framing area taken on a horizontal plane at the largest floor level of a building or an accessory building exclusive of unroofed porches, terraces, patios and steps, and of awnings and nonpermanent canopies.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The space remaining after compliance with the minimum required setbacks and the minimum open space requirements of this Ordinance. [Annotation: Definition of “Building Envelope” was amended by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
BUILDING LINE: A line extending through the building foundation, or the outermost portion of a cantilevered building and parallel to the nearest parcel boundary.
Figure B-3
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
SECTION 204 C
CAMPGROUND: A use on a parcel or tract of land licensed by the State under the control of a person in which sites are offered for the use of the public or members of an organization either free of charge or for a fee, for the establishment of temporary living quarters for three or more recreational units, which includes trailers, as defined in this Ordinance.
CAR WASH: Any facility or premises or portions thereof used for washing automobiles, including, manual wash facilities, coin washes, and those with automatic and semiautomatic application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water, and forced air and/or heat for drying.
CEMETERY: Any one (1) or a combination of more than one (1) of the following (as per MCL 456.522): a burial ground for earth interment; a mausoleum for crypt entombment; a crematory for the cremation of human remains; and a columbarium for the deposit of cremated remains.
CITY: The City of Manistee, a chartered Michigan municipal corporation. COLOCATE: means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. "Collocation" has a corresponding meaning. Colocate does not include make-ready work or the installation of a new utility pole or new wireless support structure.
COMMISSION: The Manistee City Planning Commission created pursuant to Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, being Michigan Planning Enabling Act, which has vested with it all the powers and duties of a zoning board pursuant to Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, being Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. [Annotation section changed to reflect new public acts with Amendments October 2010]
COMMON ELEMENTS: The portions of the condominium project other than the condominium units. [Annotation: Definition of “Common Elements” was changed by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
COMMON OR SHARED DRIVE: A commonly shared driveway way that connects or serves two or more properties.
[Annotation: Definition of “Communication Tower” was deleted by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17] COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: means the set of equipment and network components, including wires, cables, antennas, and associated facilities, used by a communications service provider to provide communications service.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: Land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers or herbs by multiple individuals. [Annotation: Definition of “Community Garden” was added by amendment Z11-06, effective 09/25/11]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive, long-range master plan intended to guide growth and development in the City of Manistee which includes recommendations on future land use,
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 7
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, open space, and community facilities.
CONDEMNATION: When referring to property acquisition by a public entity, Condemnation shall mean the exercise of the right of eminent domain as regulated by state statute. When referring to Building or Housing Code enforcement action, Condemnation shall mean an action taken by the Building Official or other authorized official to identify all or part of a property as unfit or unsafe for use. [Annotation: Definition of “Condominium” was deleted by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
CONDOMINIUM ACT: The Michigan Condominium Act, Act 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, as amended, or successor legislation. [Annotation: Definition of “Condominium Act” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION: A condominium project involving one or more pre-existing buildings and proposed to contain two or more condominium units some or all of which were under single ownership before the filing of a notice to taking reservations under Section 71 of the Condominium Act. [Annotation: Definition of “Condominium Conversion” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN: The plans, drawings and information prepared for a condominium project as required by Section 66 of the Condominium Act and as required by this ordinance for review and approval of the condominium project. [Annotation: Definition of “Condominium Subdivision Plan” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
CONDOMINIUM UNIT: That portion of the condominium project assigned and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a time-share unit, or any other type of use. [Annotation: Definition of “Condominium Unit” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
CONSERVATION LANDS: Environmentally sensitive areas with characteristics such as steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains, high water tables, forest areas, endangered species habitat, dunes, shoreline, or areas of significant biological productivity or uniqueness that have been designated for protection from any activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance, or character.
CONTRACTOR’S FACILITY: A facility, building, structure, grounds, or portion thereof used to store tools, trucks, equipment, supplies, resources, and materials used by building construction professionals, contractors, and subcontractors. Such facilities typically will include outdoor storage, assembly or staging areas.
CONVALESCENT HOME: (See Nursing Home)
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, and freshly prepared foods, such as salads and sandwiches, for on-site or off-site consumption.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Manistee.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 8
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
SECTION 205 D
DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL: A commercial facility which is not a private home and in which at least thirteen (13) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
DAY CARE FACILITY: An establishment or facility, other than a private residence, providing for the care, supervision, and protection for 1 or more preschool or school age children for periods less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child, including a facility which provides care for not less than 2 consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The term includes any facility referred to as a day care center, day nursery, nursery school, drop-in center, or parent cooperative pre-school. A group day care does not include a Sunday school, vacation bible school, or religious instructional class operated by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not greater than 3 hours per day for an indefinite period, or not greater than 8 hours per day for a period not to exceed 4 weeks during a 12-month period.
DAY CARE, FAMILY: A private home in which at least one (1), but not more than six (6) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.
DAY CARE, GROUP: A private home in which at least seven (7), but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
DAY CARE, ORGANIZATION: Any governmental or nongovernmental organization having as its principle function the receiving of minor children for care, maintenance, training, and supervision, notwithstanding whether educational instruction may be given, and organizations commonly described as child caring institutions, child placing agencies, children's camps, child care centers, day care centers, nursery schools, parent cooperative preschools, foster homes, group homes, or day care homes.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre. The maximum density is that number of dwelling units per acre that is allowed based on the total parcel area.
DRIVE THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT OR FACILITY: An establishment that by design, physical facilities, services or by packaging procedures encourages or permits some or all customers to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in their vehicles.
DRIVEWAY: A private vehicular roadway providing access to a street or highway from a property.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 9
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
DRIVEWAY CURB CUT: The opening along a curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the street.
DUPLEX: A building designed for or occupied by two families only, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each. For facilities with more than two dwelling units, see Dwelling, multiple unit.
DWELLING, (OR DWELLING UNIT): A structure or building or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation by one (1) family and so designed and arranged as to provide living, sleeping, sanitary, and kitchen accommodations.
DWELLING, ACCESSORY: A dwelling located in an accessory structure on the same parcel as another, single unit dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE UNIT: A building which is a dwelling designed for or occupied by three or more families, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.
DWELLING, SINGLE UNIT: A structure or building or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation by one (1) family and so designed and arranged as to provide living, sleeping, sanitary, and kitchen accommodations.
DWELLING, UPPER STORY ACCESSORY: A dwelling, which is considered an accessory use, located in the same building as the principal commercial use and located on or above the second story of a building.
SECTION 206 E
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT: A retail establishment selling food and drink for consumption on the premises, including restaurants, taverns, coffee houses, bakeries, lunch counters, refreshment stands and similar facilities selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate on-site consumption or for take-out.
EASEMENT: A private irrevocable agreement of record between landowners, public utilities, and/or persons, for a specific purpose such as, but not limited to, utilities, driveways, pipelines, or pedestrian ways.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY: Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge, including a preschool, elementary, middle, or high school, college or university, trade school and the like, whether public or private, that meets state requirements, where applicable.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE: any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets; either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board via a battery for motive purpose. “Electric vehicle” includes: (1) a battery electric vehicle; and (2) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle. [Annotation: Definition for” Electric Vehicle” was added by Amendment Z17-03, effective 6/16/17]
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 10
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION: means a public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle. [Annotation: Definition for “Electric Vehicle Charging Station” was added by Amendment Z17-03, effective 6/16/17]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACE: means any marked parking space that identifies the use to be exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle. [Annotation: Definition for “Electric Vehicle Parking Space” was added by Amendment Z17-03, effective 6/16/17]
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT: An Environmental Assessment means a summary review of the environmental impacts of a project.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT: A thorough analysis which evaluates the effects a proposed development or project, and other major actions, and alternatives to those developments, projects or actions, may have on the environment and that inventories existing environmental conditions at the project site and the surrounding area, including air and water quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soil type, topography, vegetation, wildlife, aquatic organisms, ecology, demography, land use, aesthetics, history, and archaeology.
ERECTED or ERECTION: As applied to any building or structure, erected or erection means built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operation or work on the land which the building or structure is to be built, constructed, reconstructed or moved upon, including excavation, filing, draining or the like.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Services and utilities needed for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, such as underground, surface, or overhead electrical, gas, telephone, stream, water, sewage, and other utilities and the equipment and appurtenances necessary for such systems to furnish an adequate level of service for the City.
SECTION 207 F
FAMILY: An individual or a collective number of individuals living together in one dwelling as a single housekeeping and cooking unit, whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct domestic character. However, this shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie, occupants of a counseling house, lodging house or hotel, or organization which is not a recognized religious order, nor include a group of individuals whose association is temporary and resort-seasonal in character or nature.
FENCE: An artificially constructed barrier erected to enclose, screen, or separate parcels or portions of parcels.
FENCE, DECORATIVE: A fence, no more than four (4) feet in height measured from the grade to the top of the highest
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 11
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
horizontal rail, and intended primarily as an ornament or accent on a parcel.
FILTERED VIEW OF WATER: A vista or view of a river, lake or stream that is partially screened by woody vegetation of sufficient density to buffer development from said water body, to provide for bank stabilization and erosion control, to serve as an aid in filtration of surface runoff, and to provide cover to shade the water. Vegetation need not be so dense as to completely block the view of the water, but shall not include clear cutting.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Commercial establishments such as banks, savings and loans, credit agencies, investment companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, security and commodities exchanges, and insurance agencies.
FLOODPLAIN: That area mapped by the National Flood Insurance Program having a flood elevation that has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded each year, and as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the horizontal area of each story of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, but not including basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breeze ways and enclosed or unenclosed porches, decks or patios.
FOOTPRINT: See Building Area.
FUNERAL HOME: See Mortuary.
SECTION 208 G
GALLERY OR MUSEUM: Repositories of objects connected with literature, art, history, culture, or science collected and displayed for the edification, amusement, entertainment, or education of patrons and consumers.
GASOLINE STATION: Any building, structure, or land, or portion thereof, and any associated appurtenances, intended and used for the retail sale, supply, and dispensing of fuels, lubricants and similar products for motor vehicles.
GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS: Components of the grounds, building, or development collectively owned and available for use by all of the co-owners as defined within the master deed. [Annotation: Definition of “General Common Elements” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards such as waterways, which may include such accessory uses as a pro shop, a clubhouse, banquet facility, driving range, practice greens and service buildings. [Annotation: Definition of “Golf Course” was amended when language for “banquet facility: was added by amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
GRADE: The vertical elevation of the ground.
GRADE, FINISHED: The proposed median grade of a parcel as set forth on the site plan.
Figure F-1
Figure F-1
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 12
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
GREENBELT: An open area of vegetation that may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state surrounding development or used as a buffer between land uses or properties. (See also Buffer Area, Vegetation Belt.)
GREENHOUSE (OR NURSERY): Land, or portion thereof, including a building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment. A Greenhouse and Nursery may be used to raise flowers, shrubs, and plants for commercial sale or personal enjoyment.
GROWER: Means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. [Annotation: Definition of “Grower” was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SECTION 209 H
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: One or more of the following:
A. A chemical, toxic substance or other material which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment.
B. “Hazardous substance” as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980.
C. “Hazardous waste” as defined in Article II, Chapter 3, Part 111 of P.A. 451 of 1994, as amended, being the Hazardous Waste Management part of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act.
D. “Petroleum” as defined in Article II, Chapter 8, Part 213 of P.A. 451 of 1994, as amended, being the Leaking Underground Storage Tanks part of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the highest point for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
HOBBY: An activity carried out by a person primarily for pleasure and self-entertainment.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS: A business operation carried out for gain from a residential property which operation is clearly subordinate and incidental to the residential nature of the property and which involves business activities generally conducted at other locations.
HOME OCCUPATION: An activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, secondary, incidental, and accessory use in the resident’s dwelling, but not a hobby. Without limiting the foregoing, any dwelling used by an occupant of that dwelling to give instruction in a craft or fine art within the dwelling shall be considered a home occupation.
HOSPITAL, OR CLINIC: An establishment providing health services including medical and surgical care, dental care and mental health care on an in-patient or out-patient basis to persons
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 13
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions. Such facility may include such accessory uses as laboratories, training facilities, pharmacies, medical offices and training facilities.
HOTEL: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities.
SECTION 210 I
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material of the built environment that prevents absorption of storm water into the ground, including pavement and rooftops.
INTERSECTION: The location where two or more roadways cross at grade without a bridge.
SECTION 211 J
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition or abandoned.
SECTION 212 K
KENNEL: A commercial establishment in which dogs or other domestic animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, for fee or compensation.
KEYHOLE DEVELOPMENT: Keyhole development (also known as “funnel” development) is the use of a waterfront lot as common open space for waterfront access for a larger development located away from the waterfront.
Figure K-1
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 14
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
KEY STREET SEGMENTS: Key street segments are located throughout the City and are identified on the zoning map. For the purposes of this ordinance the following street segments as described here and as illustrated on the City of Manistee Zoning Map, shall be considered key street segments:
A. US-31, from the northerly City limits to the southerly City limits.
B. Main Street, from the southerly City limits to 13th Street.
C. 13th Street, from Main Street to Vine Street
D. Vine Street, from 13th Street to 8th Street
E. 8th Street, from Vine Street to US-31.
F. Kosciusko Street, from 8th Street to 5th Street
G. 5th Street, from Kosciusko Street to Sibben Street
H. Sibben Street, from 5th Street to 1st Street
I. 1st Street, from Sibben Street to Tamarack Street
J. Cedar Street, from 1st Street to Water Street
K. Water Street, from Cedar Street to Maple Street
L. Maple/Washington Streets, from 4th Street to the northerly City limits
M. Fifth Avenue, from Maple/Washington Streets to Hastings Street.
N. Glocheski Street for its entire length.
SECTION 213 L
LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: A service business which provides washers and dryers and other facilities for rental use to the general public for cleaning garments, bedclothes, and other household and personal materials and a facility which provides cleaning and dry cleaning services to the general public.
LICENSEE: Means a person holding a state operating license issued under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. [Annotation: Definition of “Licensee” was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
LIVING AREA: The net floor area of a dwelling unit used, or intended to be used, for permanent habitation including, but not limited, to sleeping, cooking, personal sanitation areas, but
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 15
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
excluding storage space in attics, garages, and any below-grade room without a window or door affording egress to the outdoors.
LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS: A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. [Annotation: Definition of “Limited Common Elements” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
LOT: (See Parcel)
LOT COVERAGE: That portion of a lot that is covered with buildings, expressed as a ratio of the horizontal area measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot to the total lot area.
SECTION 214 M
MANUFACTURED HOME: A dwelling which is transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and is installed by a Michigan Licensed Mobile Home dealer or Michigan Licensed Mobile Home installer as required by Michigan statute, and administrative rules promulgated there under.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY: A use which is a parcel of land under the control of a person upon which three or more manufactured homes are located on a continual, non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incidental to the occupancy of a manufactured home and which is not intended for use as a temporary manufactured home or trailer.
MARIJUANA or MARIHUANA: Means that term as defined in the Public Health Code, MCL 333.1101 et seq.; the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq. [Annotation: Definition of “Marijuana or Marihuana” was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
MARIHUANA GROWER ESTABLISHMENT: Means a person licensed to cultivate marihuana and sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Grower Establishment” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
MARIHUANA MICROBUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: Means a person licensed to cultivate not more than 150 marihuana plants; process and package marihuana; and sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to individuals who are 21 years of age or older or to a marihuana safety compliance facility, but not to other marihuana establishments. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Microbusiness Establishment” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 16
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
MARIHUANA PROCESSOR ESTABLISHMENT: Means a person licensed to obtain marihuana from marihuana establishments and to sell or otherwise; process and package marihuana; and sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Processor Establishment” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
MARIHUANA PROVISIONING CENTER: A licensed commercial business that sells medical marihuana under the authority of the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act 281 of 2016. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Provisioning Center” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
MARIHUANA RETAILER: means a person licensed to obtain marihuana from marihuana establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments and to individuals who are 21 years of age or older. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Retailer” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
MARIHUANA SAFTEY COMPLIANCE ESTABLISHMENT: means a person licensed to test marihuana, including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Safety Compliance Establishment” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
MARIHUANA SECURE TRANSPORTER ESTABLISHMENT: means a person licensed to obtain marihuana from marihuana establishments in order to transport marihuana to marihuana establishments. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Secure Transporter Establishment” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
MARIHUANA FACILITY: Means an enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., including a marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana provisioning center, marihuana secure transporter, or marihuana safety compliance facility. The term does not include or apply to a “primary caregiver” or “caregiver” as that term is defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. [Annotation: Definition of “Marihuana Facility” was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
MARINA: A facility, including three (3) or more waterfront boat slips, which provides for the servicing, storing, fueling, berthing, and securing of boats and that may include a communication tower, eating, sleeping, and retail facilities intended primarily for the owners, crews, and guests of boat owners using the marina. [Annotation: Definition of Marina was amended by adding “communication tower” by Amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
MASTER DEED: A legal instrument under which title to some or all rights of real estate ownership are conveyed and by which a condominium is created and established, including as exhibits and incorporated by reference in the approved bylaws and the condominium subdivision plan.
MAYOR: The chief elected official of the City.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 17
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
MEDICAL AND DENTAL OFFICE: A facility in which medical, dental, health and related providers maintain offices and may provide services to patients on an out-patient basis.
MINE, SAND AND GRAVEL: A facility, property, or portion thereof designed, constructed, or used for the commercial open pit or subterranean extraction of sand, gravel or minerals. This term also includes quarrying, groundwater diversion, soil removal, milling and crushing, and other preparation customarily done as part of a mining activity.
MINI/SELF STORAGE FACILITY: A structure or group of structures divided into storage units, stalls or lockers of no more than five hundred (500) square feet in area each and which are offered to the public for a fee for the storage of goods.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: A development of a tract of land, building, or structure with a variety of complementary and integrated uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form.
MORTUARY: A facility for the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation and for visitation and for the conduct of memorial and funeral services.
MOTEL: An establishment providing sleeping accommodations to the general public with a majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building, as distinguished from a boarding house, hotel, lodging house, or an apartment.
SECTION 215 N NON-AUTHORITY POLE: means a utility pole used for electric delivery service and controlled by the governing body of a municipally owned electric utility.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING, STRUCTURE: A structure or building lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this Ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of the Zoning District in which it is situated.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the applicable zoning district or other zoning regulations.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of lands or structures lawfully in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance but which does not conform to the regulations of the Zoning District in which it is situated.
NUISANCE: (See Section 654 of the City of Manistee Codified Ordinances)
NURSING HOME: A residential care facility providing long-term care for elderly, infirm, terminally-ill, physically, emotionally and/or developmentally disabled persons, licensed in accord with Article 17 of Act 368 of 1978, as amended.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 18
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
SECTION 216 O
OPEN SPACE: Any property or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants, and their guests of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
ORDINARY HIGH WATERMARK: The elevation contour line at five hundred eighty one and five tenths (581.5) feet above sea level – International Great Lakes Datum 1985 (IGLD 85). [Annotation: This definition of “Ordinary High Watermark” was changed by amendment 07-05, effective 5/29/07 and Figure O-1 was deleted].
OUTDOOR PLAYSET: A structure erected outside for children to play on and around less than eighteen (18) feet in height. Typical components of an outdoor playset include but are not limited to:
A. Towers. In a playset, a tower is a vertical structure with one or more decks placed at various levels. A deck is essentially a horizontal play surface contained within or attached to a tower.
B. Bridges. Towers may be connected to one another via fixed bridges or chain bridges for children to walk across.
C. Ladders. Rope ladders and fixed ladders are common accessories for playsets.
D. Sandboxes. A sandbox often accompanies an outdoor playset.
E. Slides. Slides may be covered or uncovered.
F. Swings. Swings are usually mounted on a free-standing swingset.
G. Monkey bars. Towers may be connected by monkey bars as well as bridges.
[Annotation: This definition of “Outdoor Playset” was added by amendment Z12-07, effective 10/27/12].
OUTDOOR RECREATION – PARK: Public or private playgrounds, pocket parks, natural area, ball fields, open space preserves, arboretums, gardens, beaches, and similar uses, but not facilities designed for overnight or camping use, or as a commercial venue for performances or professional athletics.
OUTDOOR SALES FACILITY: The display and sales of products and services primarily outside of a building or structure, including vehicles, garden supplies, boats and aircraft, farm equipment, motor homes, burial monuments, manufactured housing, recreational vehicles, building and landscape materials, and lumber yards.
SECTION 217 P
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 19
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
PARCEL: An area of land separated from other parcels of land by description on a plat, condominium subdivision plan or by metes and bounds description, recorded in the Manistee County Office of the Register of deeds and with a unique tax identification number, and which complies with the dimensional requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
PARCEL AREA: The area contained within the boundaries of a parcel.
PARCEL MEASUREMENTS: Parcel depth is considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the front property line and rearmost points of the rear property line. Parcel width is the distance between the side property lines, measured at the front yard setback line.
PARCEL, SUBSTANDARD: A parcel of record or a parcel which is described in a land contract or deed executed and delivered before the designation of a high risk erosion area and which does not have adequate depth to provide the minimum required setback from the bluff line for a permanent structure. The term also means those lots which are legally created after the designation of a high risk erosion area, which have sufficient depth to meet setback requirement for permanent structures, but which subsequently become substandard due to erosion processes.
PARENT PARCEL: A parcel of record on the effective date of this ordinance amendment, or the “parent parcel” or “parent tract” as defined by the Michigan Land Division Act.
PARKING FACILITY: A parking area used to temporarily store motor vehicles. [Annotation: “Parking Facility” was amended when the language “available to the public, with or without fee,” was deleted by Amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
PARKING SPACE: One (1) unit of parking area provided for the parking of one automobile or similar motor vehicle.
PERSON: as used in reference to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act: means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership of any type, trust, or other legal entity. [Annotation: Definition of “Person” was added by amendment Z19-13, effective 5/16/19]
PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES: Events such as garage sales, yard sales, basement sales or other similar events where personal property is offered for sale on a limited basis.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel, including linen supply, beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, health clubs, and similar facilities.
PERVIOUS PAVING: Systems that allow water to pass freely thought interstitial space ingrained throughout the paving matrix, thereby transforming traditionally impervious surfaces such as pervious concrete and asphalt; including interlocking pavers, reinforced gravel, porous concrete, porous asphalt and grass paving. [Annotation: this definition of “Pervious Paving” was added by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS: All the requirements of this Ordinance dealing with designated areas for specific physical (tangible) improvements or uses/functions required for an approved
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 20
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
use, structure, building and parcel, including but not limited to, placement of accessory structures, improvements within buffer areas, building height, easements, floor area, improvements within a greenbelt, access drives, loading areas, solid waste storage areas, service drives, parking areas, and other requirements.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Buildings, structures and grounds, including theaters, churches, auditoriums, sports arenas, lecture halls and other similar facilities intended for commercial or non-commercial entertainment, instruction, worship or similar activities involving assembled groups of people numbering thirty (30) or more.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY, LARGE: A place of public assembly shall be considered a large facility if it has either two thousand (2000) square feet or more in gross floor area, total seating capacity of more than one hundred (100) in the largest room intended for public assembly, or the capability to expand to meet these standards in the future. [Annotation: Language for “Place of Public Assembly, Large” was corrected by amendment 08-06, effective 2/29/08]
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY, SMALL: A place of public assembly shall be considered a small facility if it has either less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in gross floor area or total seating capacity of no more than one hundred (100) in the largest room intended for public assembly. [Annotation: Language for “Place of Public Assembly, Small” was corrected by amendment 08-06, effective 2/29/08]
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A special land use pursuant to Section 1870 intended to accommodate developments with mixed or varied uses, innovative design features and/or sites with unusual topography or unique settings.
PORCH: Open air roofed structure attached to the exterior of a building forming a covered entrance to the building. [Annotation: This definition of “Porch” was added by amendment Z12-07, effective 10/27/12].
POWER GENERATING FACILITY: A facility designed and used for the production of electrical energy primarily for the purpose of commercial sale of electrical energy to wholesale and retail customers connected to electrical transmission grid. Such facilities may include coal, diesel, fuel oil, natural gas combustion as well as solid waste incinerators.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary or predominant use of any parcel.
PROCESSING AND MANUFACTURING: Establishments engaged in a series of operations, in a continuous and regular action or succession of actions, taking place or carried on in a definite manner associated with chemical or mechanical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, liquors, food and fiber products, minerals and compounds, and such related activities as storage, packaging, shipping and scrapping.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 21
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
PROCESSOR: Means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center. [Annotation: Definition of “Processor” was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of a member of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of that profession.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment engaged in providing assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, businesses, industries, governments, and other enterprises, including printing, legal, engineering, consulting, and other similar services.
PROPERTY LINE: The outside perimeter of a legally described parcel of land.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board fully authorized to furnish, under federal, state, or municipal regulations, electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation, water or sanitary or storm water sewerage facilities to the public.
SECTION 218 Q RESERVED
SECTION 219 R
RAIN GARDENS: Landscaped depressions that can be built to any size or shape. Also known as ‘bio-retention cells’, they are designed to allow water to settle and infiltrate into the soil and may outlet through an underdrain if required by the City Engineer. [Annotation: this definition of “Rain Gardens” was added by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
RECREATION VEHICLE: A trailer, self-propelled motor home, truck bed mounted camper and similar vehicle designed to be used primarily for recreational purposes, including temporary sleeping quarters and/or cooking facilities
REQUIRED SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS: All the requirements of this Ordinance dealing with minimum or maximum size, area or space required for an approved use, structure, building and parcel, including but not limited to, buffer areas, greenbelts, and yards.
RESEARCH, LABORATORY, AND TESTING: An establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical or social services, which may include engineering and product development.
RETAIL BUSINESS: An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, trailway, electric
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 22
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
transmission lines, pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, and other similar essential services, whether public or private, for public purposes. ROW: means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, bridge, sidewalk, or utility easement dedicated for compatible uses. Public right-of-way does not include any of the following: (private ROW, limited access highway, land owned or controlled by a railroad as defined in section 109 railroad code, railroad infrastructure.
SECTION 220 S
SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY: Means a licensee that is a commercial entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility. [Annotation: Definition of “Safety Compliance Facility” was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SAND EXCAVATION - The process of altering the natural (grade) elevation by cutting or filling the earth, or any activity by which sand is dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, or relocated. [Annotation: Definition of “Sand Excavation” was added by amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
SECTION: A part of this Ordinance, being the next division under an Article. Sections may be further divided into subsections, and divisions, paragraphs and subparagraphs.
SECURE TRANSPORTER: Means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee. [Annotation: Definition of “Secure Transporter” was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SERVICE DRIVE: A service drive shall be a front or rear interconnection between parcels, and may include the maneuvering lane within a parking lot. A service drive is not a private road.
SETBACK: The required minimum distance between a building and any lot line. Setbacks are measured by an imaginary line parallel to a property line which is a specified distance toward the center of a parcel from the property lines or ordinary high water mark. Side, front, rear and waterfront setbacks correspond to the respective yard. [Annotation: The definition of “Setback” was changed by amendment 07-05, effective 5/29/07]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Establishments, which include but are not limited to:
A. Adult Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion pictures machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
B. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store: A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 23
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that are characterized by the depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas; or
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with Specified Sexual Activities.
3. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas and still be categorized as an Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. The sale of such material shall be deemed to constitute a principal business purpose of an establishment if it comprises more than ten (10) percent of the floor area or visible inventory within the establishment.
C. Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity;
2. Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of Specified Anatomical Areas or by Specified Sexual Activities;
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that are characterized by the depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities of Specified Anatomical Areas; or
4 Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or performance that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers.
D. Adult Motel: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
1. Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other photographic reproductions or visual media that are characterized by the depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas and has a sign visible from the public road right-of-way that advertises the availability of any of the above.
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twelve (12) hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than twelve (12) hours.
E. Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment which for any form of consideration, regularly and primarily shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other photographic reproductions or visual media that are characterized by the depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 24
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
F. Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features a person or persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by exposure of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
G. Escort: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform striptease for another person.
H. Escort Agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for any form of consideration.
I. Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person who displays Specified Anatomical Areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but does not include an education institution funded, chartered, or recognized by the State of Michigan.
J. Sexual Encounter Center: A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration.
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
SHARED PARKING: Joint use of a parking area by more than one use or business.
SHIPPING FACILITY: An area of docks, wharfs, shore stations and related structures and facilities intended to service Great Lakes shipping vessels and the materials loaded and off-loaded from such vessels.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 25
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
Figure S-1
SIGN: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or marks, or combinations thereof, by which anything is made known such as the designation of an individual, a firm, an association, a profession, a business, a commodity, or a product which are visible from any public way and used as an outdoor display to advertise, identify, promote, direct, display, or attract attention.
Specific sign types and terms relating to signage content are defined as follows:
A. BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole or on a building.
B. GROUND SIGN: A sign in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground and is independent of any other structure. [Annotation: Definition of “Ground Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
C. MARQUEE SIGN: Any permanent roofed structure projecting over private or public property or right-of-way attached to and supported by a building including any fabric or plastic canopy including “roofs” over gas station islands. [Annotation: Definition of “Marquee Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
D. OFF-PREMISE SIGN: An outdoor sign used as advertising for hire, e.g., on which display space is made available to parties other than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel (not including those who rent space from the sign owner, when such space is on the same parcel or is the same development as the sign), in exchange
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 26
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
for a rent, fee, or other consideration. [Annotation: Definition of “Off-Premise Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
E. POLE SIGN: Any sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottommost edge of the sign is eight (8) feet or more above grade. [Annotation: Definition of “Pole Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
F. PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure, or the ground, intended to be transported easily. [Annotation: Definition of “Portable Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
G. PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support, that is attached perpendicularly to said building, and that projects more than twelve (12) inches from such building. [Annotation: Definition of “Projecting Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
H. SUSPENDED SIGN: Any sign hanging down from a marquee, awning, canopy, or porch, of the building that does not project above or beyond said marquee, awning, canopy, or porch. [Annotation: Definition of “Suspended Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
I. WALL SIGN: A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure that does not project more than twelve (12) inches with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the plane of such wall. [Annotation: Definition of “Wall Sign” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Deleted definitions for “Animated Sign”, “Beacon”, “Commercial Message”, “Flag”, “Electronic Message Board”, “Electronic Sign”, “Freestanding Sign”, “Identification Sign”, “Incidental Sign”, “Nonconforming Sign”, “Pennant”, “Political Sign”, and “Temporary Sign” by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
SITE CONDOMINIUM: A development in compliance with the Condominium Act containing or designed to contain structures or other improvements and in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights to an area of land on which a structure or structures may be constructed as a site condominium unit. [Annotation: Definition of “Site Condominium” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
SITE CONDOMINIUM UNIT: A specific area of land, described in a master deed and established in compliance with the Condominium Act, which is under private ownership and is part of a larger development connected by other site condominium units, limited common elements, and general common elements. . [Annotation: Definition of “Site Condominium Unit” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
SITE PLAN: The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, wetlands, and waterways; landscaping and open spaces; walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation and utility services; structures and buildings; signs and lighting; berms, buffers, and screening devices; surrounding development and legal description pursuant to Article 22 of this Ordinance. SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITY: means a wireless facility that meets both of the following requirements: Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than 6 cubic feet in volume or,
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 27
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements would fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than 6 cubic feet. All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively not more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. Are located within a public ROW and are placed on installed or existing utility poles that are forty (40) feet or less in height with all communication facilities not extending higher than forty-five (45) feet in total height.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Means a solar cell, panel, or array that converts solar energy to useable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
[Annotation: Definition of “Solar Energy System” was added by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SOLAR STORAGE BATTERY: Means a device that stores energy from the sun and makes it available in an electrical form.
[Annotation: Definition of “Solar Storage Battery” was added by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The male genitals and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or,
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in A-C above.
SPORTS AND RECREATION CLUB: A facility designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities, including aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities, and saunas, showers, massage rooms, and lockers, whether operated as a business and open to the public for a fee, or operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide members and guests of such organization, or operated by a governmental agency.
STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES: A dwelling located in a structure constructed for residential purposes, licensed by the state, pursuant to Michigan statute for a home for the
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 28
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
care of six (6) or fewer citizens. [Annotation: The word “senior” was deleted from definition by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
STOREFRONT: Tenant or owner occupied space that fronts on a public right-of-way and that occupies all or a portion of a principal building accessed from a main entrance. [Annotation: Definition of “Storefront” was added by amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
STREET: Any public vehicular way that is:
A. An existing state, county, or locally maintained roadway; or
B. Shown upon an approved plat pursuant to law; or
C. Approved by other official legal action; and
D. Excluding an alley or private street.
STREET, PRIVATE: A road or street which is part of a recorded subdivision, condominium or land division, and shown as a private road on the plat or site plan, or a road which is not public which services more than one (1) dwelling and/or business.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, erected or placed with a fixed location on the ground or affixed to something having a fixed location on the ground, but not including automobiles, trucks, trailer, hunting blinds, fences, hedges, sidewalks, gardens, and shore stabilization devices.
STRUCTURE, MOVABLE: A structure which is determined to be movable based on a review of the design and size of the structure, a review of the capability of the proposed structure to withstand normal moving stresses, and a site review to determine whether the structure is accessible to moving equipment.
STUDIO FOR PERFORMING AND GRAPHIC ARTS: A facility designed, constructed, or used for instructional, practice or production purposes in graphic and performing arts, including sculpture, painting, music, photography, drama, dance and other similar pursuits.
SWALE BIOFILTRATION: A shallow drainage way that employs landscaping to stabilize the soil while providing water quality treatment. Designed to remove silt and sediment-associated pollutants before discharging to storm sewers and to reduce volume if soils allow for infiltration. [Annotation: this definition of “Swale Biofiltration” was added by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
SWALE, VEGETATED OR ROCK: A densely vegetated or rock lined drainage ways with low-pitched side slopes that detain, evaporate, and/or infiltrate the runoff associated with a storm event. [Annotation: this definition of “Swale, Vegetated or Rock” was added by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
SWEETENING PLANT: A facility or plant which is designed for the removal of sulfur compounds from natural gas from gas and oil wells.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 29
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
SECTION 221 T
TATTOO: Any method of placing permanent designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance, by the aide of needles or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin, resulting in either the coloration of the skin, or the production of scars or scarring.
TATTOO PARLOR: An establishment where persons are tattooed for consideration, other than by a licensed medical practitioner or cosmetologist; or any place where tattooing is regularly conducted whether or not it is in exchange for compensation.
TEMPORARY DWELLING: A dwelling established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of a predetermined time period, but not a manufactured home.
TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURE: A storage structure established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of a predetermined time period.
THEATER: A building or structure or part thereof devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances or lectures.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES: Those poisonous substances which, by physical contact, ingestion or inhalation, could cause damage to humans, animals or aquatic life as set forth on the Toxic Substance Listing, maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and listed on the Critical Materials Register, as created pursuant to the Michigan Water Resources Act, P.A. 245 of 1929, as amended.
TRAILER: A structure that can stand on wheels, be towed, and hauled by another vehicle on a roadway, and used for short-term human occupancy, camping and recreational use, carrying of materials, goods, or objects, or as a temporary office.
SECTION 222 U
URGENT CARE FACILITY: A medical care facility open to the public in which professional medical care is provided for injuries and illness.
USE: The primary or main purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used, or for which it is maintained.
USEABLE OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water where the actual and intentional use is enjoyment of owners, occupants, and their guests of land adjoining such open space. Useable open space may include active recreational facilities such as swimming pools; play equipment; competitive sports fields and courts; and picnic tables.
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 30
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
SECTION 223 V
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary or practical difficulty.
VEGETATED ROOF: The roof a building that is partially or completely covered with vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. May include roofs vegetated for food production. [Annotation: this definition of “Vegetated Roof” was added by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
VEGETATION BELT: An area which does not have any buildings which is designed to mitigate the movement of nutrients in the ground into a water body by use of woody plant material whose roots are likely to remove nutrients from the soil prior to the nutrients reaching the water body, and for erosion and bank stabilization. (See also Buffer Area, Greenbelt.)
Figure V-1
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 31
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices exclusively moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and excepting a manufactured home.
VETERINARY CLINIC: A facility where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic use.
VIEW CORRIDOR: A line-of-sight corridor from a public activity area, such as a pedestrian walkway, outdoor recreation area, outdoor eating/drinking facility, outdoor attraction or similar area to Lake Michigan, Manistee Lake and/or the Manistee River Channel.
SECTION 224 W
WAREHOUSE, PUBLIC: A structure used for storage and repackaging of goods, wares, raw materials, equipment, parts and other materials by the owner or operator on behalf of the owner(s) of such items.
WATER BODIES: Surface water, lakes, wetlands, rivers, streams, creeks, brooks, ponds, springs, but not including storm water retention ponds, sediment ponds, or impromptu or uncontrolled collection of storm water.[Annotation: The definition of “Waters Edge” was deleted by amendment 07-05, effective 5/29/07]
WELLS, EXTRACTION: Wells installed for the commercial extraction of ground water, crude oil, brine, natural gas, sour gas or similar products. This definition may include any surface or subsurface pumping or processing equipment or facilities.
WETLAND: Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation and/or aquatic life, and is classified as forested or non-forested emergent or flats in the Manistee County Land Use/Cover Classification system prepared under the Michigan Resource Inventory Act and characterized by a soil type which is alluvial land, undifferentiated, variably textured flood plain sediments.
WHOLESALE FACILITY: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, ACCESSORY: A wind energy conversion system which is intended to primarily serve the needs of the property upon which it is located. [Annotation: The definition of “Windmill, Accessory” was deleted when the definition of “Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory” was added by amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
WINDMILL (WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS): A windmill or a wind energy conversion system shall mean all, or any combination of the following:
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 32
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
A. A mill or machine operated by wind acting on oblique vanes or sails that radiate from a horizontal shaft;
B. A surface area, either variable or fixed, for utilizing the wind for electrical or mechanical power;
C. A shaft, gearing, belt, or coupling utilized to convey the rotation of the surface areas into a form suitable for driving a generator, alternator, or other mechanical or electricity producing device;
D. The generator, alternator, or other device to convert the mechanical energy of the surface area into electrical energy; and,
E. The tower, pylon, or other structure upon which any, all, or some combination of the above are mounted.
WIND MONITORING STATION: A tower-mounted or building-mounted anemometer or other similar device intended to measure and report wind speeds and direction.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA: Any mounted device that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless communication signals, optical, laser or other communication signals; including, but not limited to cellular, PCS, land mobile radio, marine, paging, AM/FM radio antenna, television antenna, satellite dishes, and licensed amateur radio facilities.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: Structures or other materials attached directly to the ground in excess of forty-five (45) feet in height which may be utilized in conjunction with other equipment to transmit and/or receive radio, telephone, cellular telephone, television, microwave or any other form of telecommunication signals.
[Annotation: Definition of “Wireless Communication Facility” was added by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
WOODY PLANT MATERIAL: Vegetation characterized as having a wooden stem or trunk (as opposed to a fibrous or grass stem).
SECTION 225 X RESERVED
SECTION 226 Y
YARD: An open space that lies between the building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Front yard means a yard between the front property line, which is adjacent to a road right-of-way, and the nearest building line. Rear yard means a yard between the property line on the opposite side of the parcel from the property line adjacent to a road right-of-way and the rear building line. Side yard means the remaining yard(s) between the front and rear building lines and the side line (s) of the parcel. Waterfront yard means a yard between the ordinary high water mark and a building line. It may be situated in what would be a side or rear yard if the
As Amended thru August 8, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 33
Article Two Definitions & Interpretation
water body was not present. A parcel may have any combination of yards, so that it may not have a rear yard, it may have two front yards, etc.
[Annotation: The definition of “Yard” was changed by amendment 07-05, effective 5/29/07]
SECTION 227 Z
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: See Administrator
ZONING LOT: Any tract or contiguous tracts of land established by plat, subdivision or otherwise and in the same ownership, whether one or more platted lots or parts of lots, as identified by property tax parcel number in the Manistee County assessment roll.
Figure Y-1
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 1
ARTICLE THREE
DISTRICTS, DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
USES TABLE AND ZONING MAP
[Annotation: Article Three was renumbered from Article Seven by Ordinance Z10-06 effective 10/30/10]
SECTION 300 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
The City is hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map:
A. Residential districts: B. Commercial districts:
1. G-C Golf Course 1. C-1 Regional Commercial
2. R-1 Low Density Residential 2. C-2 Neighborhood Business
3 R-2 Medium Density Residential 3. C-3 Central Business District
4. R-3 High Density Residential 4. W-F Waterfront District
5. R-4 Manufactured Housing Community 5. P-D Peninsula District
C. Industrial districts: D. Overlays:
1. L-I Light Industrial 1. Wellhead Protection Overlay
2. G-I General Industrial 2. Renaissance District
3. U.S. 31 Corridor
4. Marihuana Sales Overlay
[Annotation: Historic Overlay was repealed by Ordinance 07-04 effective 2/20/07]
[Annotation: G-C Golf Course was added by Ordinance Z10-06 effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: P-D Peninsula District was added by Ordinance Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
SECTION 301 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
A. For the purposes of this Ordinance the Zoning Districts as provided in this Ordinance are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Manistee City", a copy of which accompanies this Ordinance and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Ordinance by reference.
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Zoning Ordinance of Manistee City", together with the effective 6/19/12 of this Ordinance, or any amendments thereto.
C. If, in accordance with the procedures of this Ordinance and Michigan law a change is made in a Land Use District boundary, such change shall be made by or under the direction of the Mayor promptly after the amendment authorizing such change shall have been adopted and published.
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 2
D. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the Manistee City Hall shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, Zoning District, use, building or structure in the City.
E. In the event the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes made thereto, the Council may by resolution authorize the transcribing and drawing of a duplicate official zoning map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The duplicate Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions on the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the Zoning Ordinance or the prior Official Zoning Map. The duplicate Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Zoning Ordinance of Manistee City duplicated on ____________________, which replaces and supersedes the Official Zoning Map which was adopted on __________"
F. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of Land Use Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules of interpretation shall apply:
1. A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a highway, street, alley or easement shall be construed as following such line.
2. A boundary indicated as approximately following a recorded parcel line or a property line shall be construed as following such line.
3. A boundary indicated as approximately following the corporate boundary line of the city shall be construed as following such line.
4. A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed as being the centerline of the railroad right of way.
5. A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be construed as following such shoreline, and in the event of change in a shoreline shall be construed as following the actual shoreline.
6. A boundary indicated as following the centerline of a water body shall be construed as following such centerline at the time of interpretation.
7. A boundary indicated as parallel to, or an extension of, a feature indicated in subsections 1 through 6 above shall be so construed.
8. A distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
9. Where a physical or cultural feature existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in any other circumstance not covered by subsections 1 through 8 above, or question in interpreting subsections 1 through 8 above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the Zoning District boundary.
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 3
[Annotation: City of Manistee Official Zoning Map Parcels 51-51-211-128-01, 51-51-211-200-01, 51-51-268-701-01 were Re-Zoned from R-2 Medium Density Residential to W-F Waterfront District as part of an Order of the Manistee County Circuit Court by Amendment 07-27, effective 5/29/07]
[Annotation: City of Manistee Official Zoning Map Parcel 51-310-400-01 was Re-Zoned from R-1 Low Density Residential to G-C Golf Course by Amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: City of Manistee Official Zoning Map was amended by Re-Zoning the W-F Waterfront District south of the Manistee River Channel to P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
SECTION 302 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
The regulations established by this Ordinance within each Zoning District shall be the minimum regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare and shall be uniform for each class of land or building, dwellings and structures throughout each Zoning District.
SECTION 303 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The Schedule of District Regulations set forth as Table 3-1 provides an overview of the dimensional requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. It is provided for expeditious reference. However, it should not be substituted for a precise reference to the specific language of this ordinance.
SECTION 304 TABLE OF LAND USES
Table 3-2, Table of Land Uses summarizes the applicable regulatory standards for the land uses governed under this Zoning Ordinance. It is provided for expeditious reference. However, it should not be substituted for careful reference to the specific language of this ordinance.
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 1
INSERT ZONING MAP
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 4
Back of 3-3
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 5
Table 3-1 – City of Manistee Schedule of Regulations
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum Yard
Requirements (feet)
Maximum Density
Maximum Height
Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling and Width
District
Area
(sq. ft.)
Width
(feet)
(%) of gross lot area(h)
Front (a)
Side
Rear/ Waterfront(f)
DU/Acre
Feet/stories
(Principal Bld)
(Sq.Ft. & Ft)
P-D
6,000
60
60%
15
10
10/20
17
35/2½
500/20
G-C
15,000
100
40%
30
10
10/100
4
35/2½
1,500/25
R-1
15,000
100
40%
30
10
10/100
4
35/2½
1,500/25
R-2
Single Unit
Duplex or Commercial
Multi-Unit
6,000
10,000
10,000(c)
60
80
80
40%
15
10
10/20
8
35/2½
960/20
R-3
Single Unit
Duplex or Commercial
Multi-Unit
6,000
10,000
10,000(c)
60
80
80
60%
15
10
10/20
17
35/2½
960/20 (for single family)
500/20 (for multi-family)
R-4
Single Unit
Duplex or Commercial Mfg Hsng
6,000
10,000
60
80
40%
15
10
10/20
8
35/2½
750/20
C-1
20,000(c)
120
60%
30
10(d)
20
17
40/3
500/20
C-2
6,000(c)
60
90%
4
0 or 4(d)(e)
10/20
17
35/2½
500/no min. width
C-3
2,500
25
100%
0
0 or 4(d)(e)
6/20
(g)
50/4
500/no min. width
W-F
Single Unit
Duplex or Commercial
Multi-Unit
6,000
10,000 10,000c)
60
80
80
60%
15
10
10/20
17
35/2½
500/20
L-I
12,000
120
70%
25
10(i)
10(i)
N/A
50/4(j)
N/A
G-I
12,000
120
70%
45
10(i)
10/50(i)
N/A
50/4(j)
N/A
Notes:
Per Requirements of Section 1105 and the Rules and Regulations of the Manufactured Housing Commission
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 6
a. In areas where the majority of parcels do not meet the setback requirements, the Zoning Administrator may establish a reduced setback requirement in accord with Section 502, G.
b. For multiple unit buildings in the R-2 district, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 5,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
c. For multiple unit buildings, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit up to twenty (20), plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit in excess of 20.
d. A commercial use contiguous to an existing residential use may be required to provide additional buffering
e. A building may be located on one or both side lot lines when both structures are designed to accommo6/19/12 zero-lot line construction. All other structures shall be located a minimum of four (4) feet from the side lot line.
f. This standard shall not apply to walkways,, boat docks, boat slips, boat houses and boat launches. In the C-3 District, the waterfront setback shall be twenty (20) feet, provided the Planning Commission may approve a lesser setback in response to site conditions or surrounding uses and structures. [Annotation: Notes: Item F was changed by amendment 07-07, effective 5/29/07]
g. Not more than one (1) unit for each 1,500 square feet of building envelope
h. In no instance shall the maximum lot coverage exceed the buildable area of a parcel as defined herein.
i. Industrial uses that abut parcels in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, W-F and C-2 districts shall provide an additional fifteen (15) feet of side and/or rear yard setback along property lines abutting such other districts. In the alternative, the Planning Commission may approve a berm, wall, fence or landscaped buffer sufficient in the judgment of the Planning Commission to buffer and screen neighboring properties from industrial impacts.
j. Structures in the L-I and G-I Districts may be erected or altered to a height of sixty (60) feet, provided that a fire lane shall be provided within twenty (20) feet of the building or structure. Said fire lane shall be paved and shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet.
k. This Schedule of Regulations is intended to provide a quick summary of dimensional standards found in this ordinance. Dimensional standards may be modified by the Planning Commission in accord with the Planned Unit Development standards set forth in Section 1870. In the event of a conflict between the standards set forth in this Table 7-1 and other sections of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine which requirement shall be applied.
[Annotation: G-C Golf Course was added to Table3-1 by Amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: P-D Peninsula District was added to Table 3-1 by Amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Minimum Lot Dimensions in the P-D Peninsula District was by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15 which removed larger requirements for Duplex or Commercial and Multi-Unit]
[Annotation: Width for P-D was changed from 550 to 500 sq. ft. by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 7
Table 3-2, Table of Land Uses summarizes the applicable regulatory standards for the land uses governed under this Zoning Ordinance. It is provided for expeditious reference. However, it should not be substituted for careful reference to the specific language of this ordinance.
CITY OF MANISTEE – Table of Land Uses
Table 3-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit
(R=Use by Right; SLU=Use Permitted as Special Land Use; * Indicates Use Permitted as Special Land Use on Key Street Segment)
(** Indicates Use Permitted as Special Land Use as part of a Mixed Use Development and requires a Special Use Permit)
USES
P-D
Peninsula
District
G-C
Golf Course
R-1
Low Density
R-2
Med Density
R-3
High
Density
R-4
Mfg. Housing
W-F
Water-front
C-1
Reg’l
Com
C-2
Neigh. Bus
C-3
Central Bus
L-I
Light Ind
G-I
Gen
Ind
MSOMJ Sales
Accessory Bldg. with a footprint less than the principal structure
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Accessory Bldg. with a footprint greater than the principal structure
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
SLU
SLU
R
R
Accessory Uses, Related to uses permitted
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
Adaptive Reuse
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
Adult Foster Care Facility
SLU
SLU
Animal Grooming
SLU
R
SLU
R
Assembly Operation
SLU*
SLU
R
R
Automobile Repair Facility
R
SLU
R
Bed & Breakfast
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
Billboard
SLU
Car Wash
SLU
SLU
Cemetery
SLU
Community Garden
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Contractor’s Facility
R
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
Convenience Store
SLU
SLU*
SLU*
SLU
R
R
R
SLU
DAS/Small Cell Wireless Facility (Public ROW)
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Day Care, Commercial
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
SLU
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 8
Day Care, Group
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
R
USES
P-D
Peninsula
District
G-C
Golf
Course
R-1
Low
Density
R-2
Med Density
R-3
High Density
R-4
Mfg. Housing
W-F
Water-front
C-1
Reg’l Com
C-2
Neigh. Bus
C-3
Central Bus
L-I
Light
Ind
G-I
Gen
Ind
MSOMari. Sales
Drive-through Establishment
SLU
SLU
SLU
Duplex
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
Dwelling - Accessory
SLU
SLU
R
Dwelling – Multiple Unit
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
Dwelling – Single Unit
R
R
R
R
R
SLU
R
SLU
Dwelling – Upper Story Accessory
R
Eating and Drinking Establishment
R
R
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
SLU
Educational Facility
SLU*
SLU*
SLU
R
SLU
SLU
Financial Institution
SLU
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
Gallery or Museum
R
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
Gasoline Station
SLU
SLU
Golf Course
R
Greenhouse and Nursery
SLU
SLU*
R
Home Based Business
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
Home Occupation, Minor
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Home Occupation, Major
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
Hotel
SLU
SLU*
SLU
SLU
R
R
SLU
Laundry & Dry Cleaning Establishment
SLU
SLU*
R
R
Manufactured Housing Community
R
Marihuana Grower Establishment
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marihuana Safety Compliance Establishment
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marihuana Microbusiness Establishment
SLU
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 9
USES
P-D
Peninsula
District
G-C
Golf
Course
R-1
Lo. Density
R-2
Med Density
R-3
High
Density
R-4
Mfg. Housing
W-F
Water-front
C-1
Reg’l Com
C-2
Neigh. Bus
C-3
Central Bu.
L-I
Light Ind
G-I
Gen
Ind
MSOMari. Sales
Marihuana Processer Establishment
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marihuana Retailer Establishment
SLU
Marihuana Secure Transporter Establishment
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marihuana Provisioning Center Facility
SLU
Marihuana Grower Facility
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marihuana Processer Facility
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marihuana Secure Transporter Facility
SLU**
SLU
SLU
SLU
Marina
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
Medical or Dental Office
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
Mini/Self-Storage Facility
SLU*
SLU
R
R
Mine, Sand and Gravel
SLU
SLU
Mixed-Use Development
R
R
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
R
R
R
Mortuary
SLU*
SLU*
SLU*
SLU*
Motel
SLU*
R
SLU*
Nursing Home or Convalescent Home
SLU*
SLU*
SLU
SLU
Outdoor Recreation, Park
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Outdoor Sales Facility
SLU*
SLU*
Parking Facility, Public
SLU
SLU*
SLU*
SLU
SLU
SLU
R
SLU
Personal Service Establishment
R
SLU
SLU
R
R
R
R
Place of Public Assembly – Large
SLU*
SLU*
SLU*
SLU*
SLU*
SLU*
SLU*
Place of Public Assembly – Small
SLU
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
USES
P-D
G-C
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
W-F
C-1
C-2
C-3
L-I
G-I
MSO
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 10
Peninsula
District
Golf
Course
Lo. Density
Med Density
High
Density
Mfg. Housing
Water-front
Reg’l Com
Neigh. Bus
Central Bu.
Light Ind
Gen
Ind
Mari. Sales
Planned Unit Development
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
Power Generating Facility
SLU
Processing and Manufacturing
SLU
R
Professional Office
R
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
R
R
Professional Service Establishment
R
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
R
R
Research, Testing and Laboratory
R
R
Retail Business
R
SLU*
SLU*
R
R
R
R
Sand Excavation
R
Sexually Oriented Business
SLU
Shipping Facility
R
R
Sports and Recreation Club
SLU
SLU*
R
SLU*
R
SLU*
Studio for Performing & Graphic Arts
SLU
SLU*
SLU*
SLU
R
R
R
Subdivision, Plat or Condo. (of permitted uses)
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Tattoo Parlor
SLU
R
Theater
SLU*
R
SLU*
R
SLU*
Urgent Care Facility
R
Uses similar to uses permitted by right or as special land uses
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
R/SLU
Veterinary Clinic
R
SLU
R
R
Warehouse, Public
SLU
SLU
R
R
Wells, Extraction
SLU
SLU
R
Wholesale Facility
R
R
R
Wind Energy Conversion System
SLU
SLU
Wind Energy Conversion System,
Accessory Subject to Section 515.G
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Wireless Communication Facility
SLU
SLU
SLU
SLU
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 11
[Annotation: Mine, Sand and Gravel was deleted as a SLU in the L-I Light Industrial by amendment 07-10, effective 5/29/07]
[Annotation: Wells Extraction was changed from a SLU to R in the G-I General Industrial District by amendment 07-11, effective 5/29/07]
[Annotation: Medical or Dental Office was added as a R in the L-I Light Industrial District by amendment 07-79, effective 12/14/07]
[Annotation: Adaptive Ruse was deleted as a SLU in the F-4 Manufactured Housing Community District by amendment 08-03, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Adaptive Ruse was deleted as a SLU in the G-I General Industrial District by amendment 08-03, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Parking Facility, Public was changed to Parking Facility by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added as a SLU* (requires key street frontage) in the R-2 Medium Density Residential District by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added as a SLU* (requires key street frontage) in the R-3 High Density Residential District by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added as a SLU in the C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added as a SLU in the G-I General Industrial District by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Windmills, Accessory was added as a R in the L-I Light Industrial District and in the G-I General Industrial District by amendment 08-08, effective 12/11/08]
[Annotation: Duplex was changed from R to SLU in the R-2 Medium Density Residential District, R-3 High Density Residential District and W-F Waterfront District by amendment Z10-01, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Bed & Breakfast was added as a SLU in the C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District by amendment, Z10-02, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: G-C Golf Course District was added to Table 7-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Accessory Bldg. < footprint principal structure was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Accessory Bldg. > footprint principal structure was added as a SLU in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Accessory Uses, Related to uses permitted was added as a R/SLU in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Dwelling – Single Unit was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Golf Course was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Golf Course was deleted as a SLU in the R-1 Low Density District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Home Occupation, Minor was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was added as a SLU in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Outdoor Recreation, Park was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Planned Unit Development was added as a SLU in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Sand Excavation was added to the List of Uses in Table 7-2by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Sand Excavation was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Subdivision, Plat or Condo, (of permitted uses) was added as a R in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Uses similar to uses permitted by right or as special land uses was added as a R/SLU in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Wells, Extraction was added as a SLU in the G-C Golf Course District by amendment Z10-06, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a R in all Zoning Districts by amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Windmill, Accessory was replaced with Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11 as a R in all Zoning Districts]
[Annotation: P-D Peninsula District was added to Table 7-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Accessory Bldg. < footprint principal structure was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Accessory Bldg. > footprint principal structure was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Accessory Uses, Related to uses permitted was added as a R/ SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Adaptive Reuse was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Bed and Breakfast was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Day Care, Commercial was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Duplex was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 12
[Annotation: Dwelling – Multiple Unit was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Dwelling – Single Unit was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Financial Institution was added as a SLU* in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Gallery or Museum was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Home Based Business was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Home Occupation, Minor was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Home Occupation, Major was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Hotel was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Marina was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Mixed-Use Development was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Motel was added as a SLU* in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Outdoor Recreation, Park was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Personal Service Establishment was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Place of Public Assembly, Large was added as a SLU* in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Place of Public Assembly, Small was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Planned Unit Development was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Professional Office was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Professional Service Establishment was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Retail Business was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Studio for Performing & Graphic Arts was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Subdivision, Plat or Condo. (of permitted uses) was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Theater was added as a SLU* in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Uses similar to uses permitted by right or as a special land uses was added as a R/ SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
[Annotation: Animal Grooming was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Contractors Facility was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a SLU to a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Financial Institution was changed from a SLU* to a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Greenhouse & Nursery was added as a SLU in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Mixed Use was changed from a SLU to a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Motel was deleted as a SLU* in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Places of Public Assembly Large was deleted as a SLU* in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Theater was deleted as a SLU* in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Wholesale Facility was added as a R in the P-D Peninsula District by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a use by amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Wireless Communication was added as a use and as a SLU in the R-3, W-F, C-1 and L-I Districts by amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Convenience Store, w/Fuel pumps was deleted as a use by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: “w/o fuel pumps” was deleted from Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a special use to a use by right in W-F and C-2 by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Gallery or Museum in the R-1 was deleted as a special use on a key street segment by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Gasoline Station was added as a special use in the C-2 District by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
As Amended thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Three Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table & Zoning Map Page 13
[Annotation: Mixed Use was changed from a special use to a use by right in G-C, W-F, C-1, C-2 and C-3 by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Place of Public Assembly, Small in R-1 was deleted as a special use on a key street segment by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System was deleted as a special use in the R-3 District by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower was added as a special use in the C-1, L-I and GI Districts and as Special Land Use as a part of a mixed use development and requires a special use by amendment Z18093, effective 3/2/18]
[Annotation: Marihuana Processer was added as a special use in the C-1, L-I and GI Districts and as Special Land Use as a part of a mixed use development and requires a special use by amendment Z18093, effective 3/2/18]
[Annotation: Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility was added as a special use in the C-1, L-I and GI Districts and as Special Land Use as a part of a mixed use development and requires a special use by amendment Z18093, effective 3/2/18]
[Annotation: Marihuana Secure Transporter was added as a special use in the C-1, L-I and GI Districts and as Special Land Use as a part of a mixed use development and requires a special use by amendment Z18093, effective 3/2/18]
[Annotation: Animal Grooming, Day Care Commercial, Day Care Group, Dwelling Accessory, Educational Facility, Motel, Tattoo Parlor and Veterinary Clinic were ADDED as a Permitted use by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
[Annotation: Motel was ADDED as a Special Use (requires key street frontage) by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
[Annotation: Duplex, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Parking Facility, Public and Sports and Recreation Club (requires key street frontage) were changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower Establishment was added as a special use in the P-D, C-1, L-I and G-I Districts by Amendment Z19-13, effective 05/16/19]
[Annotation: Marihuana Safety Compliance Establishment was added as a special use in the P-D, C-1, L-I and G-I Districts by Amendment Z19-13, effective 05/16/19]
[Annotation: Marihuana Processor Establishment was added as a special use in the P-D, C-1, L-I and G-I Districts by Amendment Z19-13, effective 05/16/19]
[Annotation: Marihuana Secure Transporter Establishment was added as a special use in the P-D, C-1, L-I and G-I Districts by Amendment Z19-13, effective 05/16/19]
[Annotation: Marihuana Microbusiness Establishment was added as a special use in the MSO District by Amendment Z19-13, effective 05/16/19]
[Annotation: Marihuana Retailer Establishment was added as a special use in the MSO District by Amendment Z19-13, effective 05/16/19]
[Annotation: Marihuana Provisioning Center Facility was added as a special use in the MSO District by Amendment Z19-13, effective 05/16/19]
[Annotation: Assembly Operation requiring Key Street Frontage was added as a special use in the R-2 District by Amendment Z19-25, effective 01/17/20]
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Four Non-Conformities
ARTICLE FOUR
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION 400 PURPOSE AND INTENT
Nonconforming lots, structures and uses as defined herein which were lawful before this Ordinance was adopted may continue until they are discontinued, damaged or removed but shall not be encouraged to continue or be duplicated after a period of non-use. These nonconformities are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with the buildings and structures and uses of parcels, lots, buildings and structures permitted by this Ordinance. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that such nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended except as provided herein nor shall such nonconformities be used as grounds for adding other buildings and structures and uses of parcels, lots, buildings and structures prohibited elsewhere in the same Land Use District.
SECTION 401 REGULATIONS
No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of such land, or to a different parcel, not occupied on the effective date or adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, except as provided in this Article Four.
A. A nonconforming structure and use may not be added to, extended, reconstructed, structurally altered, or expanded during its life except for any one or combination of the following and subject to the following restrictions:
1. Nonconforming Use. If the nature of the nonconformity is a use which is not otherwise allowed in the zoning district, then the use and structures upon which the use is associated shall not be expanded or enlarged in terms of the area devoted to the use, hours of operation or level of service, or any other extension than what exists at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. Under no condition shall the parcel be expanded and the use be expanded to a contiguous parcel.
2. Nonconforming Dwelling or Retail Use. If the nature of the nonconformity is a use which is a dwelling in the C-1, C-2, C-3, L-I or G-I districts, or a retail business located in the L-I or G-I districts, and such use is not otherwise permitted; then the use and structures associated with it may expand within the standards and regulations applicable to that zoning district as if it were a permitted use. [Annotation: Section 401.A.2 was changed by amendment 07-06, effective 5/29/07]
3. Nonconforming Developed Parcel. If the nature of the nonconformity is the parcel is too small and already has existing uses and structures; then such structures shall not be expanded more than the lesser of:
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Four Non-Conformities
a. Fifty (50) percent of the building area occupied by the structure at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or
b. The Maximum Lot Coverage for the zoning district; and
any such expansion shall comply with all other provisions of this Ordinance. Nothing here is intended to prevent the acquisition of adjacent land to bring the parcel into compliance, or to lessen the nonconformity if the use is permitted in the respective zoning district.
4. Nonconforming Undeveloped Parcel. If the nature of the nonconformity is the parcel is too small, and the parcel is vacant; then a use or structure shall not be permitted unless contiguous land is added to the parcel, to make the parcel large enough, unless:
a. It is documented by the applicant that sufficient contiguous land cannot be purchased, and
b. The nonconforming parcel was created by lawful division in full compliance with the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of the division.
5. Nonconforming Structure. If the nature of the nonconformity is the structure is too small; then the use shall not be expanded by more than fifty (50) percent in hours of operation or level of service, or other similar extension than what exists at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. Nothing here is intended to prevent any amount of addition to the size of the structure, if:
a. The size of the structure is the only nonconformity, and
b. The addition results in the structure being in full compliance, or as a second choice, closer to compliance.
6. Nonconforming Yards. If the nature of the nonconformity is any portion of the existing structure is located within a portion of the required front, side or rear yard, the structure may be expanded provided the expansion does not increase the degree of the nonconformity by enlarging any portion of the structure in the required yard in the direction of the adjoining property line.
B. Nonconforming Condominium. A nonconforming developed or undeveloped parcel shall not be converted to a condominium, except in conformance with this Ordinance. [Annotation: Item B Nonconforming Condominium was added by Amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
SECTION 402 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the repair, reinforcement, improvement or rehabilitation of nonconforming buildings, structures, or part thereof existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, rendered necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation; nor prevent compliance with the provisions of the Michigan Construction Code, relative to the maintenance of buildings or structures; provided, however, that the cost of such repair,
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Four Non-Conformities
reinforcement, improvement, rehabilitation or compliance shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the reproduction value of such building at the time such work is done; and provided, further, there shall be no change of use which would expand the nonconformity of such building at the time such work is done; and provided, further, there shall be no change of use of said building or part thereof.
SECTION 403 RECONSTRUCTION AND REPLACEMENT
A. No nonconforming building or structure damaged by fire, act of God or other causes to the extent that the damage is total (i.e. the insurance coverage, if it existed, would pay the full replacement cost of the structure) shall be repaired or rebuilt, except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Reconstruction, repair or restoration of the structure shall be completed within one (1) year following the damage and resumption of use shall take place within ninety (90) days of completion. The one (1) year timeframe may be extended by the Zoning Board of Appeals if it finds one of the following conditions to exist:
1. The delay was not avoidable due to weather;
2. The delay was a result of an on-going criminal investigation;
3. The delay was a result of a dispute between the owner and an insurance company concerning what is covered by insurance; and
4. The delay was a result of property being held in probate.
C When repairing or rebuilding any building which is located in a high risk erosion area, affirmative steps to minimize future erosion damage may be required.
SECTION 404 COMPLETION
Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change in the construction or intended use of a building or structure, the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted prior to the passage of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, and the construction of which shall have been completed within twelve (12) months after said date of adoption or amendment.
SECTION 405 ABANDONMENT
Any building, structure or land that has been used for nonconforming purposes but which has not been occupied by such nonconforming use for one (1) year or more shall not thereafter be used unless it conforms to the provisions of this Ordinance. An extension may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the following reasons:
A. Property held in Probate;
B. Insurance settlement in dispute; or
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Four Non-Conformities
C. Criminal investigation.
SECTION 406 HISTORIC BUILDINGS
Historic buildings may be exempt from Section 401 of this Ordinance and may be expanded. Nonconforming historic buildings may be permitted with prior review and approval by the Commission as provided in the Historic Overlay, Article 20 of this Ordinance, if the proposed expansion or replacement is an enhancement of an historic district, or registered historic building.
SECTION 407 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR TENANCY
There may be change of tenancy, ownership or management of an existing nonconforming use, building or structure, provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming use, building or structure.
SECTION 408 NONCONFORMING SPECIAL USES
Uses that previously existed as permitted uses but which under this ordinance are treated as special uses in the district in which they are located, shall not be considered to be nonconforming. Provided, however, that any subsequent change, expansion or adjustment to such use or its associated site shall be undertaken in compliance with this ordinance.
SECTION 409 MARIHUANA FACILITIES
A. No marihuana facility operating or purporting to operate prior to December 15, 2017, shall be deemed to have been a legally existing use nor shall the operation of such marihuana facility be deemed a legal nonconforming use under this Ordinance.
B. A property owner shall not have vested rights or nonconforming use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with this Ordinance or any amendment thereto.
C. Discontinuation of a state medical marihuana facility license shall constitute prima facie evidence that a nonconformity has been discontinued. [Annotation: Section 409 Marihuana Facilities was added by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Five General Provisions
ARTICLE FIVE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 500 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this Article to set forth regulations that may apply generally in all Zoning Districts to all permitted uses and special uses and to provide detail on how the standards of this Ordinance shall be applied.
SECTION 501 SCOPE
The use of all land and structures and the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair and moving of all structures within the City of Manistee shall conform with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance unless the nonconformance is a matter of record on the effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION 502 USES, SPATIAL AND PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Each parcel in the City shall be limited to not more than one (1) principal use; provided that multiple-tenant or multiple-occupant commercial, industrial or mixed-use developments may be regarded as single uses if approved pursuant to the standards of this ordinance.
B. The continuing maintenance of required spatial relationships and physical requirements of this ordinance for a use, structure, building, and/or parcel shall be the obligation of the owner of the use, structure, building and parcel.
C. No parcel shall be split, divided or created which does not meet the spatial requirements of this Ordinance, except as may be permitted specifically elsewhere in this Ordinance. No building, structured or use shall be constructed, expanded, renovated or established except in conformance with this Ordinance and the City of Manistee Subdivision Control Ordinance.
D. Required spatial relationships and physical requirements of this ordinance shall apply uniformly within each respective zoning district to all uses, structures, buildings and parcels except that the following may be located as follows on a parcel:
1. Within the front yard setback:
a. Those parts of a building which are decks, including steps, handicapped ramps, terraces, patios and awnings but built no closer than three (3) feet from the property line, subject to the provisions of Section 513 pertaining to clear vision areas.
b. Porches built no closer than three (3) feet from the property line, subject to the provisions of Section 513 pertaining to clear vision areas. Provided that they cannot be enclosed into living area, permanently screened (creating a screened porch) or glassed (creating a sunroom), the use of screen curtains is permissible.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Five General Provisions
c. On parcels with steep slopes exterior steps may be located within a required yard when the Zoning Administrator finds that such location is necessary for the practical use of the property.
2. Within the side or rear yard setback:
a. handicapped ramps, terraces, and patios but built no closer than three (3) feet from the property line
b. On parcels with steep slopes exterior steps may be located within a required yard when the Zoning Administrator finds that such location is necessary for the practical use of the property.
c. Outdoor playsets less than 18 feet in height but built no closer than three (3) feet from the property line and will not require a Land Use Permit.
3. Anywhere on a parcel and does not require a Land Use Permit:
a. Flag poles;
b. Hydrants;
c. Arbors, trellises, trees, plants, shrubs, subject to the provisions of Section 513 pertaining to clear vision areas;
d. Sidewalks and walkways. [Annotation: Section 502.D was changed by amendment Z12-07, effective 10/27/12]
E. Required setback distances shall be measured perpendicular to and from the property line or edge of right-of-way or ordinary high water mark toward the center of the parcel. For non-platted parcels, where the front lot line is the roadway centerline, setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way. Building setback lines shall parallel the parcel line from which they are measured. All measurements of setback distances shall be completed in accordance with Section 524 hereof. [Annotation: Section 502.E was changed by amendment 07-05, effective 5/29/07]
F. Parcel depth measurements shall be taken from the midpoints of straight lines, one connecting the front property corners and the second connecting the rear property corners. For the purposes of this section, property corners shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator as the points at which the side parcel lines intersect the front and rear lines, regardless of the shape of the property. Parcel width shall be measured at the front yard setback line. Provided that for irregularly-shaped parcels, the Zoning Administrator may determine an average parcel width as the average width measured at right angles to its depth, with no fewer than five (5) equally spaced measurements. See Figure 502.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Five General Provisions
G. In the event a site plan is submitted for a proposed building or improvement in an area where fifty percent (50%) or more of the existing buildings on the same side of the street and within the same block do not meet the front yard setback requirements of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall establish the minimum front yard setback for such proposed building or improvement as the most common setback of all existing buildings on the same side of the street within the same block. [Annotation: Section 502.G was changed by amendment 07-08, effective 5/29/07]
H. Land filling and other contour changes to create a buildable area shall not be undertaken, except in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance and applicable State and Federal requirements. No person shall undertake any activity such as grading, clearing, cutting and filling, excavating, or tree removal in preparation for a use or structure which requires Site Plan Review and approval until the proposed use or structure is authorized by a Zoning Permit.
SECTION 503 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. No parcel, building or structure in any Zoning District shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable element or condition so as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises provided any use permitted by this Ordinance may be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards are employed to limit dangerous and objectionable elements to acceptable limits as established by the following performance requirements:
Figure 502
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Five General Provisions
1. No vibration shall be permitted in excess of the applicable City noise regulations (City Code Part Six, Chapter 662: Peace Disturbances) or regulations promulgated by rule thereunder.
2. No audible noise shall be permitted in excess of City noise regulations (City Code Part Six, Chapter 662: Peace Disturbances) or regulations promulgated by rule there under.
3. No storm water runoff, which is a result of development site design, or other manmade features, shall be allowed to be directed to neighboring parcels, or shall be allowed to result in water standing on the surface, unless the standing water is a part of a properly managed and maintained storm water retention system, sediment pond; or the standing water is in a naturally occurring wetland or water body. As an alternative, if in the opinion of the City’s consulting engineer, the soils are of a type which will allow for efficient drainage, the use of drywells, infiltration trenches, swales, bio-retention or other best management practices for controlling urban runoff quality may be permitted. Single-family standalone residences are exempt from having to receive permitting and design approval for placement of rain gardens, bio-swales, rain barrels or other stormwater management practice, but all stormwater structures must meet applicable setbacks and other general standards. Methods used may include attached or detached accessory stormwater control features as follows:
a. Swales: both biofiltration and vegetated/rock swales subject to engineering review.
b. Rain Gardens may be permitted subject to engineering review.
c. Rain Barrels or Cisterns are permitted in all districts and require a land use permit.
1) Underground cisterns or rain barrels are subject to engineering review and constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
2) Aboveground rain barrel or cistern systems in excess of 250 gallons must conform to the setbacks for accessory buildings and structures and are subject to engineering review. These systems must be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code. These above ground rain barrels or cistern systems shall be fully enclosed to avoid attracting mosquitos or becoming a hazard.
d. Vegetated roof systems may be permitted in accordance with the State Building Code.
e. Other methods of onsite stormwater control may be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and, at their discretion, may be approved, approved subject to engineering review, approved subject to Planning Commission review, or denied.
[Annotation: Section 503.3 was amended by adding language for green infrastructure options by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
B. The Administrator shall enforce this Section and Section 504 by cooperating with and reporting suspected violations to the respective enforcement agency(s) responsible for administration of the statutes, rules or ordinances cited above.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 504 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE FACILITIES
A structure intended or used for human occupancy shall be connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities in compliance with the City Code, as amended, and approved by the Manistee-Mason District Health Department.
SECTION 505 WATER PROTECTION
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Ordinance, the following provisions shall apply:
A. Where any building, structure or improvement is proposed for property abutting Manistee Lake, the Manistee River Channel, Lake Michigan or any man-made lake, additional waterfront setbacks shall be provided to offer protection for said water body. Such setbacks shall be increased to the following (see Table 7-1 for a complete schedule of regulations):
B.
District
PD
GC
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
C-2
C-3
W-F
L-I
G-I
Waterfront Yard (feet)
20
100
100
20
20
20
20
20
20
N/A
50
Provided, that these increased setback standards shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat houses and boat launches. The increased setback areas shall be designed to provide additional protection for the water bodies. [Annotation: Section 505.A was changed by amendment 07-07, effective 5/29/07] [Annotation: GC was added by amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10] [Annotation: PD was added by amendment Z12-08, effective 10/27/12]
C. A site plan for any improvement proposed for property abutting the Manistee Lake or River Channel shall provide for a filter and buffer landscape strip a minimum of ten (10) feet in width along the edge of the water. Natural shoreline and existing vegetation shall be preserved where appropriate. It shall be the landowner's responsibility to maintain (and establish, if necessary) this vegetation belt in a healthy state.
D. No building or structure shall be built, located or constructed within a 100 year flood plain, as may be determined by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, unless constructed according to the Michigan Construction Code, as it applies to construction in flood plains, consistent with criteria set forth in Section 1910 of National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, promulgated under the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
E. Where buildings and structures are proposed to be located within or adjacent to floodplains and areas of high-risk erosion, techniques shall be implemented to mitigate any impact on water bodies and bluff lines. The mitigation techniques shall also be designed to minimize the economic hardships that individuals and the City may face in the event of property loss due to severe erosion or flooding. The Planning Commission may require an applicant to submit an Environmental Assessment on the condition of the floodplain or the bluff line. Where a bluff is determined to be eroding or in danger of eroding, structures and buildings
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Five General Provisions
shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet in addition to the respective minimum waterfront yard setback, from the bluff line; provided, that a minimum of 30 years protection from shore land or bluff erosion is provided by said setback, as determined by the Department of Natural Resources.
F. The City encourages property owners, developers, and others to construct walkways, or to dedicate easements to the City for the eventual construction of walkways, along lands abutting the Manistee Lake or River Channel. Where an easement or walkway will be provided, it shall be illustrated on a site plan and may be located within or on posts or pilings above the ten (10) foot filter and buffer landscape strip required per Section 505 B.
1. The easement or walkway shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide and shall be aligned to connect with existing, anticipated, or future walkways on neighboring properties.
2. A walkway shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall conform to the City of Manistee’s sidewalk standards, as promulgated under Section 1024 of the General Law Ordinances of the City of Manistee.
SECTION 506 DUMPSTERS AND ENCLOSURES
Adequate refuse disposal facilities shall be required for all uses, except single-family and two-family residences and shall comply with the following regulations and requirements: A. Dumpsters shall not be located in the front yard setback. Any such dumpster shall have adequate vehicular access, shall not encroach on a required parking area, and shall not conflict with entrances to principal buildings. Unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator, dumpsters shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from any side or rear property line, and shall be located as far as practicable from any adjoining residential district. B. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad. The concrete pad should extend a minimum of three (3) feet in front of the dumpster enclosure. C. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate D. The dumpster screening requirements may be waived upon finding that the unscreened dumpster will not be visible from adjoining property or from any public road, or upon finding that if the dumpster is visible from the adjoining property the impact will not be detrimental because of the size or location of the proposed dumpster or because of the nature of the adjoining use. E. This Section is not intended to require the screening of any dumpster used on a temporary basis during construction, remodeling or demolition of a building. F. The location and method of screening of dumpsters shall be shown on all site plans and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
G. Upon the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission may approve a site plan that does not comply the requirements of this section where local conditions make full compliance impossible.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 7
Article Five General Provisions
[Annotation: Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures was added by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 507 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
The Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, City Council and Zoning Board of Appeals may attach reasonable conditions with the approval of special land uses, planned unit developments, site plans, variances, and other discretionary zoning decisions. These conditions may include those necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Any conditions imposed, however, shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare and the social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
B. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
C. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, be related to the standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards.
SECTION 508 FENCES
Fences, walls, and decorative fences shall comply with the following regulations and requirements:
A. Location:
1. Fences, walls and decorative fences shall not be located outside or beyond the property or lot lines of the lot upon which said improvement shall be placed.
2. Decorative Fences, as defined herein, may be placed in any location on a parcel, provided that on a waterfront lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts, no portion of such fence shall constructed in the waterfront setback. [Annotation: Section 508.2 was changed by amendment 07-05, effective 5/29/07]
3. Fences, other than decorative fences as defined herein, shall not be located in the front setback of any lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or C-2 Districts.
B. Height:
1. Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height in any district, unless such fences are constructed in conformance with the setback restrictions in the district. However, the Planning Commission may approve a greater height in the L-I and G-I Districts if the increased height will better screen a use from the roadway or adjacent residential uses.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 8
Article Five General Provisions
HigheHighe HigheHighest st st elevationelevationelevationelevationelevationelevationelevationelevationelevation
Lowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevationLowest elevation
Median GradeMedian GradeMedian Grade Median GradeMedian Grade Median GradeMedian Grade Median Grade
Maximum Maximum Maximum Maximum Maximum Height, 35’ Height, 35’ Height, 35’ Height, 35’ Height, 35’
C. Design and Type:
1. All fences shall be constructed with the finished side exposed, the support posts placed on the inside, and in a manner which serves to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or surrounding.
2. Decorative fences shall be constructed, by way of illustration, in a style similar to split rail or wrought iron fences. Decorative fences shall be designed to incorporate no more than fifty percent (50%) opaque surface area.
3. Except in the G-I District, no fence shall include barbed or razor wire strands or electrification.
[Annotation: the requirement for a zoning permit was deleted by amendment, Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 509 HEIGHT
A. Maximum Building Height. No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or altered to a height exceeding thirty-five (35) feet, as measured from the finished median grade elevation of a site, except as follows:
1. Buildings or structures in the C-1 District may be erected or altered to a height of forty (40) feet. Buildings in the C-3 District may be erected or altered to a height of fifty (50) feet.
2. Buildings or structures in the L-I and G-I Districts may be erected or altered to a height of 60 feet, provided that a fire lane shall be provided within twenty (20) feet of the building or structure. Said fire lane shall be paved and shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. All such structures shall require the approval of the Fire Chief.
B. Measurement. Building height shall be measured from median finished grade elevation to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the highest point for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
Figure 509
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 9
Article Five General Provisions
C. For the purposes of this Section, median grade shall be determined to be the elevation of the crown of the road at the center point of the parcel for all sites where there is less than fifteen (15) feet variation in elevation across the building envelope of the site. For parcels with more than fifteen (15) feet variation across the building envelope, the median grade shall be determined by subtracting the lowest elevation point in elevation within the building envelope from the highest, multiplying the result by 0.667 and adding the product to the elevation of the lowest point.
D. In all districts, height requirements may be exceeded by chimneys, silos, cupolas, spires, ornamental projections, radio, cellular telecommunication and television antenna systems or water towers. [Annotation: Standards for Item D were changed by amendment, Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
E. In the Industrial District chimneys, cooling and fire towers, elevator buildings and bulkheads, roof storage tanks and other necessary accessory structures are permitted. [Annotation: Item E was added by amendment, Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 510 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS
In every Zoning District, every use, building or structure established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be located on a parcel which abuts a public road or a private road or easement which provides access to a public road, such private road or easement being at least sixty-six (66) feet in width, unless a lesser width was duly established of record prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or as part of a Planned Unit Development, provided that private easements in all cases shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width.
SECTION 511 DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS
A. In the P-D, R-4, C-1, C-2, W-F, L-I and G-I Districts, driveway entrances and exits to a property shall comply with the following standards unless superseded by State or Federal statute or rule. [Annotation: PD was added by amendment Z12-08, effective 10/27/12]
1. The location of a driveway curb cut to any street shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from an intersection of any two streets, measured from the edge of the respective rights-of-way. Provided that, parcels greater than one hundred (100) feet in width, which shall have driveways curb cuts at least sixty (60) feet from an intersection measured at the edge of the public right-of-way.
2. Driveway curb cuts shall be aligned with driveways on the opposite side of the street or offset a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet, measured from centerline to centerline.
3. Driveways on the same side of a local street shall be separated by at least thirty (30) feet, measured from centerline to centerline. Provided, that common or shared drives shall have zero distance between them but shall comply with required distances from intersections and other driveways as set forth in this section.
4. Exit-only or entrance-only driveways and driveways for dwellings and duplexes, shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, and no more than twenty (20) feet in width. All other
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 10
Article Five General Provisions
driveways shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet but no more than thirty five (35) feet in width.
B. In the G-C, R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts, driveway curb cuts shall be placed at least thirty (30) feet from an intersection. [Annotation: G-C was added by amendment Z-15-04, effective 7/14/15]
C. All driveways in every district shall be located at least three (3) feet from a side yard property line.
D. A driveway curb cut shall not be constructed into a city-owned street unless a driveway is also being constructed. [Annotation: word “unto” was replaced with “into” by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
E. In those areas without curbs and gutters, the requirements of this section shall apply and be administered as if the curb and gutters were present.
F. All driveways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or pervious paving and connect to the public right-of-way. [Annotation: pervious paving was added by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
G. Upon the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, the Commission may approve a site plan that does not comply the requirements of this section where local conditions make full compliance impossible, providing the distances between the new driveway from street intersections and other driveways is the greatest possible.
SECTION 512 PRIVATE STREETS
Except within a PUD approved in accordance with Section 1870, every private street that provides, or may provide in the future, access to and from a public street for three (3) or more dwelling units or principal buildings on separately owned parcels shall be constructed within a right-of-way not less than sixty-six (66) feet in width and which is established by duly recorded conveyance. Private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Standards for the Construction of Private Roads of the City of Manistee. A Private Street shall not include driveways to a dwelling and/or business or accessory buildings thereto when the driveway is located on the same parcel of land as the serviced structure; a city street as shown on maps certifying the same to the Michigan Department of Transportation; two-track trails which have been in common use for fifteen (15) or more years and which provide the only access to a parcel of property.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 11
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 513 CLEAR VISIBILITY AT CORNERS
No parking space, fence, hedge, planting, sign, structure, or any other element of the built environment, shall be located, erected or maintained, within a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from a street right-of-way which obstructs safe vision at a street corner. Provided, however, the Zoning Administrator, upon consultation with the City Engineer and/or Chief of Police, may require a greater clear vision area where necessary due to traffic speeds, volumes or the topography of the site. Provided, further, that the Planning Commission may, upon the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, waive or modify such standard within the C-3 and C-2 districts to permit buildings to conform to existing front and side yard patterns in the immediate vicinity.
Figure 513
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 12
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 514 PARKING, BIKE PARKING AND SIDEWALKS
A. For each principal building or establishment hereafter erected or altered and located in any Zoning District, including buildings and structures used principally as places of public assembly, there shall be provided and maintained suitable space off the public right-of-way which is adequate for the parking or loading of motor vehicles in the proportions shown below. The parking spaces called for hereunder shall be considered minimum requirements under this Ordinance. Where more than one use exists or is proposed on a parcel, the minimum shall be the sum of the required parking for each use, except where it is demonstrated to the Commission that such provisions would be excessive, in which case shared parking may be permitted. All parking areas except for Dwelling Units for Single Family, duplex units and mobile homes; the maximum number of parking spaces shall not exceed 1.5 times the minimum number of required parking spaces
Use
Number of Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measure
Dwellings
Two (2) spaces per Dwelling Unit for Single Family, duplex units and mobile homes.
One and a half (1.5) spaces for Multi-Family.
Hotels, Motels, Inns and Transient Lodging Places
One (1) space for each rentable room.
Hospitals, Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
One (1) space for each four beds, and one (1) space for each employee during the time the largest number of employees are present.
Places of public assembly
One (1) space for each four seats of legal capacity.
Medical clinics and medical and dental offices
One (1) space for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in waiting rooms, one (1) space for each examining room, dental chair and similar use area, and (1) space for each employee during the time the largest number of employees are present.
Offices, other than medical or dental clinics
One (1) space for each 250 square feet of office space.
Eating and drinking establishments
One (1) space for each three seats of legal seating capacity.
Retail establishments
One (1) space for each 450 square feet of floor area dedicated to retail activity, exclusive of storage areas.
Industrial and warehouse uses
One (1) space for each employee during the time the largest number of employees are present plus five (5) spaces for visitors.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 13
Article Five General Provisions
[Annotation: Section Title was changed from Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting to Vehicular Parking Space, Access, Bike Parking and Sidewalks and Section A was amended by Amendment Z12-04; effective 10/27/12]
B. In the case of uses or businesses not addressed in paragraph A hereof the required parking shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator, subject to Planning Commission concurrence. The latest edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers Parking Generation shall be consulted in determining a parking requirement for any such use or business.
C. The minimum dimensional standards for parking spaces and aisles shall be as follows.
Minimum Parking Space and Maneuvering Lane Standards
Lane Width
Parking Space
Total Width of
Two Tiers Plus Lane
Parking
One-way
Two-way
Width (1)
Length(2)
One-way
Two-way
Pattern
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
Parallel
11
18
9
23
40
36
30°-53°
12
18
9
19
50
56
54°-74°
13
19
9
19
51
57
75°-90°
15
20
9
18
51
56
(1) Measured Perpendicular to the space centerline.
(2) Measured along the space centerline.
Figure 514
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 14
Article Five General Provisions
D. The approval of the City Engineer shall be obtained for the location of exits and entrances to parking areas and for the design and construction thereof.
E. Off-street parking areas for all uses requiring City approval shall be paved with concrete, bituminous material or pervious paving with approved curbing and approved parking lines. [Annotation: Item E was amended by Amendment Z12-04, effective 10/27/12]
[Annotation: Item E was amended by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Item E was amended by amendment Z19-01, effective 4/15/19]
F. Parking areas with ten (10) or more spaces shall include designated pedestrian walkways through the parking lot in addition to landscaped planting islands and perimeter buffers in accordance with Section 531, in all instances where sufficient space is available. Landscape islands must meet the following size requirements:
1. Landscape islands containing a tree shall be a minimum of 160 square feet and a minimum of nine (9) feet wide.
2. Landscape islands containing a pedestrian pathway shall be a minimum of eleven (11) feet wide, with a pathway of a minimum width of five (5) feet and a minimum of three (3) feet of landscape area on both sides.
3. If landscaped islands are not used for storm water infiltration, the islands must be raised and curbed. [Annotation: Item F was added by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
G. For all permitted uses and special uses in the P-D District the parking provisions of this section shall not apply, except hotels, marinas, and places of public assembly. [Annotation: Item G was added by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
H. For all permitted uses and special uses in the C-3 District the parking provisions of this section shall not apply, except to hotels, motels, and residential use condominiums. Required parking shall be provided within two hundred (200) feet of the building. One (1) space shall be provided per dwelling unit. [Annotation: Item H was amended by Amendment Z17-07, effective 7/28/17]
I. Parking areas required under this Section, and city-owned parking lots, shall not be used for the storage of, camping within, or continuous parking or storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, motor vehicles and junk for more than a twenty-four (24) hour period.
J. Within the C-1, C-2, C-3, and P-D Districts, the Planning Commission may approve shared parking arrangements among various uses when it can be demonstrated that parking in sufficient quantities for all such uses as set forth in this Section shall be available at all times. [Annotation: P-D was added by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
K. Vehicle Stacking for drive through establishments shall meet the following
1. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width by 20 feet in length.
2 Stacking spaces shall not impede on-or off-site traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
3. A minimum stacking space number includes the space at the point of service as follows:
a. Gasoline fueling two (2) spaces measured from the stacking lane entry to the fueling position.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 15
Article Five General Provisions
b. Restaurant four (4) spaces measured from the stacking lane entry to the order/pick-up window.
c. Car Wash (3) spaces measured from the stacking lane entry to the bay.
d. All other uses (3) spaces measured from the stacking lane entry to the window.
Upon the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission may approve a site plan that does not comply the requirements of this section where local conditions make full compliance impossible, providing the distances between the stacking lane, on-or off-site traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces is the greatest possible.
[Annotation: Vehicle Stacking was added by Amendment Z17-03, Adopted 6/16/17]
L. The Commission may defer construction of the required number of parking spaces. The granting of deferred parking is subject to the following conditions :
1. An application is filed with the site plan of the entire project showing the design and layout of all required parking areas including areas proposed for deferred parking. The design of the parking area, as indicated on the development plan shall include sufficient space to provide for the total parking area as required by Section 514, Vehicular Parking Space, Access, Bike Parking and Sidewalks.
2. The area designated for deferred parking shall not include areas required for front, side or rear yards, buffer yards or land otherwise unsuitable for parking due to environmental or physical conditions.
Subsequent to the implementation of a deferred parking plan, the planning commission may, based on review of parking needs and a recommendation by the zoning administrator, require the construction of additional parking spaces.
[Annotation: Deferred Parking was added by Amendment Z17-03, Adopted 6/16/17]
M. Electric Vehicle Parking
1. An electric vehicle charging station space may be included in the calculation for minimum required parking spaces
2. Battery charging station outlets and connector devices shall be no less than 36 inches and no higher than 48 inches from the surface where mounted. Equipment mounted on pedestals, lighting posts, bollards, or other devices shall be designed and located as to not impede pedestrian travel or create trip hazards.
3. Adequate battery charging station protection, such as concrete-filled steel bollards, shall be used. Curbing may be used in lieu of bollards, if the battery charging station is setback a minimum of 24 inches from the face of the curb.
4. All equipment installed shall meet building code requirements.
5. Information shall be posted identifying voltage and amperage levels and any time of use, fees, or safety information related to the electric vehicle charging station.
6. Each electric vehicle charging station space shall be posted with signage indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. For purposes of this
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 16
Article Five General Provisions
subsection, “charging” means that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment.
[Annotation: Electric Vehicle Parking was added by Amendment Z17-03, Adopted 6/16/17]
N. No parking area designed for more than 4 vehicles shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the front property line. [Annotation: Item I was added by Amendment Z12-04, effective 10/27/12]
O. Bike Parking and the installation of a Bike Rack is required for all uses that require Medium Site Plan Review, unless waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator. Bike Parking and the installation of a Bike Rack is required for all uses that require Detailed Site Plan Review unless waived by the Planning Commission. Bicycle parking shall be located along the principal building entrance approach line and be clearly visible and easily accessible from the approach and building entrance being served. [Annotation: Item J was added by Amendment Z12-04, effective 10/27/12] [Annotation: location of Bicycle parking was added by Amendment Z17-03, adopted 6/16/17]
P. In all Districts except the L-I and G-I, sidewalks are required and shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Manistee Sidewalk Standards except as follows:
1. Dwelling, Single Family,
2. Duplex’s if waived by the Planning Commission during the Special Use Permit process,
3. Accessory Structures, or
4. Additions or Alterations to existing structures that do not require a Special Use Permit. [Annotation: Item K was added by Amendment Z12-04, effective 10/27/12]
SECTION 515 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
A. All accessory buildings and structures shall be located in the side yard or rear yard, except when built attached to the principal building (for example radio or television antennas, or upper story accessory dwellings).
B. Accessory buildings shall be located in compliance with the setback requirements of this Ordinance.
C. An accessory building attached to the principal building of a parcel shall be made structurally a part thereof, and shall comply in all respects with the requirements applicable to the principal building. A detached accessory building shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the principal structure.
D. An accessory building and structure in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts shall not be higher than eighteen (18) feet and side walls shall not be higher than twelve (12) feet, unless a higher structure is approved by the Planning Commission and the Historic District Commission (if applicable) to achieve architectural compatibility with the principal building.
E. In all Districts except L-I and G-I accessory buildings shall not be taller than the principal building. In all Districts except C-1, L-I and G-I, the building area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed the building area of the principal building, except in accord with Section 1804, hereof.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 17
Article Five General Provisions
F. No accessory building shall be used as a dwelling or for temporary or permanent residential or lodging purposes or as sleeping quarters for human beings, except as permitted pursuant to Section 1831, pertaining to Accessory Dwellings.
G. Accessory Wind Energy System
1. Design and Installation. - All accessory wind energy conversion systems (ground and roof mounted) shall comply with the building code currently adopted by the City of Manistee. Applications shall be accompanied by engineering drawings of the accessory wind energy conversion system structure including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the currently adopted building code and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted. The installation of the accessory wind energy conversion system shall meet manufacturer’s specifications.
2. Plan Submittal – A Basic Site Plan is required for accessory wind energy conversion systems. The plan must include a drawing showing the rotor clearance from the finished median grade elevation of the site.
3. Height – Accessory wind energy conversion systems shall be measured from the finished median grade elevation of the site as follows:
a. Accessory wind energy conversion systems in the P-D, G-C, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and W-F District shall not be constructed to a height higher than thirty five (35) feet. [Annotation: PD was added by amendment Z12-08, effective 10/27/12]
b. Accessory wind energy conversion systems in the C-1 District shall not be constructed to a height higher than forty (40) feet.
c. Accessory wind energy conversion systems in the C-3, L-I, and G-I shall not be constructed to a height higher than fifty (50) feet.
4. Rotor Clearance - A minimum ten (10) foot clearance from the ground shall be maintained to the vertical blade tip of a Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine and to the bottom of the rotating spire or helix of a Vertical Axis Wind Turbine.
5. Guy Wires - The use of Guy wires shall be prohibited.
6. Placement on Parcel - Accessory wind energy conversion systems shall not be located closer to an adjoining parcel than the height of the accessory wind energy conversion system or setback requirements for the zoning district, whichever is greater.
7. Noise – The property owner of an accessory wind energy conversion system shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line or in excess of five decibels above the background noise, whichever is greater, as measured at the nearest property line.
8. Vibration - Accessory wind energy conversion systems shall not cause vibrations through the ground which are perceptible beyond the property line of the parcel in which it is located.
9. Spacing - Minimum spacing between accessory wind energy conversion systems (on and off site) shall be per the manufacturers specifications. Accessory wind energy
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 18
Article Five General Provisions
conversion systems shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the principal structure on the property which it is located.
10. Accessory Equipment - All electrical equipment and battery storage shall be located within a locked panel or building (principal or accessory structure) so as not to be readily accessible. A small sign shall be placed on the panel or building with emergency contact information. Manufacturers Materials Safety Data Sheet (s) for all coolants, lubricants, batteries (acid), etc. shall be provided to the City prior to installation, and updated or amended sheets provide as may be required and a copy must be maintained on site.
11. Reception Interference - Accessory wind energy conversion systems shall not cause interference with television, microwave, navigational or radio reception to neighboring areas.
12. Shadow Flicker - The property owner of an accessory wind energy conversion system shall minimize shadow flicker to any occupied building on nearby properties.
13. Potential Ice Throw - Any potential ice throw or ice shedding from the accessory wind energy conversion system shall not cross the property lines of the site or impinge on any right-of-way or overhead utility line.
14. Visual Impact - All visible components of an accessory wind energy conversion system shall be painted a non-reflective, non-obtrusive neutral color and maintained in good repair in accordance with industry standards.
15. Safety – Accessory wind energy conversion systems shall have an automatic braking system to prevent uncontrolled rotation.
16. Other Regulations - On-site use of Accessory wind energy conversion systems shall comply with all applicable State Construction and Electrical Codes, Federal Aviation Administration requirements, Michigan Aeronautics Commission requirements, the Michigan Tall Structures Act (P.A. of 1959, as amended), and the Michigan Public Service Commission and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission standards.
17. Historic District – Prior to the issuance of any permits the City of Manistee Historic District Commissions shall review and approve any proposal to locate an accessory wind energy conversion system within a historic district, approval being subject to the requirements for the Historic District. [Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory replaced Windmill Accessory under Ordinance Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SECTION 516 ACCESSORY USES
A. When an activity or use is conducted in conjunction with another principal use and the former use; (1) constitutes only an incidental or insubstantial part of the total activity that takes place on a lot, or (2) is commonly associated with the principal use and integrally related to it, then the former use may be regarded as accessory to the principal use and may be carried on underneath the umbrella of the permit issued for the principal use. Uses may be considered accessory to the principal use regardless of whether the accessory use is separately identified in this ordinance as a permitted or special use.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 19
Article Five General Provisions
B. Interpretation of Accessory Uses: For purposes of interpreting accessory uses:
1. A use may be regarded as incidental or insubstantial if the viability of the principal use is not dependent in any significant way on the accessory use.
2. To be "commonly associated" with a principal use it is not necessary for an accessory use to be connected with such principal use more times than not, but only that the association of such accessory use with such principal use takes place with sufficient frequency that there is common acceptance of their relatedness.
3. An accessory use shall not generate any effects on neighboring properties, including, but not limited to, noise, parking, traffic, glare, or dust, greater than or more burdensome than such impacts from the main use on the property.
4. By way of example, and not to limit the application of this section, common accessory uses may include swimming pools or tennis courts associated with and integrally related to a residential subdivision or multi-family development, two or fewer boat slips associated with a residential or commercial development, automated car wash associated with a gasoline station and upper story dwellings above a commercial or office use, especially in the C-3 district.
SECTION 517 TEMPORARY DWELLINGS
Unoccupied parking or storage of temporary dwellings, recreational vehicles, trailers, etc. on a street or front yard is prohibited for more than forty eight (48) hours at a time. No person shall use or permit the use of any temporary dwelling or trailer as a principal or seasonal dwelling on any site, lot, field, parcel or tract of land, except:
A. As temporary quarters during the construction and installation of a dwelling conforming to this Ordinance when the following conditions are met:
1. The location of the temporary dwelling or trailer shall comply with all setback requirements of this Ordinance.
2. The use of the temporary dwelling or trailer shall not be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare.
3. The temporary dwelling shall, at all times, have a clear and unoccupied space of seven (7) feet on all sides.
4. The use of the temporary dwelling or trailer shall be limited to six (6) months beginning with the issuance of a permit. The permit may be renewed for not more than six (6) months at a time upon approval of the Administrator for good cause shown.
B. As part of a campground licensed by the Michigan Department of Public Health.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 20
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 518 TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURES
A. A temporary storage structure shall not be occupied as a dwelling.
B. A temporary storage structure shall be located only in the side or rear yard of a property and shall meet the setback requirements of its respective district. The Administrator prior to placement must approve the site for the temporary structure.
C. Membrane-covered framework or metal roofed temporary structures shall be prohibited in all districts.
D. In all districts, except L-I and G-I, a temporary structure shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size.
SECTION 519 DWELLINGS
A. All structures used or proposed to be used as a dwelling as defined herein, shall comply with dwelling standards of this Ordinance and the standards of the State of Michigan and United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, as applicable. All dwellings constructed shall have a minimum square footage and minimum width required in each respective Zoning District.
B. Manufactured Housing. Dwellings located in a Manufactured Housing Community regulated pursuant to Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1997, as amended shall comply with the terms of this Ordinance as applicable and the terms of said Act and the rules promulgated thereunder.
C. Every new Dwelling, Single Unit shall be constructed with a roof slope of at least an average of four (4) feet, or greater, vertical rise for each twelve (12) feet of horizontal distance. In no case, however, shall the vertical rise be less than the manufacturer’s recommendation for the shingles on the roof. [Annotation: Section 519.C was added by amendment 07-09, effective 5/29/07]
SECTION 520 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
A. Applicability. All businesses and facilities (except fuel stored in a fuel tank which is part of a motor vehicle for purposes of use by that vehicle's motor) which:
1. use or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) per month or ninety five (95) liters (approximately twenty five (25) gallons) per month, whichever is less; or
2. store greater than one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) or ninety five (95) liters (approximately twenty five (25) gallons), whichever is less, shall comply with the following groundwater protection requirements.
B. Groundwater Protection Requirements:
1. Groundwater Protection, generally:
a. The project and related improvements shall be designed to prevent groundwater contamination from hazardous substance discharge to the natural environment,
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 21
Article Five General Provisions
including lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains, groundwater, street slopes, and natural and man-made drainage systems.
b. Stormwater management and drainage facilities shall be designed to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body, or watercourse, and shall not increase flooding or the potential for pollution of surface or groundwater, on-site or off-site.
c. General purpose floor drains and storm drains shall be:
1) connected to an on-site holding tank (not a septic tank/drain field or a dry well) in accordance with state, county and municipal requirements; or
2) authorized through a state groundwater discharge permit; or
3) connected to a storm water system.
d. State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, record keeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharge to groundwater, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed without appropriate state and county permits and approvals.
e. In determining conformance with the standards in this Ordinance, the Administrator or Commission, whichever is applicable, shall take into consideration the publication titled "Small Business Guide to Secondary Containment; Practical Methods for Above-ground Storage and Containment of Hazardous Substances and Polluting Materials" published by the Clinton River Watershed Council, May 1990, and other references.
f. Out-of-service water wells shall be sealed and abandoned in accordance with applicable requirements of the Michigan Department of Public Health and the Manistee-Mason District Health Department.
g. If the site plan includes territory within a Wellhead Protection Overlay Area submit a signed statement providing permission for periodic follow-up groundwater protection inspections by the Administrator, county and state officials.
3. Above-ground Storage
a. Primary containment of hazardous substances shall be product-tight containers which are protected from weather, leakage, accidental damage, and vandalism.
b. Secondary containment for the storage of hazardous substances and polluting materials is required. Secondary containment shall be one of the following, whichever is greatest:
1) sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance; or
2) shall be at least as great as volumes required by state or county regulations; or
3) shall, if not protected from rainfall, contain a minimum of
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 22
Article Five General Provisions
a) 110 percent of the volume of the largest storage container within the dike of the secondary containment area, plus
b) the volume that is occupied by all other objects within and below the height of the dike of the secondary containment area plus
c) the volume of a 6 inch rainfall.
c. Secondary containment structures such as out buildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns shall not have floor drains which outlet to soils, groundwater, or nearby drains or rivers.
d. Areas and facilities for loading/unloading of hazardous substances and polluting materials, as well as areas where such materials are handled, stored or used, shall be designed and constructed to prevent discharge or runoff to floor drains, rivers, lakes, wetlands, groundwater or soils.
e. State of Michigan and Federal agency requirements for storage, leak detection, record keeping, spill prevention, emergency response, transport and disposal shall be met.
f. Bulk storage of pesticides shall be in accordance with requirements of the Michigan Department of Agriculture.
4. Underground Storage
a. Underground storage tank installation, operation, maintenance, closure and removal shall be in accordance with the requirements of the State Police Fire Marshal Division and the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
b. Bulk storage facilities for pesticides and fertilizers shall be in compliance with requirements of the Michigan Department of Agriculture.
SECTION 521 RESERVED
SECTION 522 TEMPORARY ACTIVITY PERMITS
A. The City Council may issue permits for the temporary use and occupancy of property for uses not otherwise provided for in this Ordinance (carnivals, special events, flea markets, environmental testing devices) and which do not require the erection of any structures requiring foundations or connection to public water or sewer. For the purpose of this section, a temporary activity shall not extend for more than six (6) months in any year. There shall be no minimum duration for a temporary activity. Provided, however, that sales of personal items from a private residence or church, such as garage or yard sales, shall not require a temporary activity permit if such sale does not extend for more than three (3) days in any ninety (90) day period.
B. The City Council shall issue Temporary Activity Permits in response to a properly completed application, if it finds that such activity shall:
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 23
Article Five General Provisions
1. Conform with applicable minimum development standards, including but not limited to setbacks, off-street parking and loading, and signs;
2. Maintain adequate setbacks between stalls, fixtures and equipment to allow emergency access;
3. Be compatible with the physical character and the use of nearby properties;
4. Not adversely impact the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City, its residents and businesses.
5. The City Council shall establish a definite time limit for the existence of any such temporary use which shall not exceed six (6) months.
C. In accordance with Section 507, the City Council may establish conditions upon the approval of a Temporary Activity permit, including establishment of a definite time limit for the existence of any such temporary use which shall not exceed six (6) months
SECTION 523 PARCEL DIVISIONS
A. New parcels created and existing parcels combined shall conform to this Ordinance and the requirements of the Land Division Act, being Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended.
B. Divided Lots. Unless expressly approved by the Planning Commission as a part of a Planned Unit Development, no parcel of land shall be divided by a public or private right-of-way or road easement such that any portion of the parcel isolated from the remainder of the parcel by such right-of-way includes less than the minimum area and frontage for the zoning district in which it is located.
1. Each portion of such divided lot exclusive of the right-of-way or easement, shall either:
a. Comply with the district requirements for minimum net lot area, road frontage, lot width, width to depth ratio and setback, or
b. Be considered permanently combined with such other portions of the lot such that the combined portions, exclusive of the area within the right-of-way, are considered one (1) zoning lot to comply with the district requirements for minimum net lot area, road frontage, lot width, width to depth ratio and setback.
2. Not more than one (1) principal building may be erected on a Divided Lot and the standards of Section 515 pertaining to Accessory Buildings shall apply to Divided Lots, providing that all required setback standards of this Zoning Ordinance shall be met.
3. No portion of a Divided Lot, as defined herein, may be sold or otherwise conveyed if the Divided Lot, either prior to or after the conveyance, shall fail to meet the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance pertaining to minimum net lot area, road frontage, lot width, width to depth ratio and setback.
4. One or more platted lots, any of which do not meet the net lot area and road frontage requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and which are separated from one another by a public or private road right-of-way or road easement and which have common
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 24
Article Five General Provisions
ownership and which have been used historically as one (1) site, shall be considered to be one (1) zoning lot.
5. One or more platted lots, any of which do not meet the net lot area and road frontage requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and which are separated from one another by a public or private road right-of-way or road easement and which have not been used historically as one (1) site, may become one (1) zoning lot if a copy of a recorded deed incorporating the owner’s intent to permanently combine such parcels is provided to the City.
6. Once a Zoning Lot, as defined herein, is designated and used as such, it shall not be used or developed except in conformance with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
C. Open Space Preservation Development: Within the R-1 District, the owner of property may elect to develop an Open Space Preservation Development in accord with the terms of this subparagraph. A maximum of eighty (80%) percent of the parcel’s buildable area may be divided into new parcels averaging not less than 10,000 square feet in area. The remaining twenty (20%) percent of the parcel shall be kept as useable open space in perpetuity by conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or other legal means acceptable to the Planning Commission.
1. Minimum Open Space Requirement: The development density which would normally be realized on the entire parent parcel shall be transferred to the area of the parent parcel which is not the twenty (20%) percent of the parent parcel which shall be kept as usable open space in perpetuity by conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or other legal means.
2. Determining Maximum Allowable Parcel Divisions: The maximum number of new parcels which may be created within the parent parcel shall be the same number that would be permitted on the site under the provisions of the R-1 district. To determine this density, the applicant shall either:
a. Submit a conceptual plan of division of the parcel. This conceptual plan shall contain proposed parcels, roads, rights-of-way, areas which are not in the buildable area, and other pertinent features, in compliance with City ordinances and stipulations. This plan must be drawn to scale; or
b. Multiply the buildable area of the parcel as defined herein, by 85% to account for rights-of-way and divide the result by the minimum parcel area in the R-1 district.
3. Siting Criteria for New Parcels: Creativity and originality in parcel layout shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between buildable land and open space. The Planning Commission shall evaluate proposals to determine whether the proposed site plan meets the site plan criteria of Article 22 and the following:
a. Protection and preservation of beach areas contiguous to a lake or stream, wetland, flood plain; existing public utility easements; existing public rights-of-way; waterfront setback areas; slopes over twenty five (25%) percent; and buffer areas around such features from clearing, grading, filling, and construction.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 25
Article Five General Provisions
b. Maintenance or creation of a significant an upland buffer of natural native species vegetation adjacent to wetlands and surface waters.
c. Preservation of scenic views and vistas unblocked and uninterrupted, particularly as seen from adjacent roads and surface water.
d. Protection of wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened or of special local concern.
e. Protection and preservation of sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value
f. Provision of reasonable and contiguous open space areas that are attractive and useful for future residents and the larger community.
g. Documentation that a homeowners association made up of parcel owners in the development, or a recognized non-profit land conservancy shall own or control the open space. The owner(s) of the open space shall be required to maintain the open space. In the alternative, the City of Manistee may, but shall in no way be required to, accept title to the open space as an addition to the City’s park system.
4. Application and Site Plan Review Process. A pre-application conference shall be held involving the applicant, the site designer, and the Zoning Administrator to discuss the applicant’s objectives and how these may be achieved under this Ordinance. Engineering, site plans, or surveys, shall not be required for the pre-application conference and shall not be accepted or reviewed at the pre-application conference. If necessary a site visit may be scheduled during the pre-application conference. All Open Space Preservation Developments shall be processed in accordance with Article 22 pertaining to Site Plan Review.
SECTION 524 STRUCTURES PROJECTING INTO SETBACKS
No structure shall be placed within the required setback area (required yard). Setbacks shall be measured from the property line, or the ordinary high water mark, to the foundation of the structure (including porches and steps), unless an upper portion of the structure projects beyond the foundation, then the setback shall be measured from the property line to a point which is perpendicular to the furthest most point of the projections, exclusive of any eaves. Further, at no time will the eaves be permitted to extend into the required setback area more than one-third of the required setback.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 26
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 525 OUTDOOR LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS
A. Intent and Purpose: To maintain safe nighttime driver performance on public roadways, by minimizing both brightly lighted surfaces and lighting glare, to preserve the restful quality of nighttime, by eliminating intrusive, artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily contributes to “sky glow”, and to reduce light pollution from lighting luminaries and light trespass onto adjacent properties. The following requirements shall be considered by the Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator in the review of all site plan or plot plans submitted for approval under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. General Provisions:
1. Exempted areas and types. The following types of outdoor lighting shall not be covered by this Ordinance:
a. Residential decorative lighting such as porch lights, low level lawn lights, and special seasonal light such as for Christmas decorating.
b. Sign lighting as regulated by Section 2102, B.
c. Lighting associated with detached single family housing.
2. Regulated Lighting. The following types of lighting shall be regulated by this Ordinance:
a. Parking lot lighting and site lighting for commercial, industrial and institutional developments.
b. Multiple Family Developments parking lot lighting and site lighting.
c. Publicly and privately owned roadway lighting.
d. Building façade lighting.
e. Residential yard lighting.
Figure 525
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 27
Article Five General Provisions
f. Other forms of outdoor lighting which in the judgment of the Planning Commission is similar in character, luminosity and/or glare to the foregoing.
3. Standards: Lighting shall be designed and constructed in such as manner to:
a. Ensure that direct or directly reflected light is confined to the development site.
b. Lamps and luminaries shall be shielded, hooded and/or louvered to provide a glare free area beyond the property line and beyond any public right-of-way, or the light source is not directly visible from beyond the boundary of the site.
c. The light from any illuminated source shall be designed so that the light intensity or brightness at any property line shall not exceed one (1) foot candle.
d. Lighting fixtures shall have one hundred percent (100%) cut off above the horizontal plane at the lowest part of the point light source. The light rays may not be emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane, as illustrated in Figure 525. No light fixture shall be mounted higher than twenty (20) feet above the average grade of the site, except for approved outdoor recreation area lighting.
e. Outdoor recreation area lighting may use standard color metal halide sources and standard sports lighting fixtures if they are mounted at a sufficient height and properly equipped with baffling, glare guards or lenses to meet the requirements of this section.
f. There shall be no lighting of a blinking, flashing, or fluttering nature, including changes in light intensity, brightness or color. Beacon and search lights are not permitted.
g. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices.
SECTION 526 OUTDOOR STORAGE
A. Residential Districts.
1. Within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts, the outdoor storage or parking of trucks of more than one and one-half (1½) tons or trailers of any kind shall be permitted only in accordance with this Section. The storage or parking of trucks of more than one and one-half (1½) tons, truck trailers, recreational vehicles and boats shall be prohibited in any front yard in all districts, except as accessory to a use permitted by right or by special land use permit.
2. The outdoor storage of recreational vehicles and boats units shall be regarded as a permitted accessory use in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts, if such storage conforms to the provisions of this section.
3. Such outdoor storage may be permitted within the rear yard or in one (1) side yard, provided all stored material is placed no closer than three (3) feet from a side lot line or five (5) feet from a rear lot line and provided that such storage does not prevent clear access between the front and rear yards of the parcel for a person on foot.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 28
Article Five General Provisions
4. Such storage shall not be permitted in any front yard, except that trucks of more than one-and one-half (1½) ton, recreational vehicles or boats and trailers may be stored in a driveway within a front yard for a period of not more than twenty-one (21) consecutive days.
5. The open storage of disassembled or component parts for any vehicle of any type shall be deemed a nuisance in accord with the City of Manistee Nuisance Ordinance (Chapter 654 of the City of Manistee Codified Ordinances) and shall be prohibited at all times.
6. Recreational vehicles shall not be used for lodging or housekeeping purposes, except as otherwise authorized by permit.
7. Any recreational vehicle or boat stored out of doors shall be the property of the resident, except that one (1) such authorized unit may be the property of a non-resident.
8. No recreational vehicle or recreational unit shall be parked or stored on any roadway or road right-of-way, except in accord the City of Manistee Parking Ordinances.
B. Commercial and Industrial Districts. Yards for storage of heavy machinery, supplies and materials generally used by road builders, earth movers, and construction contractors, or unused motor vehicles, trailers or boats, or parts thereof, which may or may not be not wholly owned by the property owner, shall be only located in areas approved by the Planning Commission. Such storage yards shall be entirely enclosed with a solid fence evergreen plantings or other year-round screening not less than six (6) feet high. Fencing or walls shall not be more than eight (8) feet high and shall be constructed and maintained in such suitable manner in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. In approving or disapproving such a fence to screen outdoor storage, the following standards shall be applied:
1. Fences and walls shall be constructed of durable materials such as wood planks, brick, cement block, or structural resin intended to remain in good condition in the northern Michigan climate. Sheet metal, chainlink, chainlink with woven screening and other similar materials that may be subject to rusting, weathering or deflection under severe weather conditions shall not be permitted.
2. All fencing materials shall be located in accord with the terms of this ordinance and completely on the property of the owner. The Planning Commission may require that sufficient area be set aside on the outside of the fencing to permit maintenance of the fencing from the owner’s property.
SECTION 527 ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The Planning Commission shall have the power to permit the use of lands and the erection and use of buildings and facilities for an essential service in any district. The Planning Commission may further authorize buildings in connection with an essential service to be constructed to a height or of a building area greater than permitted in the district upon a finding that such use, height and area is reasonably necessary for the public convenience and service.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 29
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 528 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE FOR COMPLIANCE
In authorizing any variance, or in granting any conditional, temporary or special land use approval permits, the Planning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals may require that a performance guarantee be furnished to insure compliance with the requirements, specifications and conditions imposed with any such approval to insure continued compliance with any conditions of approval and/or the proper discontinuance of a temporary use by a stipulated time. Such performance guarantee may be in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit, at the discretion of the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals.
SECTION 529 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
A. Intent and Purpose: To promote the safe, effective and efficient use of Solar Energy Systems. Preserve and protect public health, safety, welfare and quality of life by minimizing the potential adverse effects of Solar Energy Systems, including aesthetic impacts and risks to the property values of adjoining properties. To establish standards and procedures by which the siting, design, engineering, installation, operation and maintenance of Solar Energy Systems shall be governed.
B. General Provisions:
1. Active and passive solar energy devices, systems or structures shall be permitted in all zoning classifications by right, subject to administrative approval, except when such solar devices or architectural features project into required front or side yards, or are free-standing elements in a required front or side yard, in which case they are subject to site plan review in accordance with Section 2203.
2. Maximum Height of Structures. Passive solar energy structures, such as flat plate collectors, photovoltaic cells, etc., which are roof-mounted or integrated otherwise into the roof structure shall not be included in the calculation of maximum height. Active solar energy structures, when mounted on either freestanding structural elements or integrated architecturally with a principal or accessory building shall not exceed a height of forty (40) feet.
3. A building permit and electrical permit shall be required for any ground-mounted solar energy system.
4. When batteries are included as part of the solar collector system, they must be placed in a secure container or enclosure when in use, and when no longer used shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
5. If a solar energy system ceases to perform its intended function for more than twelve (12) consecutive months, the property owner shall remove the collector, mount, and associated equipment and facilities no later than ninety (90) days after the end of the twelve (12) month period.
[Annotation: Section 429 Solar Energy System was added by amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 30
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 530 UNCLASSIFIED USES
The Planning Commission may find that a land use, while not specifically classified in this ordinance as a permitted or special land use, may be sufficiently similar to uses listed as permitted by right or as special uses. In that event, such unclassified uses may be reviewed and treated as similar classified uses within the district. In reaching such a finding, the Zoning Administrator shall first evaluate the proposed use in terms of the potential generation of traffic, congestion, noise, odors, dust, litter and similar impacts. In addition, the proposed use shall be evaluated to determine the degree to which it may support or conflict with the intent of the district and other permitted and special land uses. If the Zoning Administrator determines that such use is similar to the uses permitted by special use permit, a report outlining the determination shall be provided to the Planning Commission with a recommendation to consider such use as sufficiently similar to permitted or special land uses within the district and the approval standards that should be used to evaluate the proposed use. Where a proposed use of land or use of building is not contemplated or specified by this Ordinance or where the Zoning Administrator has a question as to the appropriateness of a use which, although permitted, involves other features which were not contemplated or specified by this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall request a determination by the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission determines that such use is not contemplated or specified by this Ordinance, or that it involves features which were not contemplated or specified herein, such use shall be prohibited.
SECTION 531 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
Whenever a greenbelt, buffer area or vegetation belt is required under the terms of this ordinance, it shall be established in accord with the terms of this Section within six (6) months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless the Planning Commission in any conditions of approval provide for another timeframe for completion.
A. A landscape plan required under the terms of this ordinance shall be prepared and submitted in conjunction with a site plan. Such landscape plan shall be prepared by a Licensed Landscape Architect, professional engineer or by a qualified landscape designer. Such landscape plan shall provide, to the greatest extent possible, for the preservation and protection of existing natural features on the site. [Annotation: word “Registered” was changed to “Licensed” by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
B. The landscape plan shall include an inventory of existing trees, wood lots, streams, lakes, wetlands, view sheds and other natural features of the site and detail on the measures proposed to preserve and protect such features. All existing trees having five (5) inches or greater diameter at breast height shall be identified by common or botanical name. Trees proposed to remain, to be transplanted or to be removed shall be so designated. A cluster of trees standing in close proximity (5 feet or closer) may be designated as a "stand" of trees, and the predominant species, estimated number, and average size shall be indicated.
C. All proposed planting areas for grass, trees, shrubbery and other green space shall be illustrated in the landscape plan. Such illustration shall include the species proposed, the
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 31
Article Five General Provisions
number of plantings, the size of such plantings including the caliber and height, irrigation measures proposed and related information.
D. The location and nature of lighting, signs, utility fixtures, earth changes, streetscape and any other matter that may affect the appearance of the site shall be illustrated on the landscape plan or site plan.
E. Not less than thirty percent (30%) of the proposed landscaped area shall consist of woody vegetation, including trees and shrubbery. Landscaped open space shall not include driveways and parking areas. To the greatest extent possible, existing trees over five inches (5") diameter at breast height, shall be retained and protected. Areas of a site plan intended for stormwater detention or retention shall only be included in such required minimum landscaped area if formally landscaped with shrubbery and turf and contoured such that no fencing shall be required.
F. The area between the edge of the street pavement and property line, with the exception of paved driveways and parking areas permitted by this ordinance, shall be used exclusively for the planting and growing of trees, shrubs, lawns, rain gardens and other landscaping designed, planted and maintained to serve as a healthy and attractive amenity on the site. [Annotation: “rain gardens” was added to item F by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
G. In the event a proposed development includes uses more intense in terms of noise, lighting, traffic, residential density or similar impacts than an existing adjoining use, the Planning Commission may require provision for plantings or other aesthetic screening to mitigate and lessen the potential impact on such adjoining land use.
H. The applicant shall replace any trees, shrubbery or other plantings that fail to become established and remain viable for a period of two (2) years following completion of all construction on the site. In accordance with Section 2204, H, the City shall require an irrevocable bank letter of credit, certified check or cash in an amount as determined by the City which shall be sufficient to assure the establishment of a viable landscaped area. In the event any of the landscaped materials do not become established and the applicant shall fail to provide a viable replacement, the City shall utilize such bond, irrevocable bank letter of credit or cash to install replacement landscaping materials. After two years of demonstrated viability of all landscape materials, the remaining balance, if any, of such bond, irrevocable bank letter of credit or cash shall be returned to the applicant.
I. All landscaped areas required pursuant to this section shall be equipped with a watering system capable of providing sufficient water to maintain plants in a healthy condition. Irrigation systems shall be maintained in good working order.
SECTION 532 KEY STREET SEGMENTS
Key street segments are located throughout the City and are identified on the zoning map. Key street segments tend to include a mix of land uses, and, due to traffic patterns, are appropriate locations for certain uses within a zoning district. If a property fronts on a key street segment, certain uses shall be permitted as Special Land Uses that are not otherwise permitted in other locations throughout the zoning district boundaries. For the purposes of this ordinance the
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 32
Article Five General Provisions
following street segments as described here and as illustrated on the City of Manistee Zoning Map, shall be considered key street segments:
A. US-31, from the northerly City limits to the southerly City limits
B. Main Street, from the southerly City limits to 13th Street
C. 13th Street, from Main Street to Vine Street
D. Vine Street, from 13th Street to 8th Street
E. 8th Street, from Vine Street to US-31
F. Kosciusko Street, from 8th Street to 5th Street
G. 5th Street, from Kosciusko Street to Sibben Street
H. Sibben Street, from 5th Street to 1st Street
I. 1st Street, from Sibben Street to Tamarack Street
J. Cedar Street, from 1st Street to Water Street
K. Water Street, from Cedar Street to Maple Street
L. Maple/Washington Streets, from 4th Street to the northerly City limits
M. Fifth Avenue, from Maple/Washington Streets to Hastings Street
N. Glocheski Street for its entire length
SECTION 533 CONDOMINIUMS
A. Purpose. This section further regulates condominiums, whether for residential use or non-residential use.
B. Site Condominium development as defined herein shall be regulated per the standards set forth in the Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Condominium Act. A condominium unit which is, or which is proposed to be a parcel as defined herein, shall meet the requirements of this ordinance pertaining to lot or parcel area, width, and the required yards.
C. Section 523 A and B shall apply to parcel divisions resulting from condominium development projects.
D. Submittal of a Condominium Plan. A condominium plan shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with the site plan review and approval process of Section 2200-2209. Such plan shall include the documents and information required by Section 66 of the Condominium Act, and the following information to the extent not included in such Act:
1. The information required for a detailed site plan review under Article 22 of this Ordinance.
2. A narrative describing the overall objectives of the condominium development.
3. Existing building footprint for Condominium Conversion.
4. Area and volume of each proposed condominium unit, including dimensions of living areas.
5. Common elements (including general and limited).
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 33
Article Five General Provisions
6. Location and dimensions of each building, lot, and total development.
7. The condominium plan shall depict a building envelope around each building so as to demonstrate compliance with the minimum lot area requirement, the minimum lot width requirement, and the minimum building setback requirements of the district in which the condominium is located.
8. Approval or tentative approval of the proposed design and location of the entrance to the condominium from the City Engineer and/or Michigan Department of Transportation, if applicable.
9. The use and occupancy restrictions and maintenance provisions for all general and limited common elements that will be included in the master deed.
10. Such other information as the Planning Commission may reasonably request in their review of the proposed condominium development. Unless requested by the Planning Commission, the proposed master deed and condominium bylaws need not necessarily be submitted with the application.
E. Standards for Approval. To receive approval, a condominium development plan shall satisfy the following requirements.
1. The plan shall satisfy the standards and requirements for detailed site plan approval pursuant to Article 22 of this Ordinance.
2. The proposed common elements and maintenance provisions, use and occupancy restrictions, utility systems and streets, project layout and design, or other aspects of the proposed project, shall comply with the Condominium Act and other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
3. Unless modified pursuant to Section 1870 hereof, the condominium development shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, including without limitation, density, minimum living area of units, lot coverage, building height, lot area, lot width and yard size requirements with respect to each of the buildings in which the condominium is located.
4. If a condominium development is proposed to have public streets, the streets shall be paved and developed to the minimum design, construction, inspection, approval, and maintenance requirements for platted public streets as required by the City of Manistee.
5. The City may require the condominium development to include pedestrian sidewalks at specific locations; street lighting at intersections or otherwise within the street rights-of-way; and greenbelts or other landscaping in order to obscure the view of other types of land uses that may be near or adjacent to the condominium, such as commercial or industrial uses, highways, railroads and the like.
6. The condominium development shall be connected to public water and public sanitary sewer facilities.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 34
Article Five General Provisions
F. Compliance with City Ordinances: Condominium development shall meet the standards of the applicable zoning district, as well as all other standards in the City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable Local, State or Federal Laws.
G. Expandable or Convertible Condominium Conversions. Approval of a final condominium plan shall not constitute approval of expandable or convertible portions of a condominium conversion project unless the expandable or convertible areas are specifically reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission in compliance with the procedures, standards and requirements of this section.
H. Review of Condominium Master Deed and Bylaws. An approved condominium plan shall be incorporated by reference in the master deed for the condominium. The Master Deed shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney, consistent with this section and any conditions of approval of the condominium. A copy of the master deed as recorded with the County Register of Deeds shall be provided to the City. [Annotation: Section 533 Condominiums was added by Amendment Z10-03, effective 10/30/10]
SECTION 534 COMMUNITY GARDENS
Community Gardens shall consist of land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers or herbs by multiple individuals.
A. Community Gardens shall be permitted in all Zoning Districts.
1. A Community Garden shall be considered an accessory use under Section 516 hereof if located on a parcel with an existing use.
2. A Community Garden shall be considered a principal use if located on a vacant parcel of land.
B. The following structures shall be permitted when utilized with a community garden and when otherwise in compliance with this ordinance.
1. One (1) Storage Building not larger than 100 square feet (permit required).
2. One (1) Greenhouse not larger than 100 square feet and covered with glass, plastic or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated (permit required).
3. Raised/accessible planting beds, compost or waste bins.
4. Fences that comply with Section 508.
[Annotation: Item 5 relating to signage was deleted by amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
C. Reclamation Standards. In the event the community garden is discontinued for a period of more than one year, all buildings and structures shall be removed and the site shall be restored with grass or other acceptable methods of landscaping. [Annotation: Section 534 Community Garden was added by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
SECTION 535 KEEPING OF CHICKENS OR DUCKS
The keeping of Chickens or Ducks is permitted in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts if conforming to Section 606 Animals of the General Law Ordinances of the City of Manistee. [Annotation: Section 535 Keeping of Chickens or Ducks was added by Amendment Z15-08, effective 8/19/15]
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 35
Article Five General Provisions
SECTION 536 DAS/SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES (PUBLIC ROW)
A. Purpose and Intent: The purpose of this section is to regulate the installation of distributed antenna systems, small cell telecommunications equipment, or similar data wireless network equipment in the public rights-of-way within the City of Manistee.
B. License Requirements:
1. Licenses Required: No person shall install or operate, in whole or in part, DAS Facilities in a public right-of-way within the City without first applying for and receiving a DAS Facilities License from the City in a form and subject to such terms and conditions as is acceptable to the City. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to require the City to issue such a license as it determines to be in the best interest of the City and its citizens.
2. METRO Act Permit: No person shall install or operate “telecommunications facilities” as defined in the METRO Act, without first obtaining a permit under the Act from the City in accordance with the METRO Act, including any part of a DAS/Small Cell/Wireless system constituting telecommunications facilities.
C. Design Parameters:
Where permitted by the City, the following minimal design parameters shall apply to DAS Facilities in City public rights-of-way:
1. The required map(s) for proposed DAS Facilities shall be legible, to scale, labeled with streets, and contain sufficient detail to clearly identify the proposed DAS/Small Cell/Wireless Network Facilities’ locations and surroundings. Where applicable, the required map or list shall include and identify any requested pole height(s).
2. The maximum height of a pole or other supporting installed or existing to accommodate DAS/Small Cell/Wireless Network shall be forty (40) feet.
3. All communication facilities shall not extend more than five (5) feet above the height of the pole and at no time shall any communications facilities extend more than forty-five (45) feet in height.
4. Unless otherwise permitted in Section 3 (j), DAS Facilities shall be located no closer than eighteen (18) inches from an existing sidewalk/face of curb or eighteen (18) inches from a proposed future sidewalk/face of curb location.
5. Unless otherwise permitted in Section 3 (j), DAS Facilities shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from any driveway.
6. Projecting antenna or other equipment shall be located at a height sufficient to not pose a hazard or obstruction to persons or vehicles, and to provide sufficient separation distance from power lines and similar facilities.
7. In residential areas, DAS Facilities shall be located in line with a side lot line whenever possible and not in front of a house.
8. No logos, emblems or symbols shall be placed on any portion of the communications facilities which is viewable to the public.
9. All communications facilities should be designed to blend with the neighboring
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 36
Article Five General Provisions
environment to the greatest extent possible. All communications facilities shall be of a color scheme which blends with the neighboring environment, and/or is subdued in color.
10. The licensee shall field-stake all proposed locations for DAS Facilities which shall be subject to the approval of the City Board of Public Works, Michigan Department of Transportation and/or the Manistee County Road Commission as applicable. Issuance of a license by the City shall allow installation of facilities only on those poles and in locations approved in the license. Installation of any different facilities or locations shall require written amendment of the license.
11. Once precise locations have been approved in accordance with Section 3 (j), the licensee shall provide latitude and longitude coordinates for the DAS Facilities’ locations to the City BPW Director, Planner and Engineer.
12. The licensee shall be responsible to obtain such other permits and approvals as required by law.
D. Compliance with Applicable Law: The City, in reviewing and authorizing a permit under the Act and/or a license referred to in this section, and the licensee, in the establishment and operation of any DAS/Small Cell/Wireless Network Facilities, shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws.
E. Fees: Fees for the agreement and permits required shall be as provided for in the Act or those documents and as periodically authorized by resolution of the City Council.
F. Other Approvals: In addition to obtaining a license for DAS Facilities pursuant to this ordinance, the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining permission from the Manistee County Road Commission, Michigan Department of Transportation, utility or other easement holders, property owners and all other entities or persons required to give consent for such location.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Six P-D Peninsula District
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
[Annotation: Article Six P-D Peninsula District was added by Amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Six – P-D Peninsula District
ARTICLE SIX
P-D PENINSULA DISTRICT
SECTION 600 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to establish a mixed-use district incorporating a variety of recreational, residential, business or service uses on or near the Waterfront. This district is intended to encourage and promote sustainable, environmentally and aesthetically compatible developments that use or compliment the shoreline while promoting expanded use of the shoreline by the public. The District is intended to host a variety of land uses including, but not limited to, residential, commercial, entertainment and recreational, service, and mixed use. [Annotation: “and mixed use” was added to Section 600 by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to uses permitted by right.
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Contractors Facility
? Dwelling, Single unit
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Gallery or Museum
? Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
? Mixed Use Development
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Personal Service Establishment
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Retail Business
? Subdivision and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
? Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Wholesale Facility
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Contractors Facility and Wholesale Facility were added as a permitted use by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment and Mixed Use Development were changed from a Special use to permitted use by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory uses to a permitted Special Use
? Adaptive Reuse
SPECIAL USES (cont’d)
? Animal Grooming
? Bed & Breakfast
? Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps
? Day Care, Commercial and Group
? Duplex
? Dwelling – Multiple unit
? Financial Institution
? Greenhouse and Nursery
? Home Based Business
? Home Occupation, Major
? Hotels
? Marihuana Grower as a component of a Mixed Use Development
? Marihuana Processer as a component of a Mixed Use Development
? Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility as a component of a Mixed Use Development
? Marihuana Secure Transporter as a component of a Mixed Use Development
? Marina
? Parking Facility, Public
? Place of Public Assembly Small
? Planned Unit Development
? Studio for performing and graphic arts
? Uses similar to permitted special use
[Annotation: Animal Grooming and Greenhouse and Nursery were added as a special use by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Financial Institution was changed from a SLU* to a SLU by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Motel, Places of Public Assembly Large and Theater were was deleted as a SLU* by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15] * Requires Key Street Frontage
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transporter as a component of Mixed Use was added as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Six – P-D Peninsula District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (a)
Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 sq. ft. Minimum Lot Width: 60 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 17 Max. Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 60%
Front(b) 15 ft. Minimum Living Area 500 sq. ft.
Side 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Dwelling Width 20 ft.
Rear (c) 10 ft. Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks:
Waterfront 20 ft.(d) Side 3 ft.
Rear 3 ft.(c)
(a) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(b) Subject to Section 502, G
(c) Provided that garages fronting on platted alleys shall be set back the greater of 3 feet from the rear property line or 20 feet from property line on the opposite side of the alley.
(d) Provided that this standard shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat houses and boat launches.
[Annotation: Parcel area requirements for Duplex or Commercial and Multi-Units were deleted by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
SECTION 601 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the Peninsula District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan.
A. Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory use to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
D. Contractors Facility
E. Dwelling, single unit
F. Eating and Drinking Establishment
G. Gallery or Museum
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Six – P-D Peninsula District
H. Home Occupation, Minor, subject to Section 1847, B, 1
I. Mixed Use Development
J. Outdoor Recreation, Park
K. Personal Service Establishment
L. Professional Office
M. Professional Service Establishment
N. Retail Business
O. Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance
P. Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
Q. Wholesale Facility
R. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Contractors Facility and Wholesale Facility were added as a permitted use by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment and Mixed Use Development were changed from a Special use to permitted use by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
SECTION 602 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the Peninsula District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory uses to a permitted special use, subject to Section 1805
C. Adaptive reuse, subject to Section 1807
D. Animal Grooming, subject to Section 1810
E. Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 1813
F. Convenience Store, without fuel pumps, subject to Section 1823
G. Day Care, Commercial, subject to Section 1825
H. Day Care, Group, subject to Section 1826
I. Duplex, subject to Section 1829
J. Dwelling, multiple unit, subject to Section 1832
K. Financial Institution, subject to Section 1838
L. Greenhouse and Nursery, subject to Section 1844
M. Home Based Business, subject to Section 1846
N. Home Occupation, Major, subject to Section 1847
O. Hotel, subject to Section 1849
P. Marihuana Grower, subject to Section 1851, as a component of a Mixed Use Development
Q. Marihuana Processer, subject to Section 1851 as a component of a Mixed Use Development
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Six – P-D Peninsula District
R. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility, subject to Section 1851 as a component of a Mixed Use Development
S. Marihuana Secure Transporter , subject to Section 1851 as a component of a Mixed Use Development
T. Marina, subject to Section 1852
U. Parking Facility, Public, subject to Section 1865
V. Place of Public Assembly, Small, subject to Section 1868
W. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
X. Studio for performing and graphic arts, subject to Section 1882
Y. Uses similar to permitted special use, subject to Section 1886
[Annotation: Animal Grooming and Greenhouse and Nursery were added as a special use by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Financial Institution was changed from a SLU that required frontage on a key street segment* to a Special Use by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
[Annotation: Section 603 Uses permitted by Special Land Use Permit, Requires Frontage on a Key Street Segment as deleted from Article 6 P-D and the uses Motel, Places of Public Assembly Large and Theater were was deleted as uses in the P-D by amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15 resulting in renumbering the remaining sections]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility, and Secure Transporter as a component of Mixed Use was added as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SECTION 603 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the Peninsula District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No single family dwelling building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. [Annotation: Parcel area requirements for Duplex or Commercial and Multi-Units were deleted by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
B. Parcel Width – For all uses the minimum parcel width shall be sixty (60) feet. [Annotation: Parcel Width requirements for Duplex or Commercial and Multi-Units were deleted by amendment Z15-05, effective 7/14/15]
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from front property line. In established neighborhoods, where a majority of the buildings do not meet the required front yard setback, the Administrator may establish an alternate setback, pursuant to Section 502, G.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setback shall be three (3) feet;
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be three (3) feet, excepting garages which front on a platted alley. Such garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line on the opposite side of the alley, to provide a minimal turning radius for vehicles, but at no time shall the structure be closer than three (3) feet to the rear property line. The side yard for such garage shall be the same as for other accessory structures, as outlined above.
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Six – P-D Peninsula District
4. Waterfront Yards: The minimum setback from the ordinary high watermark of Manistee Lake shall be twenty (20) feet. Provided that this provision shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat houses and boat launches.
D. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the P-D District which is less than twenty (20) feet wide.
E. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the P-D District which has less than five hundred (500) square feet of living area.
F. Lot Coverage: Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
G. Height: The maximum height of principal buildings in the P-D District shall be the lesser of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet with side walls not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
[Annotation: On December 31, 2014 the Renaissance Zone expired, Section 605 Peninsula District Renaissance Zone Standards was deleted by Amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Seven G-C Golf Course District
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
[Annotation: Article 7 added by Amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Seven G-C Golf Course District
ARTICLE SEVEN
G-C GOLF COURSE DISTRICT
SECTION 700 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District is to provide for and regulate development in association with a Golf Course. The G-C District is intended to maintain and enhance open space, promote recreational opportunities and provide for a variety of residential housing developed with the natural and scenic elements of the property.
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure.
? Accessory uses to uses permitted by right
? Community Garden subject to Section 534
? Dwelling, Single Unit
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Golf Course
? Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B,1
? Mixed-Use Development
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Sand Excavation
? Subdivision and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered, or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
? Wind Energy Conversion system, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure
? Planned Unit Development
? Wells, Extraction
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Seven G-C Golf Course District
10’/ 100’ (b) Minimum Rear
Yard Setback
Minimum Side
Yard Setback
10’ 10’
Minimum Front
Yard Setback (a)
Accessory Building
30’
R/W
GARAGE DECK
Lot Line
Building
Envelope
Impervious
Surface
rD iv e aw y
G-C DISTRICT
HOUSE
Minimum Lot Width 100 ft.
Minimum Lot Size 15,000 sq. Ft.
3’ minimum side
and rear setback
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Parking, Bike Parking and Sidewalks subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (d)
Minimum Lot Area: 15,000 sq. ft. Minimum Lot Width 100 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 4 Maximum Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 40%
Front(a) 30 ft. Minimum Living Area 1,500 sq. ft.
Side 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Dwelling Width 25 ft.
Rear 10 ft. Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks:
Waterfront 100 ft. (b) Side 3 ft.
Rear 3 ft.(c)
(a) Subject to Section 502, G
(b) As measured from the ordinary high water mark, except where a greater distance is required by the
Department of Natural Resources.
(c). Provided that garages fronting on platted alleys shall be set back the greater of 3 feet from the rear
property line or 20 feet from property line on the opposite side of the alley.
(d) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Seven G-C Golf Course District
SECTION 701 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the G-C District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure.
B. Accessory use to uses permitted by right
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
D. Dwelling, Single Unit
E. Eating and Drinking Establishment
F. Golf Course
G. Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B,1
H. Mixed-Use Development
I. Outdoor Recreation, Park
J. Sand Excavation
K. Subdivision and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered, or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
L. Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
M. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 702 USES PERMIITED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the G-C District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, Special Land Use Approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804.
B. , subject to Section 1858
C. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
D. Wells, Extraction, subject to Section 1891
SECTION 703 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the G-C District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area - No building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Seven G-C Golf Course District
B. Parcel Width - The minimum parcel width shall be one hundred (100) feet and it shall front on a public street.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than thirty (30) feet from front property line. In established neighborhoods, where a majority of the buildings do not meet the required front yard setback, the Administrator may establish an alternate setback, pursuant to Section 502, G.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setback shall be three (3) feet;
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be three (3) feet, excepting garages which front on a platted alley. Such garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line on the opposite side of the alley, to provide a minimal turning radius for vehicles, but at no time shall the structure be closer than three (3) feet to the rear property line. The side yard for such garage shall be the same as for other accessory structures, as outlined above.
4. Waterfront Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet from the ordinary high water mark, provided such setback shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat launches and boat houses. Provided, further that the waterfront setback shall not be less than the setbacks required by the Department of Natural Resources and Environment in a High Risk Erosion Control area.
5. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the R-1 District which is less than twenty-five (25) feet wide.
6. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the R-1 District which has less than fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of living area.
7. Lot Coverage: Not more than forty percent (40%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
8. Height: The maximum height of principal buildings in the R-1 district shall be the lesser of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet with side walls not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Eight R-1 Low Density Residential
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Eight R-1 Low Density Residential
ARTICLE EIGHT
R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 800 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to establish and protect residential areas consisting primarily of low density; single-family neighborhoods designed and maintained promote an attractive, healthy and stable living environment for families, singles and the elderly. In portions of the district near Lake Michigan, this district is intended to protect the Lake Michigan shoreline environment while enabling sustainable enjoyment of this unique feature of the community.
PERMITTED USES*
? Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to uses permitted by right.
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Dwelling, Single Unit
? Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
? Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
*If located outside the Wellhead Protection Overlay
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to permitted special use
? Adaptive Reuse
? Bed & Breakfast
? Day Care, Group (7-12 children)
? Duplex
? Home Based Business
? Home Occupation, Major
? Marina
? Mixed Use Development
? Planned Unit Development
? Sports and Recreation Club
? Use similar to permitted special use
[Annotation: Golf Course deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Gallery or Museum and Places of Public Assembly, Small were deleted as special uses, requires key street frontage by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Eight R-1 Low Density Residential
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Parking, Bike Parking and Sidewalks subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (d)
Minimum Lot Area: 15,000 sq. ft. Minimum Lot Width 100 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 4 Maximum Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 40%
Front(a) 30 ft. Minimum Living Area 1,500 sq. ft.
Side 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Dwelling Width 25 ft.
Rear 10 ft. Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks:
Waterfront 100 ft. (b) Side 3 ft.
Rear 3 ft.(c)
(a) Subject to Section 502, G
(b) As measured from the ordinary high water mark, except where a greater distance is required by the Department of Natural Resources.
(c) Provided that garages fronting on platted alleys shall be set back the greater of 3 feet from the rear property line or 20 feet from property line on the opposite side of the alley.
(d) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Eight R-1 Low Density Residential
SECTION 801 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the R-1 District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory use to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
D. Dwelling, Single Unit
E. Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
F. Outdoor Recreation, Park
G. Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject the Subdivision Control Ordinance
H. Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
I. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SECTION 802 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the R-1 District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory use to permitted special use, subject to Section 1805
C. Adaptive Reuse, subject to Section 1807
D. Bed & Breakfast, subject to Section 1813
E. Day Care, Group (7-12 children), subject to Section 1826
F. Duplex, subject to Section 1829
G. Home Based Business, subject to Section 1846
H. Home Occupation, Major subject to Section 1847.B.2
I. Marina, subject to Section 1852
J. Mixed Use Development, subject to Section 1858
K. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
L. Sports and Recreation Club, subject to Section 1880
M. Use similar to permitted special use, subject to Section 1886
[Annotation: Golf Course was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Gallery or Museum and Places of Public Assembly, Small were deleted as special uses, requires key street frontage by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Eight R-1 Low Density Residential
SECTION 803 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
Within the R-1 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area - No building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area.
B. Parcel Width - The minimum parcel width shall be one hundred (100) feet and it shall front on a public street.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than thirty (30) feet from front property line. In established neighborhoods, where a majority of the buildings do not meet the required front yard setback, the Administrator may establish an alternate setback, pursuant to Section 502, G.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setback shall be three (3) feet;
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be three (3) feet, excepting garages which front on a platted alley. Such garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line on the opposite side of the alley, to provide a minimal turning radius for vehicles, but at no time shall the structure be closer than three (3) feet to the rear property line. The side yard for such garage shall be the same as for other accessory structures, as outlined above.
4. Waterfront Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet from the ordinary high water mark, provided such setback shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat launches and boat houses. Provided, further that the waterfront setback shall not be less than the setbacks required by the Department of Natural Resources in a High Risk Erosion Control area. [Annotation: Section 804.4 was changed by amendments 07-05 and 07-07, effective 5/29/07]
5. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the R-1 District which is less than twenty-five (25) feet wide.
6. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the R-1 District which has less than fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of living area.
7. Lot Coverage: Not more than forty percent (40%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
8. Height: The maximum height of principal buildings in the R-1 district shall be the lesser of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet with side walls not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Eight R-1 Low Density Residential
SECTION 804 WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY
A. Applicability. Every parcel of land which lies in whole or in part within Wellhead Protection Overlay as depicted on the Official Zoning Map around public Type I water wells is subject to the regulations of this Section. The regulations of this Section are in addition to any regulations in the underlying zoning district, provided that in the event of a conflict between the regulations of this section and those of the underlying zoning district, the requirements of this Section shall prevail.
B. Land Use Restrictions.
1. Special Land Uses. Except as provided in Subparagraph 2 of this section, and the provisions of Section 802 notwithstanding, all uses permitted in the R-1 Zoning District and located within the Wellhead Protection Overlay shall be treated as Special Land Uses with review and approval subject to the provisions of Article 18 and Section 520, hereof.
2. Prohibited Uses. Within the Wellhead Protection Overlay, any land use that uses, generates or stores a minimum threshold quantity of any hazardous substance as defined herein and which has not received and maintained in good standing a bona fide permit for the use, generation and/or storage of such substance, shall be prohibited. For the purpose of this subparagraph, a minimum threshold quantity of hazardous substances shall mean
a. For the use or generation of hazardous substances: Quantities of at least one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds), or ninety-five (95) liters (approximately 25.1 gallons), whichever is less, per month; or
b. For the storage of hazardous substances: Quantities of at least one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) or ninety-five (95) liters (approximately 25.1 gallons), whichever is less, routinely stored on site.
C. Conflicting Federal or State Regulations. The regulations of this Overlay Zone are not intended to conflict with any law or administrative regulation, on groundwater protection, of the United States, the State of Michigan or any agencies thereof.
D. Nonconforming Land Uses. If a land use prohibited pursuant to Paragraph B, 2 of this Section 804 legally existed within this Wellhead Protection Overlay on January 31, 1997, and has continued in use since that date, then;
1. Such nonconforming use of land shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of such land, added to, extended, reconstructed, structurally altered or expanded during its life, Article 4 Nonconformities notwithstanding.
2. Nothing herein shall prevent the completion of structures for a land use which shall have been diligently prosecuted prior to the passage of this section.
3. Nothing herein shall prevent the normal repair, reinforcement, rehabilitation of a structure.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Nine R-2 Medium Density Residential
As Updated thru January 17, 2020
As Updated thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Nine R-2 Medium Density Residential
ARTICLE NINE
R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 900 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to establish and protect residential areas consisting primarily of medium density, single-family neighborhoods and multi-family communities designed and maintained promote an attractive, walkable, healthy and stable living environment for families, singles and the elderly. The R-2 District, while primarily residential in character, will incorporate some retail and personal service land uses to enhance and strengthen neighborhood life and promote a cohesive and complete community. All portions of the R-2 District shall be served with public water and wastewater services.
PERMITTED USES*
? Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to uses permitted by right.
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Dwelling, Single Unit
? Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
? Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
*If located outside the Wellhead Protection Overlay
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to permitted special use
? Adaptive Reuse
? Adult Foster Care Facility
? Bed & Breakfast
? Day Care, Group (7-12 children)
? Duplex
? Dwelling, Accessory
SPECIAL USES Cont’d
? Dwelling, Multiple Unit
? Home Based Business
? Home Occupation, Major
? Marina
? Mixed-Use Development
? Personal Service Establishment
? Planned Unit Development
? Use similar to permitted special use
[Annotation: Duplex changed from Permitted use to Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective 10/30/10]
SPECIAL USES
Requires Key Street Frontage
? Assembly Operation*
? Convenience Store
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Education Facility
? Gallery or Museum
? Hotel
? Medical or Dental Office
? Mortuary
? Nursing Home or Convalescent Home
? Parking Facility
? Places of Public Assembly, Large & Small
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Retail Business
? Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
*Location of this use on Key Street Frontage Letter H in Section 532 of City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance.
[Annotation: Convenience Store without fuel pumps was changed to Convenience Store by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Assembly Operation requiring Key Street Frontage was added as a special use in the R-2 District by Amendment Z19-25, effective 01/17/20]
As Updated thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Nine R-2 Medium Density Residential
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (d)
Minimum Lot Area: Minimum Lot Width:
Single Unit 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft. Duplex, or Commercial Use 10,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Multiple Unit (b) 10,000 sq. ft. min. 80 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 8 Maximum Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’ Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 40%
Front(a) 15 ft. Minimum Living Area 960 sq. ft.
Side 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Dwelling Width 20 ft.
Rear 10 ft. Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks:
Waterfront 20 feet Side 3 ft.
Rear 3 ft.(c)
(a) Subject to Section 502, G
(b) For multiple unit buildings in the R-2 district, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 5,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
(c) Provided that garages fronting on platted alleys shall be set back the greater of 3 feet from the rear property line or 20 feet from property line on the opposite side of the alley.
(d) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
As Updated thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Nine R-2 Medium Density Residential
SECTION 901 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the R-2 District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory use to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
D. Dwelling, Single Unit
E. Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
F. Outdoor Recreation, Park
G. Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance
H. Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
I. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Duplex changed from Use by Right to Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SECTION 902 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the R-2 District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory use to permitted special use, subject to Section 1805
C. Adaptive Reuse, subject to Section 1807
D. Adult Foster Care Facility, subject to Section 1808
E. Bed & Breakfast, subject to Section 1813
F. Convenience Store subject to Section 1823 – Requires Key Street Frontage
G. Day Care, Group (7-12 children), subject to Section 1826
H. Duplex, subject to Section 1829
I. Dwelling, Accessory, subject to Section 1831
J. Dwelling, Multiple Unit, subject to Section 1832
K. Eating and Drinking Establishment, subject to Section 1835 – Requires Key Street Frontage
L. Education Facility, subject to Section 1837 – Requires Key Street Frontage
M. Gallery or Museum, subject to Section 1840 – Requires Key Street Frontage
N. Home Based Business, subject to Section 1846
O. Home Occupation, Major subject to Section 1847
P. Hotel, subject to Section 1849 – Requires Key Street Frontage
As Updated thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Nine R-2 Medium Density Residential
Q. Marina, subject to Section 1852
R. Medical or Dental Office, subject to Section 1853 – Requires Key Street Frontage
S. Mixed-Use Development, subject to Section 1858
T. Mortuary, subject to Section 1859 – Requires Key Street Frontage
U. Nursing Home or Convalescent Home, subject to Section 1862 – Requires Key Street Frontage
V. Parking Facility, subject to Section 1865 – Requires Key Street Frontage
W. Personal Service Establishment, subject to Section 1867
X. Places of Public Assembly, Large and Small, subject to Section 1868 – Requires Key Street Frontage
Y. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
Z. Professional Office, subject to Section 1874 – Requires Key Street Frontage
AA. Professional Service Establishment, subject to Section 1876 – Requires Key Street Frontage
BB. Retail Business, subject to Section 1877 – Requires Key Street Frontage
CC. Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts, subject to Section 1882 – Requires Key Street Frontage
DD. Use similar to permitted special use, subject to Section 1886
[Annotation: Parking Facility added to Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Duplex changed from Use by Right to Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Convenience Store without fuel pumps was changed to Convenience Store by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 903 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
Within the R-2 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No single family dwelling building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. No duplex, multiple unit or commercial structure shall be established on any parcel less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. For multiple unit buildings in the R-2 district, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 5,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
B. Parcel Width – For a single family detached dwelling, the minimum parcel width shall be sixty (60) feet and for all other uses the minimum parcel width shall be eighty (80) feet.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from front property line. In established neighborhoods, where a majority of the buildings do not meet the required front yard setback, the Administrator may establish an alternate setback, pursuant to Section 502, G.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setback shall be three (3) feet;
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be three (3) feet, excepting garages which front on a platted alley. Such garages shall be set back a
As Updated thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Nine R-2 Medium Density Residential
minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line on the opposite side of the alley, to provide a minimal turning radius for vehicles, but at no time shall the structure be closer than three (3) feet to the rear property line. The side yard for such garage shall be the same as for other accessory structures, as outlined above.
4. Waterfront Yard: The minimum setback shall be not less than twenty (20) feet, provided such setback shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat launches and boat houses. [Annotation: Section 903.C.4 changed by amendment 07-07, effective 5/29/07]
5. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the R-2 District which is less than twenty (20) feet wide.
6. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the R-2 District which has less than nine hundred sixty (960) square feet of living area.
7. Lot Coverage: Not more than forty percent (40%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
8. Height: The maximum height of principal buildings in the R-2 district shall be the lesser of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet with side walls not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
SECTION 904 WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY
A. Applicability. Every parcel of land which lies in whole or in part within Wellhead Protection Overlay as depicted on the Official Zoning Map around public Type I water wells is subject to the regulations of this Section. The regulations of this Section are in addition to any regulations in the underlying zoning district, provided that in the event of a conflict between the regulations of this section and those of the underlying zoning district, the requirements of this Section shall prevail.
B. Land Use Restrictions.
1. Special Land Uses. Except as provided in Subparagraph 2 of this section, and the provisions of Section 901 notwithstanding, all uses permitted in the R-2 Zoning District and located within the Wellhead Protection Overlay shall be treated as Special Land Uses with review and approval subject to the provisions of Article 18 and Section 520, hereof.
2. Prohibited Uses. Within the Wellhead Protection Overlay, any land use that uses, generates or stores a minimum threshold quantity of any hazardous substance as defined herein and which has not received and maintained in good standing a bona fide permit for the use, generation and/or storage of such substance, shall be prohibited. For the purpose of this subparagraph, a minimum threshold quantity of hazardous substances shall mean
a. For the use or generation of hazardous substances: Quantities of at least one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds), or ninety-five (95) liters (approximately 25.1 gallons), whichever is less, per month; or
As Updated thru January 17, 2020
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Nine R-2 Medium Density Residential
b. For the storage of hazardous substances: Quantities of at least one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) or ninety-five (95) liters (approximately 25.1 gallons), whichever is less, routinely stored on site.
C. Conflicting Federal or State Regulations. The regulations of this Overlay Zone are not intended to conflict with any law or administrative regulation, on groundwater protection, of the United States, the State of Michigan or any agencies thereof.
D. Nonconforming Land Uses. If a land use prohibited pursuant to Paragraph B, 2 of this Section 904 legally existed within this Wellhead Protection Overlay on January 31, 1997, and has continued in use since that date, then;
1. Such nonconforming use of land shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of such land, added to, extended, reconstructed, structurally altered or expanded during its life, Article 4 Nonconformities notwithstanding.
2. Nothing herein shall prevent the completion of structures for a land use which shall have been diligently prosecuted prior to the passage of this section.
3. Nothing herein shall prevent the normal repair, reinforcement, rehabilitation of a structure.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Ten R-3 High Density Residential
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Ten R-3 High Density Residential
ARTICLE TEN
R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 1000 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to establish and protect urban residential areas consisting primarily of one and two-family, and multi-family communities designed and maintained promote an attractive, walkable, healthy and convenient living environment primarily for singles, couples, the elderly and seasonal residents. The R-3 District will incorporate convenience retail and services as well as dining and entertainment for residents and visitors. All portions of the R-3 District shall be served with public water and wastewater services.
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to uses permitted by right.
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Day Care, Group (7-12 children)
? Dwelling, Single Unit
? Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
? Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to permitted special use
? Adaptive Reuse
? Adult Foster Care Facility
? Bed & Breakfast
? Contractor’s Facility
? Day Care, Commercial
? Duplex
? Dwelling, Accessory
? Dwelling, Multiple Unit
? Home Based Business
SPECIAL USES (cont’d)
? Home Occupation, Major
? Hotel
? Marina
? Mixed-Use Development
? Personal Service Establishment
? Planned Unit Development
? Use similar to permitted special use
? Wireless Communication Facility
[Annotation: Duplex changed from Permitted use to Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion Systems was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SPECIAL USES
Requires Key Street Frontage
? Convenience Store
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Education Facility
? Financial Institution
? Gallery or Museum
? Medical or Dental Office
? Mini/Self-Storage Facility
? Mortuary
? Nursing Home or Convalescent Home
? Parking Facility
? Places of Public Assembly, Large & Small
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Retail Business
? Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
[Annotation: Convenience Store without fuel pumps was changed to Convenience Store by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Ten R-3 High Density Residential
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (b)
Minimum Lot Area: Minimum Lot Width:
Single Unit 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft. Duplex, or Commercial Use 10,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Multiple Unit (a) 10,000 sq. ft. min. 80 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 17 Max. Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 60%
Front(c) 15 ft. Minimum Living Area (Single-family)960 sq. ft.
Side 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Living Area (Multi-family)500 sq. ft.
Rear (d) 10 ft. Minimum Dwelling Width 20 ft.
Waterfront 20 ft. Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks:
Side 3 ft.
Rear 3 ft.
(a) For multiple unit buildings, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit up to twenty (20), plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit in excess of 20.
(b) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(c) Subject to Section 502, G
(d) Provided that garages fronting on platted alleys shall be set back the greater of 3 feet from the rear property line or 20 feet from property line on the opposite side of the alley.
Mid-Rise Multiple Unit
Garden Apartment Multiple Unit
Townhouse Multiple Unit
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Ten R-3 High Density Residential
SECTION 1001 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the R-3 District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory use to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
D. Day Care, Group for 7 to 12 children
E. Dwelling, Single Unit
F. Home Occupation, Minor, subject to Section 1847, B, 1.
G. Outdoor Recreation, Park
H. Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
I. Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
J. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G.
[Annotation: Duplex changed from Use by Right to Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SECTION 1002 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the R-3 District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory use to permitted special use, subject to Section 1805
C. Adaptive Reuse, subject to Section 1807
D. Adult Foster Care Facility, subject to Section 1808
E. Bed & Breakfast, subject to Section 1813
F. Contractor’s Facility, subject to Section 1820
G. Convenience Store subject to Section 1823 – Requires Key Street Frontage
H. Day Care, Commercial, subject to Section 1825
I. Duplex, subject to Section 1829
J. Dwelling, Accessory, subject to Section 1831
K. Dwelling, Multiple Unit, subject to Section 1832
L. Eating and Drinking Establishment, subject to Section 1835 – Requires Key Street Frontage
M. Education Facility, subject to Section 1837 – Requires Key Street Frontage
N. Financial Institution, subject to Section 1838 – Requires Key Street Frontage
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Ten R-3 High Density Residential
O. Gallery or Museum, subject to Section 1840 – Requires Key Street Frontage
P. Home Based Business, subject to Section 1846
Q. Home Occupation, Major, subject to Section 1847
R. Hotel, subject to Section 1849
S. Marina, subject to Section 1852
T. Medical or Dental Office, subject to Section 1853 – Requires Key Street Frontage
U. Mini/Self-Storage Facility, subject to Section 1855 – Requires Key Street Frontage
V. Mixed-Use Development, subject to Section 1858
W. Mortuary, subject to Section 1859 – Requires Key Street Frontage
X. Nursing Home or Convalescent Home, subject to Section 1862 – Requires Key Street Frontage
Y. Parking Facility, subject to Section 1865 – Requires Key Street Frontage
Z. Personal Service Establishment, subject to Section 1867
AA. Places of Public Assembly, Large & Small, subject to Section 1868 – Requires Key Street Frontage
BB. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
CC. Professional Office, subject to Section 1874 – Requires Key Street Frontage
DD. Professional Service Establishment, subject to Section 1876 – Requires Key Street Frontage
EE. Retail Business, subject to Section 1877 – Requires Key Street Frontage
FF. Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts, subject to Section 1882 – Requires Key Street Frontage
GG. Use similar to permitted special use, subject to Section 1886
HH. Wireless Communication Facility, subject to Section1893
[Annotation: Parking Facility added to Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Duplex changed from Use by Right to Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective10/30/10]
[Annotation: Communication Facility was deleted as a Special Use by amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion Systems was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Convenience Store without fuel pumps was changed to Convenience Store by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1003 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
Within the R-3 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No single family dwelling building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. No duplex, multiple unit or commercial structure shall be established on any parcel less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. For multiple unit buildings, in addition to a ten thousand (10,000) square feet in minimum parcel area for the first two units, two thousand (2,000) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each dwelling unit up to twenty (20) and two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each additional dwelling unit in excess of twenty (20).
B. Parcel Width – For a single family detached dwelling, the minimum parcel width shall be sixty (60) feet and for all other uses the minimum parcel width shall be eighty (80) feet.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Ten R-3 High Density Residential
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from front property line. In established neighborhoods, where a majority of the buildings do not meet the required front yard setback, the Administrator may establish an alternate setback, pursuant to Section 502, G.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setback shall be three (3) feet;
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be three (3) feet, excepting garages which front on a platted alley. Such garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line on the opposite side of the alley, to provide a minimal turning radius for vehicles, but at no time shall the structure be closer than three (3) feet to the rear property line. The side yard for such garage shall be the same as for other accessory structures, as outlined above.
4. Waterfront Yard: The minimum setback shall be not less than twenty (20) feet, provided such setback shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat launches and boat houses. [Annotation: Section 1003.C.4 changed by amendment 07-07, effective 5/29/07]
D. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the R-3 District which is less than twenty (20) feet wide.
E. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the R-3 District which has less than five hundred (500) square feet of living area for multiple family, and nine hundred sixty (960) square feet for single family.
F. Lot Coverage: Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
G. Height: The maximum height of principal buildings in the R-3 district shall be the lesser of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet with side walls not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Eleven R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District
As Updated thru June 16, 2017
As Updated thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Eleven R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District
ARTICLE ELEVEN
R-4 MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITY DISTRICT
SECTION 1100 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to establish a locale to accommodate manufactured housing communities as regulated by the Michigan Mobile Home Commission Act, Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended, and the rules and regulations of the Manufactured Housing Commission.
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to uses permitted by right.
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1.
? Manufactured Housing Community, Subject to Section 1104.
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
? Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to permitted special use
? Day Care, Group (7-12 children)
? Duplex
? Dwelling, Multiple Unit
? Dwelling, Single Unit
? Home Occupation, Major
? Mixed Use Development
? Planned Unit Development
? Use similar to permitted special use
[Annotation: Adaptive Reuse was Deleted as a Special Use by amendment 08-03, effective 2/29/08]
As Updated thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Eleven R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR ALL USES OTHER THAN MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITIES
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514.
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS FOR ALL USES OTHER THAN MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITIES (d)
Minimum Lot Area: Minimum Lot Width:
Single Unit 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft. Duplex, or Commercial Use 10,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Multiple Unit (a) 10,000 sq. ft. min. 80 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 8 Max. Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 40%
Front(b) 15 ft. Minimum Living Area 750 sq. ft.
Side 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Dwelling Width 20 ft.
Rear (c) 10 ft. Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks:
Waterfront 20 ft. Side 3 ft.
Rear 3 ft.(c)
(a) For multiple unit buildings, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided, plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit up to twenty (20), plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit in excess of 20.
(b) Subject to Section 502, G.
(c) Provided that garages fronting on platted alleys shall be set back the greater of 3 feet from the rear property line or 20 feet from property line on the opposite side of the alley.
(d) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
SECTION 1101 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the R-4 District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory use to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
D. Home Occupation, Minor, subject to Section 1847, B, 1
As Updated thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Eleven R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District
E. Manufactured Housing Community, subject to Section 1104
F. Outdoor Recreation, Park
G. Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance
H. Use similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
I. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SECTION 1102 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the R-4 District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory use to permitted special use, subject to Section 1805
C. Day Care, Group for 7 to 12 children, subject to Section 1826
D. Duplex, subject to Section 1829
E. Dwelling, Multiple Unit, subject to Section 1832
F. Dwelling, Single Unit, subject to Section 1834
G. Home Occupation, Major, subject to Section 1847
H. Mixed Use Development, subject to Section 1858
I. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
J. Use similar to permitted special use, subject to Section 1886
[Annotation: Adaptive Reuse was Deleted as a Special Use by amendment 08-03, effective 2/29/08]
SECTION 1103 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the R-4 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply to all uses, other than Manufactured Housing Communities:
A. Parcel Area – No single family dwelling building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. No duplex, multiple unit or commercial structure shall be established on any parcel less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. For multiple unit buildings, in addition to a ten thousand (10,000) square feet in minimum parcel area, two thousand (2,000) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each dwelling unit up to twenty (20) and two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each additional dwelling unit in excess of twenty (20).
B. Parcel Width – For a single family detached dwelling, the minimum parcel width shall be sixty (60) feet and for all other uses the minimum parcel width shall be eighty (80) feet.
As Updated thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Eleven R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from front property line. In established neighborhoods, where a majority of the buildings do not meet the required front yard setback, the Administrator may establish an alternate setback, pursuant to Section 502, G.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setback shall be three (3) feet;
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be three (3) feet, excepting garages which front on a platted alley. Such garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line on the opposite side of the alley, to provide a minimal turning radius for vehicles, but at no time shall the structure be closer than three (3) feet to the rear property line. The side yard for such garage shall be the same as for other accessory structures, as outlined above.
4. Waterfront Yard: The minimum setback shall be not less than twenty (20) feet, provided such setback shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat launches and boat houses. [Annotation: Section 1103.C.4 changed by amendment 07-07, effective 5/29/07]
D. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the R-4 District which is less than twenty (20) feet wide.
E. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the R-4 District which has less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of living area.
F. Lot Coverage: Not more than forty percent (40%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
G. Height: The maximum height of principal buildings in the R-4 district shall be the lesser of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet with side walls not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
SECTION 1104 MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITIES
The R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District is intended to provide for the location and regulation of manufactured housing communities. It is intended that manufactured housing communities be provided with necessary community services in a setting that provides a high quality of life for residents and residential development standards consistent with all other residential districts in the City of Manistee. This district shall be located in areas where it will be compatible with adjacent land uses. It is further the intent of this district to prohibit office, business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development, or continued use, of the land for manufactured housing communities in the district. Determining the appropriate location for a manufactured housing community is a uniquely challenging task and may have a crucial impact on adjacent and surrounding land uses. A manufactured housing community contains specific site conditions unlike other types of residential development. Sites with an abundance of natural features such as forested areas, wetlands, and steep slopes and sites without the road and utility infrastructure to
As Updated thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Eleven R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District
support a high density living environment are not found to be suitable for the development of a manufactured housing community. In light of these parameters, the City has elected to allow this zoning district to “float” placing the responsibility for the site analysis on the applicant for the placement of the district. The City and residents shall rely on the Manistee Master Plan to determine future use and to judge and evaluate rezoning requests. Within the R-4 District, manufactured housing communities shall be governed by this Section, by the requirements of the Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended and the standards set forth in the Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Manufactured Housing Commission, including Part 9, Community Construction. The intent of this Section is to provide for manufactured home development, of long-term duration of stay in areas which are developed in a manner which takes into account such special characteristics as locational needs, site layout and design, demand upon community services, and the relationship to and effect upon surrounding uses of land, and conformance to the City of Manistee Master Plan. All manufactured home developments shall comply with the applicable requirements of Public Act 96 of 1987, as amended. The controlling standards in this Section are not designed to generally exclude mobile homes of persons who engage in any aspect pertaining to the business of mobile homes or mobile home parks.
A. Rezoning. Applications to amend this Zoning Ordinance to establish a Manufactured Housing Community district shall be processed in accord with Article 28 hereof and shall be evaluated in accordance with the following standards:
1. Consistency with the Manistee Master Plan by location within the Medium or High Density Residential future land use designations.
2. Availability of public water and wastewater service.
3. Absence of significant areas of mature hardwood forests, significant areas of regulated wetlands and/or significant areas of slopes in excess of 10% on the proposed site.
4. Location on a key street segment, as defined herein.
5. Location within not more than one-half (½) mile of commercial land uses and community services such as schools and churches.
B. Application Procedures. Pursuant to Section 11 of Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended, and the rules promulgated thereunder, an application for the extension, alteration, or construction of a manufactured home development shall be accompanied by a preliminary plan of the proposed development and all permanent buildings indicating the proposed methods of compliance with these requirements. Said application, fees and preliminary plan shall meet the following requirements:
1. An application form shall be completed and fees paid in accordance with the fee schedule (as amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council) and 12 copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for distribution to the Planning Commission.
2. The preliminary plan need not include detailed construction plans, but shall include the following materials:
a. The applicant's name, address and telephone number and the property owner's name, address and telephone number, if different than that of the applicant.
b. Notation of all federal, state and local permits required.
c. The location of the project including the permanent parcel number(s) of the property
As Updated thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Eleven R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District
upon which the project is proposed to be located.
d. The layout of the project including an illustration of the internal roadway system proposed and typical homesite layout.
e. The general design of the proposed project including the proposed location and design of signs, trash receptacles, light fixtures and any accessory structures, open lands and recreation areas and accessory uses.
f. The location, spacing, type and size of proposed plant materials.
g. A general description of the proposed project including the number of homesites proposed, the anticipated phasing of project development and an indication of the number of homesites to be rented and the number to be sold, if any.
C. Review Process. The Planning Commission shall review the submitted preliminary plan and render a decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary plan. The Planning Commission shall approve the preliminary plan upon a finding that the proposed use will not, upon the facts known at the time of the submission of the site plan, cause undue hardship, or create unsafe or hazardous health or safety conditions to the general public. Not more than sixty (60) days following the receipt by the City of a complete application for preliminary plan approval, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny an application and preliminary plan pursuant to the Mobile Home Commission Act, the rules promulgated thereunder and this ordinance.
Upon approval of the preliminary plan, the Zoning Administrator shall sign three (3) copies thereof. One (1) signed copy shall be made a part of the City’s files, one (1) copy shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator for issuance of a Zoning Permit, and one (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant. Construction shall commence within five (5) years after the date of issuance of a construction permit by the Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services unless an extension has been granted by said Department. Amendments to the approved preliminary plan must be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval.
D. Noncompliance. Any substantial noncompliance with the approved preliminary plan shall be reported to the Manufactured Housing Division of the Department of Consumer and Industry Services for remedy along with all pertaining evidence.
E. Site Development Requirements. The site development requirements of the Manufactured Housing Commission, together with any other applicable requirements of the State of Michigan, Act 96 of 1987, as amended, shall be complied with. No manufactured housing community shall be maintained, operated, or conducted without an annual license from the Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services. An inspection of construction may be performed at any appropriate time, pursuant to 1987 PA 96, as amended (the Mobile Home Commission Act).
F. Site Size: The minimum site size for a manufactured housing community shall be fifteen (15) acres.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Twelve W-F Waterfront District
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twelve W-F Waterfront District
ARTICLE TWELVE
W-F WATERFRONT DISTRICT
SECTION 1200 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to establish a mixed-use district incorporating a variety of recreational, residential, business or service uses on or near the Waterfront. This district is intended to encourage and promote sustainable, environmentally and aesthetically compatible developments that use or compliment the shoreline while promoting expanded use of the shoreline by the public. The W-F District is intended to host a variety of land uses including, but not limited to, residential, commercial, entertainment and recreational, service and industrial uses. [Annotation: The Language “Waterfront” was added, while the Language “Manistee Lake shoreline” was deleted by amendment 08-05, effective 2/29/08]
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory use to uses permitted by right.
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Dwelling, Single unit
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Gallery or Museum
? Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
? Mixed Use Development
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Personal Service Establishment
? Places of Public Assembly, Small
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Retail Business
? Shipping Facility
? Subdivision and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
? Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17][Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory building with footprint greater than the foot print of the principal structure
? Accessory uses to a permitted Special Use
? Adaptive Reuse
? Assembly Operation
? Bed & Breakfast
? Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps
? Day Care, Commercial and Group
? Duplex
? Dwelling – Multiple unit
? Home Based Business
? Home Occupation, Major
? Hotels
? Marina
? Parking Facility, Public
? Planned Unit Development
? Studio for performing and graphic arts
? Uses similar to permitted special use
? Warehouse, Public
? Wireless Communication Facility
[Annotation: Duplex was changed from a Use by Right to a Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
SPECIAL USES
Requires Key Street Frontage
? Financial Institution
? Motels
? Places of Public Assembly, Large
? Sports and Recreation Club
? Theater
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Twelve W-F Waterfront District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (b)
Minimum Lot Area: Minimum Lot Width:
Single Unit 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft. Duplex, or Commercial Use 10,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Multiple Unit (a) 10,000 sq. ft. min. 80 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 17 Max. Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 60%
Front(c) 15 ft. Minimum Living Area 500 sq. ft.
Side 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Dwelling Width 20 ft.
Rear (d) 10 ft. Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks:
Waterfront 20 ft.(e) Side 3 ft.
Rear 3 ft.(d)
(a) For multiple unit buildings, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit up to twenty (20), plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit in excess of 20.
(b) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(c) Subject to Section 502, G
(d) Provided that garages fronting on platted alleys shall be set back the greater of 3 feet from the rear property line or 20 feet from property line on the opposite side of the alley.
(e) Provided that this standard shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat houses and boat launches.
SECTION 1201 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the W-F District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan.
A. Accessory building with footprint less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory use to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Twelve W-F Waterfront District
D. Dwelling, single unit
E. Eating and Drinking Establishment
F. Gallery or Museum
G. Home Occupation, Minor, subject to Section 1847, B, 1
H. Mixed Use Development
I. Outdoor Recreation, Park
J. Personal Service Establishment
K. Places of Public Assembly, Small
L. Professional Office
M. Professional Service Establishment
N. Retail Business
O. Shipping Facility
P. Subdivision, and condominium subdivision consisting of permitted uses, clustered or traditional subject to the Subdivision Control Ordinance
Q. Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
R. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Duplex was changed from a Use by Right to a Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective 1030/10]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1202 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the W-F District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory building with footprint greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory uses to a permitted special use, subject to Section 1805
C. Adaptive reuse, subject to Section 1807
D. Assembly Operation, subject to Section 1873
E. Convenience Store, without fuel pumps, subject to Section 1823
F. Day Care, Commercial, subject to Section 1825
G. Day Care, Group, subject to Section 1826
H. Duplex, subject to Section 1829
I. Dwelling, multiple unit, subject to Section 1832
J. Financial Institution, subject to Section 1838 – Requires Key Street Frontage
K. Home Based Business, subject to Section 1846
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Twelve W-F Waterfront District
L. Home Occupation, Major, subject to Section 1847
M. Hotel, subject to Section 1849
N. Marina, subject to Section 1852
O. Motel, subject to Section 1861 – Requires Key Street Frontage
P. Parking Facility, Public, subject to Section 1865
Q. Places of Public Assembly, Large, subject to Section 1868 – Requires Key Street Frontage
R. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
S. Sports and Recreation Club, subject to Section 1880 – Requires Key Street Frontage
T. Studio for performing and graphic arts, subject to Section 1882
U. Theater, subject to Section 1885 – Requires Key Street Frontage
V. Uses similar to permitted special use, subject to Section 1886
W. Warehouse, Public, subject to Section 1889
X. Wireless Communication Facility, subject to Section 1893
[Annotation: Duplex was changed from a Use by Right to a Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1203 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the W-F District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No single family dwelling building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. No duplex, multiple unit or commercial structure shall be established on any parcel less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. Provided that for multiple unit buildings, in addition to ten thousand (10,000) square feet in minimum parcel area for the first two units, two thousand (2,000) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each dwelling unit up to twenty (20) and two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each additional dwelling unit in excess of twenty (20).
B. Parcel Width – For a single family detached dwelling, the minimum parcel width shall be sixty (60) feet and for all other uses the minimum parcel width shall be eighty (80) feet.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from front property line. In established neighborhoods, where a majority of the buildings do not meet the required front yard setback, the Administrator may establish an alternate setback, pursuant to Section 502, G.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setback shall be three (3) feet;
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Twelve W-F Waterfront District
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For accessory buildings, the minimum rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be three (3) feet, excepting garages which front on a platted alley. Such garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line on the opposite side of the alley, to provide a minimal turning radius for vehicles, but at no time shall the structure be closer than three (3) feet to the rear property line. The side yard for such garage shall be the same as for other accessory structures, as outlined above.
4. Waterfront Yards: The minimum setback from the ordinary high watermark of Manistee Lake shall be twenty (20) feet. Provided that this provision shall not apply to walkways, boat docks, boat slips, boat houses and boat launches.
[Annotation: Section 1203.C.4 changed by amendment 07-07, effective 5/29/07]
D. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the W-F District which is less than twenty (20) feet wide.
E. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the W-F District which has less than five hundred (500) square feet of living area.
F. Lot Coverage: Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
G. Height: The maximum height of principal buildings in the W-F District shall be the lesser of thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet with side walls not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
[Annotation: On December 31, 2014 the Renaissance Zone expired, Section 1204 Waterfront Renaissance Zone Standards was deleted by Amendment Z15-04, effective 7/14/15]
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Thirteen C-1 Regional Commercial District
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Thirteen C-1 Regional Commercial District
ARTICLE THIRTEEN
C-1 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 1300 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to provide areas for commercial uses intended to serve the larger community and the traveling public in the vicinity of highway U.S.-31 and to promote the economic development of the City in conformity with the Manistee City Master Plan, while establishing standards for curb cut location, pedestrian facilities, parking and shared parking, loading/unloading area, landscaping, and building form intended to mitigate the negative impacts of lineal development along highway U.S.-31; and potential conflicts with nearby residential districts.
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory buildings
? Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right
? Animal Grooming
? Automobile Repair Facility
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Convenience Store w/o fuel pumps
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Financial Institution
? Gallery or Museum
? Hotel
? Medical or Dental Office
? Mixed Use Development
? Motel
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Personal Service Establishment
? Place of Public Assembly, Small
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Retail Business
? Sports and Recreation Club
? Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
? Subdivision, Plat or Condo (permitted uses)
? Theater
? Urgent Care Facility
? Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Veterinary Clinic
? Wholesale Facility
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory uses related to special uses
? Adaptive Reuse
SPECIAL USES (cont’d)
? Billboard
? Car Wash
? Contractor’s Facility
? Day Care, Commercial or Group
? Drive-through Establishment
? Dwelling – Multiple Unit
? Gasoline Station
? Laundry and Dry Cleaning Establishment
? Marihuana Grower
? Marihuana Processer
? Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility
? Marihuana Secure Transporter
? Mini/Self Storage Facility
? Mine, Sand and Gravel
? Nursing or Convalescent Home
? Parking Facility, Public
? Planned Unit Development
? Sexually Oriented Business
? Tattoo Parlor
? Uses similar to permitted special uses
? Warehouse, Public
? Wireless Communication Facility
[Annotation: Duplex changed from Permitted Use to Special Use by Amendment Z10-01, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Convenience Store w/fuel pumps was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transporter as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SPECIAL USES
Requires Key Street Frontage
? Greenhouse or Nursery
? Mortuary
? Outdoor Sales Facility
? Places of Public Assembly, Large
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Thirteen C-1 Regional Commercial District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (b)
Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 sq. ft.(a) Minimum Lot Width: 120 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 17 Max. Building Height 3 stories, or 40’(b)
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 60%
Front(c) 30 ft. Minimum Living Area 500 sq. ft.
Side(d) 10 ft. (each side) Minimum Dwelling Width 20 ft.
Rear(d) 20 ft.
(a) For multiple unit buildings, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit up to twenty (20), plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit in excess of 20.
(b) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(c) Subject to Section 502, G.
(d) When a proposed commercial use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a fifty (50) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to six (6) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
SECTION 1301 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the C-1 District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory buildings, regardless of floor area.
B. Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Animal Grooming
D. Automobile Repair Facility
E. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
F. Convenience Store without fuel pumps
G. Eating and Drinking Establishment
H. Financial Institution
I. Gallery or Museum
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Thirteen C-1 Regional Commercial District
J. Hotel
K. Medical or Dental Office
L. Mixed Use Development
M. Motel
N. Outdoor Recreation, Park
O. Personal Service Establishment
P. Place of Public Assembly, Small
Q. Professional Office
R. Professional Service Establishment
S. Retail Business
T. Sports and Recreation Club
U. Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
V. Subdivision, Plat or Condo (of permitted uses)
W. Theater
X. Urgent Care Facility
Y. Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
Z. Veterinary Clinic
AA. Wind Energy Conversion System, subject to Section 515.G
BB. Wholesale Facility
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/22]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1302 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the C-1 District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory uses related to special uses, subject to Section 1805
B. Adaptive Reuse, subject to Section 1807
C. Billboard, subject to Section 1814
D. Car Wash, subject to Section 1816
E. Contractor’s Facility, subject to Section 1820
F. Day Care, Commercial, subject to Section 1825
G. Day Care, Group, subject to Section 1826
H. Drive-through Establishment, subject to Section 1828
I. Dwelling – Multiple Unit, subject to Section 1832
J. Gasoline Station, subject to Section 1841
K. Greenhouse or Nursery, subject to Section 1844 – Requires Key Street Frontage
L. Laundry and Dry Cleaning Establishment, subject to Section 1850
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Thirteen C-1 Regional Commercial District
M. Marihuana Grower, subject to Section 1851
N. Marihuana Processor, subject to Section 1851
O. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility, subject to Section 1851
P. Marihuana Secure Transporter, subject to Section 1851
Q. Mini/Self Storage, subject to Section 1855
R. Mine, Sand and Gravel, subject to Section 1856
S. Mortuary, subject to Section 1859 – Requires Key Street Frontage
T. Nursing or Convalescent Home, subject to Section 1862
U. Outdoor Sales Facility, subject to Section 1864 – Requires Key Street Frontage
V. Parking Facility, Public, subject to Section 1865
W. Places of Public Assembly, Large, subject to Section 1868 – Requires Key Street Frontage
X. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
Y. Sexually Oriented Business, subject to Section 1879
Z. Tattoo Parlor, subject to Section 1883
AA. Uses similar to permitted special uses, subject to Section 1886
BB. Warehouse, Public, subject to Section 1889
CC. Wireless Communication Facility, subject to Section 1893
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Convenience Store w/fuel pumps was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment Z17-04, Effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transporter as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SECTION 1303 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the C-1 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area. Provided that for multiple unit buildings, in addition to ten thousand (10,000) square feet in minimum parcel area for the first two units, two thousand (2,000) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each dwelling unit up to twenty (20) and two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each additional dwelling unit in excess of twenty (20).
B. Parcel Width – For all uses the minimum parcel width shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than thirty (30) feet from front property line.
2. Side Yards: Except as provided in subparagraph 4 below, the minimum width of either side yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Thirteen C-1 Regional Commercial District
3. Rear Yard: Except as provided in subparagraph 4 below, the minimum rear setback shall twenty (20) feet.
4. When a proposed commercial use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a fifty (50) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to six (6) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
E. Building Height. Except as a part of a Planned Unit Development, no structure in the C-1 District shall exceed three (3) stories in height or forty (40) feet in height.
F. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the C-1 District which has less than five hundred (500) square feet of living area.
G. Dwelling Width: No dwelling shall be constructed in the C-1 District which is less than twenty (20) feet wide.
H. Lot Coverage: Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
SECTION 1304 SITE STANDARDS
A. In addition to Site Plan requirements set forth in Article 22 of this Ordinance, a site plan in the C-1 District for a commercial enterprise with frontage on highway U.S.-31 shall also meet the following requirements:
1. Existing drives and curb cuts onto U.S.-31 shall comply with the requirements of Article 19, US-31 Corridor Overlay.
2. Parking shall not be allowed within the front yard setback.
3. Loading and solid waste storage areas shall be located in the side or rear of the commercial establishment.
4. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
5. The location of the solid waste container(s) shall be adjacent to a building, unless specifically waived by the Commission.
6. Loading/unloading docks and areas (including solid waste containers) shall be situated so that trucks loading and unloading do not park in parking lot areas.
B. Yards median, and all grounds areas shall be maintained and shall meet the following standards:
1. The front yard setback area:
a. The required front yard shall consist of a landscaped lawn and shrub area. The Commission may require manicured lawn covered berm, fences, walls, and other screening and the same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant.
b. The City may require walkways for pedestrian and non-motorized vehicles.
2. All utilities (electric, gas, water, sewer, cable television, and other similar services) shall be located underground. This requirement applies to service to individual commercial establishments and to any utilities necessary to travel between the rear wall of the principle commercial establishment building and the centerline of highway U.S.-31. All utility pad
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Thirteen C-1 Regional Commercial District
fixtures, meters, shall be shown on the site plan and integrated with the architectural and landscape elements of the site plan.
3. All exterior lights shall be arranged and installed in accordance with Section 525.
4. All service drives, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, shall be paved with concrete, bituminous asphalt or other similar material.
5. Landscaping of the yard and grounds area of the parcel shall meet the following standards:
a. All open yard and grounds areas in front and on the sides and the rear 20 feet (closest to the building) of the parcel shall be maintained as manicured lawn, and/or formal garden.
b. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all landscaping. Plant materials (including grass) shall be kept in a healthy growing condition and free from refuse and debris, except for continuous watering during periods of water shortage or drought.
c. The site plan shall identify existing vegetation on the site and indicate whether such existing vegetation will be preserved or replaced upon construction.
C. All buildings, fences, walls, gates, shall meet the following architectural standards:
1. No building exterior (whether front, side, or rear) will consist of architectural materials inferior in quality, appearance, or detail to any other exterior of the same building. Nothing in this section shall prevent using different building exterior materials or design which would be acceptable as representative of good architectural design and does not involve use of inferior materials on sides which face adjoining property and thus might adversely impact existing or future development.
2. The building shall be constructed and finished in such a manner that its color and appearance will be aesthetically complimentary to the other buildings in the area. It shall be subject to prior site plan and construction approval by the Planning Commission.
3. Mechanical equipment, whether ground-level or rooftop, shall be shielded and screened from public view and designed to be perceived as an integral part of the building.
4. For all commercial establishments, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for off-road parking, loading, unloading, and open air uses specifically approved by the Commission.
D. In addition to any requirements of Manistee City Subdivision Ordinance, a division of a parcel of land, in or outside of an existing subdivision, which results in one or more parcels which do not have public highway U.S.-31 frontage, shall be required to have an approved access to a public highway U.S.-31 prior to the division of the parcel or issuing a zoning permit.
SECTION 1305 EXISTING RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
A dwelling or duplex which exists prior to the effective date of this Article may continue as a non-conforming use pursuant to Article 4, Section 401, A, 2 of this Ordinance.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Fourteen C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Fourteen C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
ARTICLE FOURTEEN
C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 1400 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to provide areas for commercial and mixed uses intended to serve nearby residential neighborhood and the larger Manistee community, while establishing standards to manage traffic and parking, operational impacts, parking and shared parking, loading/unloading area, landscaping, and building form intended to complement existing commercial nodes and surrounding residential uses.
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory buildings with floor area less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Convenience Store w/o fuel pumps
? Day Care, Group
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Financial Institution
? Gallery or Museum
? Home Occupation, Minor, subject to Section 1847, B, 1
? Medical or Dental Office
? Mixed Use Development
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Personal Service Establishment
? Place of Public Assembly, Small
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Retail Business
? Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
? Subdivision, Plat or Condo (of permitted uses)
? Uses similar to uses permitted by right subject to Section 530
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory buildings with floor area greater than the footprint of the principal structure
SPECIAL USES CONT’D
? Accessory uses related to special uses
? Adaptive Reuse
? Animal Grooming
? Automobile Repair Facility
? Bed & Breakfast
? Car Wash
? Contractor’s Facility
? Day Care, Commercial
? Drive Thru Establishment
? Duplex
? Dwelling – Multiple unit
? Dwelling – Single Unit
? Educational Facility
? Gasoline Station
? Home Based Business
? Home Occupation, Major
? Marina
? Nursing Home or Convalescent Home
? Planned Unit Development
? Uses similar to permitted special uses
? Veterinary Clinic
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added as a Special Use by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Bed & Breakfast was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z10-02, effective 10/30/10]
Annotation: Convenience Store w/fuel pumps was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Gasoline Station was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SPECIAL USES
Requires Key Street Frontage
? Laundry and Dry Cleaning Establishment
? Mortuary
? Outdoor Sales Facility
? Parking Facility
? Place of Public Assembly, Large
? Sports and Recreation Club
? Theater
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Fourteen C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (b)
Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 sq. ft.(a) Minimum Lot Width: 60 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre 17 Max. Building Height 2½ stories, or 35’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 90%
Front(c) 4 ft. Minimum Living Area 500 sq. ft.
Side(d) (e) 0 or 4 ft. (each side)
Rear(e) 10 ft.
Waterfront 20 ft.
(a) For multiple unit buildings, a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for the first two units, plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit up to twenty (20), plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit in excess of 20.
(b) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(c) Subject to Section 502, G
(d) The Planning Commission may approve the location of a building in the C-2 district on one or both side lot lines when both the proposed structure and the adjoining structure are designed to accommodate zero-lot line construction.
(e) When a proposed commercial use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require an additional buffer consisting of a twenty-five (25) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to six (6) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
SECTION 1401 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the C-2 District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory buildings with floor area less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
D. Convenience Store without fuel pumps
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Fourteen C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
E. Day Care, Group
F. Eating and Drinking Establishment
G. Financial Institution
H. Gallery or Museum
I. Home Occupation, Minor, Subject to Section 1847, B, 1.
J. Medical or Dental Office
K. Mixed Use Development
L. Outdoor Recreation, Park
M. Personal Service Establishment
N. Place of Public Assembly, Small
O. Professional Office
P. Professional Service Establishment
Q. Retail Business
R. Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
S. Subdivision, Plat or Condo (of permitted uses)
T. Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
U. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1402 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the C-2 District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory buildings with floor area greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory uses related to special uses, subject to Section 1805
C. Adaptive Reuse, subject to Section 1807
D. Animal Grooming, subject to Section 1810
E. Automobile Repair Facility, subject to Section 1811
F. Bed & Breakfast, subject to Section 1813
G. Car Wash, subject to Section 1816
H. Contractor’s Facility, subject to Section 1820
I. Day Care, Commercial, subject to Section 1825
J. Drive-through Establishment, subject to Section 1828
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Fourteen C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
K. Duplex, subject to Section 1829
L. Dwelling, multiple unit, subject to Section 1832
M. Dwelling, single unit, subject to Section 1834
N. Educational Facility, subject to Section 1837
O. Home Based Business, subject to Section 1846
P. Home Occupation, Major, subject to Section 1847
Q. Laundry and Dry Cleaning Establishment, subject to Section 1850 – Requires Key Street Frontage
R. Marina, subject to Section 1852
S. Mortuary, subject to Section 1859 – Requires Key Street Frontage
T. Nursing or Convalescent Home, subject to Section 1862
U. Outdoor Sales Facility, subject to Section 1864 – Requires Key Street Frontage
V. Parking Facility; Subject to Section 1865 – Requires Key Street Frontage
W. Place of Public Assembly, Large, subject to Section 1868 – Requires Key Street Frontage
X. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
Y. Sports and Recreation Club, subject to Section 1880 – Requires Key Street Frontage
Z. Theater, subject to Section 1885 – Requires Key Street Frontage
BB. Uses similar to permitted special uses, subject to Section 1886
CC. Veterinary Clinic, subject to Section 1888
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added to Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Bed & Breakfast was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z10-02, effective 10/30/10]
[Annotation: Convenience Store with fuel pumps was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Eating and Drinking Establishment was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Gasoline Station was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1403 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the C-2 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. Provided that for multiple unit buildings, in addition to ten thousand (10,000) square feet in minimum parcel area provided for the first two units, two thousand (2,000) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each dwelling unit up to twenty (20) and two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each additional dwelling unit in excess of twenty (20).
B. Parcel Width – For all uses the minimum parcel width shall be sixty (60) feet.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than four (4) feet from front property line, subject to Section 502, G.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Fourteen C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
2. Side Yards: Except as provided in subparagraph 4 below, the minimum width of either side yard shall not be less than four (4) feet. Provided, however, that the Planning Commission may approve the location of a building in the C-2 district on one or both side lot lines when both the proposed structure and the adjoining structure are designed to accommodate zero-lot line construction.
3. Rear Yard: Except as provided in subparagraph 4 below, the minimum rear setback shall ten (10) feet.
4. Waterfront yard: For properties abutting the Manistee River Channel, the minimum setback from the ordinary high watermark shall be twenty (20) feet; provided however, that such setback shall not apply to docks, boat launching ramps, and riverwalks.
5. When a proposed commercial use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a fifty (50) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to six (6) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
D. Building Height. Except as a part of a Planned Unit Development, no structure in the C-2 District shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories in height or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
E. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the C-2 District which has less than five hundred (500) square feet of living area.
F. Lot Coverage: Not more than ninety percent (90%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Fifteen C-3 Central Business District
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Fifteen C-3 Central Business District
ARTICLE FIFTEEN
C-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION 1500 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to protect and strengthen the commercial core of the City of Manistee as a regional and specialty shopping, service and entertainment area; to encourage a broad range of compatible retail, service, entertainment and residential uses formed vibrant, walkable and attractive districts in concert with the objectives of the Master Plan and Downtown Development Authority Plan; while establishing standards to manage traffic and parking, operational impacts, parking and shared parking, loading/unloading area, landscaping, and building form intended to complement existing commercial uses and surrounding residential neighborhoods.
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory buildings with floor area less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right
? Animal Grooming
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Convenience Store w/o fuel pumps
? Day Care, Commercial
? Day Care, Group
? Duplex
? Dwelling, Accessory
? Dwelling, Upper Story Accessory, subject to Section 1504
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Educational Facility
? Financial Institution
? Gallery or Museum
? Home Occupation, Minor, subject to Section 1847, B, 1.
? Hotel
? Laundry and Dry-Cleaning
? Medical or Dental Office
? Mixed Use Development
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Parking Facility, Public
? Personal Service Establishment
? Place of Public Assembly, Small
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Retail Business
? Sports and Recreation Club
? Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
? Subdivision, Plat or Condo (of permitted uses)
? Tattoo Parlor
? Theater
? Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
PERMITTED USES (Cont.)
? Veterinary Clinic
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory subject to Section 515.G
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory buildings with floor area greater than the footprint of the principal structure
? Accessory uses related to special uses
? Adaptive Reuse
? Bed & Breakfast
? Contractor’s Facility
? Drive-through Establishment
? Dwelling, Multiple unit
? Home Occupation, Major
? Marina
? Planned Unit Development
? Uses similar to permitted special uses
SPECIAL USES
Requires Key Street Frontage
? Motel
? Place of Public Assembly Large
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Animal Grooming, Day Care Commercial, Day Care Group, Dwelling Accessory, Educational Facility, Motel, Tattoo Parlor and Veterinary Clinic were ADDED as a Permitted use by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
[Annotation: Motel was ADDED as a Special Use (requires key street frontage by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
[Annotation: Duplex, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Parking Facility, Public and Sports and Recreation Club (requires key street frontage) were changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Fifteen C-3 Central Business District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203, except for upper story dwellings, which are subject to Section 2201, A
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpster and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
? U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (b)
Minimum Lot Area: 2,500 sq. ft. Minimum Lot Width: 25 ft.
Maximum Dwelling Units/Acre (a) Max. Building Height 4 stories, or 50’
Minimum Building Setbacks Maximum Lot Coverage 100%
Front(c) 0 ft. Waterfront Yard 20 ft
Side(d) (e) 0 or 4 ft. (each side) Minimum Living Area 500 sq. ft.
Rear(e) 6 ft.
(a) Not more than three units per each fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of building envelope
(b) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(c) Subject to Section 502, G
(d) Where a building is not proposed to be sited on the side lot line, a minimum yard of four (4) feet shall be provided.
(e) When a proposed commercial use is contiguous to a parcel in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a ten (10) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to six (6) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
SECTION 1501 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the C-3 District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory buildings with floor area less than or equal to the footprint of the principal structure
B. Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Animal Grooming
D. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
E. Convenience Store, without fuel pumps.
F. Day Care, Commercial
G. Day Care, Group
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Fifteen C-3 Central Business District
H. Duplex
I. Dwelling, Accessory
J. Dwelling, Upper Story Accessory subject to Section 1504
K. Eating and Drinking Establishment
L. Educational Facility
M. Financial Institution
N. Gallery or Museum
O. Home Occupation, Minor subject to Section 1847, B, 1
P. Hotel
Q. Laundry and Dry Cleaning
R. Medical or Dental Office
S. Mixed Use Development
T. Outdoor Recreation, Park
U. Parking Facility, Public
V. Personal Service Establishment
W. Place of Public Assembly, Small
X. Professional Office
Y. Professional Service Establishment
Z. Retail Business
AA. Sports and Recreation Club
BB. Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts
CC. Subdivision, Plat or Condo (of permitted uses)
DD. Tattoo Parlor
EE. Theater
FF. Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
GG. Veterinary Clinic
HH. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Animal Grooming, Day Care Commercial, Day Care Group, Dwelling Accessory, Educational Facility, Tattoo Parlor and Veterinary Clinic were ADDED as a Permitted use by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
[Annotation: Duplex, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Parking Facility, Public and Sports and Recreation Club (requires key street frontage) were changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
SECTION 1502 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the C-3 District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Fifteen C-3 Central Business District
A. Accessory buildings with floor area greater than the footprint of the principal structure, subject to Section 1804
B. Accessory uses related to special uses, subject to Section 1805
C. Adaptive Reuse, subject to Section 1807
D. Bed & Breakfast, subject to Section 1813
E. Contractor’s Facility, subject to Section 1820
F. Drive-through Establishment, subject to Section 1828
G. Dwelling, Multiple Unit, subject to Section 1832
H. Home Occupation, Major, subject to Section 1847
I. Marina, subject to Section 1852
J. Motel, subject to Section 1861 - Requires Key Street Frontage
K. Place of Public Assembly, Large, subject to Section 1868 – Requires Key Street Frontage
L. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
M. Uses similar to permitted special uses, subject to Section 1886
[Annotation: Mixed Use Development was changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Motel was added as a Special Use (requires key street segment by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
[Annotation: Duplex, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Parking Facility, Public and Sports and Recreation Club (requires key street frontage) were changed from a Special use to a Permitted use by Amendment Z18-07, effective 08/31/18]
SECTION 1503 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the C-3 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet in area.
B. Parcel Width – For all uses the minimum parcel width shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall be 0 feet.
2. Side Yards: Except as provided in subparagraph 5 below, the minimum width of either side yard shall 0 feet. Where a building is not proposed to be sited on the side lot line, a minimum yard of four (4) feet shall be provided.
3. Rear Yard: Except as provided in subparagraph 5 below, the minimum rear setback shall six (6) feet.
4. Waterfront yard: For properties abutting the Manistee River Channel, the minimum setback from the ordinary high watermark shall be twenty (20) feet; provided however, that such setback shall not apply to docks, boat launching ramps, and riverwalks.
5. When a proposed commercial use is contiguous to an parcel in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a ten (10) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to six (6) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
As Amended thru August 31, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Fifteen C-3 Central Business District
D. Building Height. Except as a part of a Planned Unit Development, no structure in the C-3 District shall exceed the lesser of four (4) stories or fifty (50) feet in height.
E. Living Area: No dwelling unit shall be constructed in the C-3 District which has less than five hundred (500) square feet of living area.
F. Lot Coverage: Up to 100% of the parcel area may be covered by buildings.
SECTION 1504 UPPER STORY DWELLINGS
A. Upper story dwellings are permitted in existing structures within the C-3 district. New structures proposing upper story dwellings shall be governed as a mixed use.
B. Upper story dwellings shall be accessed by a secure entrance dedicated for the exclusive use of building residents and guests.
C. No commercial or office use shall be located on the same floor as a residential use.
D. No dwelling unit shall exceed a maximum of two (2) bedrooms.
E. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of five hundred (500) square feet.
F. A basic site plan shall be required and reviewed by the Zoning Administrator per Section 2201, A.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Sixteen L-I Light Industrial District
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Sixteen L-I Light Industrial District
ARTICLE SIXTEEN
L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
SECTION 1600 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to protect adjacent residential areas from the negative effects of the Light Industrial District by providing a buffer while allowing industries which traditionally do not cause excessive noise, vibration, odors, visual blight, pollution, use hazardous processes; and to be compatible with the City’s Master Plan.
[Annotation: the Word “Light” was added to Purpose and Intent by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory buildings
? Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right
? Assembly Operation
? Automobile Repair Facility
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Financial Institution
? Greenhouse and Nursery
? Laundry and Dry Cleaning Establishment
? Medical or Dental Office
? Mini/Self-Storage Facility
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Research, Testing and Laboratory
? Subdivision, Plat or Condo (of permitted uses)
? Uses similar to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 530
? Veterinary Clinic
? Warehouse, Public
? Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
? Wholesale Facility
[Annotation: Medical or Dental Office was added to Uses Permitted by Right by amendment 07-29, effective 12/14/07]
[Annotation: Windmill, Accessory was added to Uses Permitted by Right by amendment 08-08, effective 12/11/08]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Windmill Accessory was replaced with Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory uses related to special uses
? Cemetery
? Contractor’s Facility
? Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps
? Day Care, Commercial
? Eating and Drinking Establishment
? Educational Facility
? Hotel
? Marihuana Grower
? Marihuana Processer
? Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility
? Marihuana Secure Transporter
? Mine, Sand and Gravel
? Planned Unit Development
? Processing and Manufacturing
? Uses similar to permitted special uses
? Wells, Extraction
? Wind Energy Conversion System
? Wireless Communication Facility
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transporter as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SPECIAL USES
Requires Key Street Frontage
? Place of Public Assembly, Large
? Sports and Recreation Club
? Theater
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Sixteen L-I Light Industrial District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpster and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (a)
Minimum Lot Area: 12,000 sq. ft. Minimum Lot Width: 120 ft.
Max. Building Height: 4 stories, or 50’ Maximum Lot Coverage 70%
Minimum Building Setbacks Minimum Building Floor Area 4,000 sq. ft.
Front(b) 25 ft.
Side(c) 10 ft. (each side)
Rear(c) 10 ft.
(a) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(b) Subject to Section 502, G
(c) When a proposed industrial use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a twenty-five (25) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to six (4) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
SECTION 1601 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the L-I District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory buildings regardless of floor area
B. Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Assembly Operation
D. Automobile Repair Facility
E. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
F. Financial Institution
G. Greenhouse and Nursery
H. Laundry or Dry-Cleaning Establishment
I. Medical or Dental Office
J. Mini/Self-Storage Facility
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Sixteen L-I Light Industrial District
K. Outdoor Recreation, Park
L. Professional Office
M. Professional Service Establishment
N. Research, Testing and Laboratory
O. Subdivision, plat or condominium of permitted uses
P. Uses similar to Uses Permitted by Right, subject to Section 530
Q. Veterinary Clinic
R. Warehouse, Public
S. Wholesale Facility
T. Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Medical or Dental Office was added to Uses Permitted by Right by amendment 07-29, effective 12/14/07]
[Annotation: Windmill, Accessory was added to Uses Permitted by Right by amendment 08-08, effective 12/11/08]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Windmill Accessory was replaced with Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SECTION 1602 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the L-I District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, special land use approval.
A. Accessory uses related to special uses, subject to Section 1805
B. Cemetery, subject to Section 1817
C. Contractor’s Facility, subject to Section 1820
D. Convenience Store, without fuel pumps, subject to Section 1823
E. Day Care, Commercial, subject to Section 1825
F. Eating and Drinking Establishment, subject to Section 1835
G. Educational Facility, subject to Section 1837
H. Hotel, subject to Section 1849
I. Marihuana Grower, subject to Section 1851
J. Marihuana Processer, subject to Section 1851
K. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility, subject to Section 1851
L. Marihuana Secure Transporter, subject to Section 1851
M. Mine, Sand and Gravel, subject to Section 1856
N. Place of Public Assembly, Large, subject to Section 1868 – Requires Key Street Frontage
O. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
P. Processing and Manufacturing, subject to Section 1873
Q. Sports and Recreation Club, subject to Section 1880 – Requires Key Street Frontage
R. Theater, subject to Section 1885 – Requires Key Street Frontage
S. Uses similar to Uses Permitted by Special Land Use, subject to Section 1886
T. Wells, Extraction, subject to Section 1891
As Amended thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Sixteen L-I Light Industrial District
U. Wind Energy Conversion System, subject to Section 1892
V. Wireless Communication Facility, subject to Section 1893
[Annotation: Communication Tower was deleted as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transporter as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SECTION 1603 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the L-I District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area.
B. Parcel Width – For all uses the minimum parcel width shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet from front property line.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
3. Rear: The minimum rear setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
4. When a proposed nonresidential use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require an additional buffer consisting of a fifty (50) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to four (4) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
D. Building Height. Except as a part of a Planned Unit Development and as set forth below, no structure in the L-I District shall exceed two and four (4) stories in height or fifty (50) feet in height. Buildings or structures in the GI Districts may be erected or altered to a height of sixty 60 feet, provided that a fire lane shall be provided within twenty (20) feet of the building or structure. Said fire lane shall be paved and shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. All such structures shall require the approval of the Fire Chief.
E. Area: No principle structure shall be constructed in the District which is less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of building area, and is less than twenty feet wide.
F. Lot Coverage: Not more than seventy percent (70%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
Article Seventeen G-I General Industrial District
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Seventeen G-I General Industrial District
ARTICLE SEVENTEEN
G-I GENERAL INDUSTRIAL
SECTION 1700 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the intent of this District to protect adjacent residential areas from the negative effects of the General Industrial District while allowing industries which traditionally heavier and more intense in the nature of their uses; to provide protection to Manistee Lake including its water quality, to protect its shoreline from erosion or instability or other negative effects; and to be compatible with the City’s Master Plan.
PERMITTED USES
? Accessory buildings
? Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right
? Assembly Operation
? Community Garden, subject to Section 534
? Contractor’s Facility
? Mini/Self-Storage Facility
? Outdoor Recreation, Park
? Processing and Manufacturing
? Professional Office
? Professional Service Establishment
? Research, Laboratory and Testing
? Shipping Facility
? Subdivision, Plat or Condo (of permitted uses)
? Uses similar to Uses Permitted by Right, subject to Section 530
? Warehouse, Public
? Wells, Extraction
? Windmills, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Wells, Extraction were changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment 07-11, effective 5/29/07]
[Annotation: Windmills, Accessory was added to Uses Permitted by Right by amendment 08-08, effective 12/11/08]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Windmill Accessory was replaced with Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SPECIAL USES
? Accessory uses related to special uses
? Educational Facility
? Marihuana Grower
? Marihuana Processer
? Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility
? Marihuana Secure Transporter
? Marina
? Mine, Sand and Gravel
? Parking Facility
? Planned Unit Development
? Power Generating Facility
? Uses similar to Used Permitted by Special Land Use, subject to Section 530
? Wind Energy Conversion System
[Annotation: Adaptive Reuse was Deleted as a Special Use by amendment 08-03, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added to Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transporter as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Seventeen G-I General Industrial District
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
? Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203
? Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
? Landscaping requirements subject to Section 531
? Signage requirements subject to Article 21
? Dumpster and Enclosures subject to Section 506
? Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
DISTRICT REGULATIONS (a)
Minimum Lot Area: 12,000 sq. ft. Minimum Lot Width: 120 ft.
Max. Building Height: 4 stories, or 50’(e) Maximum Lot Coverage 70%
Minimum Building Setbacks
Front(b) 45 ft.
Side(c) (d) 10 ft. (each side)
Rear(d) 10 ft.
Waterfront 50 ft.
(a) Except as may be permitted pursuant to Section 1870, Planned Unit Development.
(b) Or 78 feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater and subject to Section 502, G
(c) The Planning Commission may approve the location of a building in the G-I district on one or both side lot lines when both the proposed structure and the adjoining structure are designed to accommodate zero-lot line construction.
(d) When a proposed industrial use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a twenty-five (25) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to four (4) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
(e) Subject to Section 1703, E
SECTION 1701 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
The following uses of buildings and land shall be permitted within the G-I District subject to the provisions of Article 22, Site Plan Approval.
A. Accessory buildings, regardless of floor area
B. Accessory uses related to uses permitted by right, subject to Section 516
C. Assembly Operations
D. Community Garden, subject to Section 534
E. Contractor’s Facility
F. Mini/Self-Storage Facility
G. Outdoor Recreation, Park
H. Processing and Manufacturing
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Seventeen G-I General Industrial District
I. Professional Office
J. Professional Service Establishment
K. Research, Laboratory and Testing
L. Shipping Facility
M. Subdivision, plat or condominium of permitted uses.
N. Uses similar to Uses Permitted by Right, subject to Section 530
O. Warehouse, Public
P. Wells, Extraction
Q. Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Accessory, subject to Section 515.G
[Annotation: Wells, Extraction were changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment 07-11, effective 5/29/07]
[Annotation: Windmills, Accessory was added to a Uses Permitted by Right by amendment 08-08, effective 12/11/08]
[Annotation: Community Garden was added as a Permitted Use by Amendment Z11-06, effective 9/25/11]
[Annotation: Windmill Accessory was replaced with Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory by Amendment Z11-08, effective 12/28/11]
SECTION 1702 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the G-I District, as special land uses subject to the provisions of Article 18, Special Use approval.
A. Accessory uses related to special uses, subject to Section 1805
B. Educational Facility, subject to Section 1837
C. Marihuana Grower, subject to Section 1851
D. Marihuana Processer, subject to Section 1851
E. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility, subject to Section 1851
F. Marihuana Secure Transporter, subject to Section 1851
G. Marina, subject to Section 1852
H. Mine, Sand and Gravel, subject to Section 1856
I. Parking Facility, Subject to Section 1865
J. Planned Unit Development, subject to Section 1870
K. Power Generating Facility, subject to Section 1871
L. Uses similar to Uses Permitted by Special Land Use, subject to Section 1886
M. Wind Energy Conversion System, subject to Section 1892
[Annotation: Wells, Extraction were changed from a Special Use to a Permitted Use by Amendment 07-11, effective 5/29/07]
[Annotation: Adaptive Reuse was Deleted as a Special Use by amendment 08-03, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Parking Facility was added to Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
[Annotation: Marihuana Grower, Processer, Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transporter as a special use by amendment Z18-03, effective 3/2/18]
SECTION 1703 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Within the G-I District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
A. Parcel Area – No building or structure shall be established on any parcel less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area.
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Seventeen G-I General Industrial District
B. Parcel Width – For all uses the minimum parcel width shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet.
C. Yard and Setback Requirements - The following requirements shall apply to every parcel, building or structure.
1. Front Yard: The minimum setback shall not be less than four (45) feet from front property line.
2. Side Yards: The minimum width of either side yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard: Except as provided in subparagraph 4 below, the minimum rear setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
4. Waterfront yard: For properties abutting the Manistee Lake and/or the Manistee River Channel, the minimum setback from the ordinary high watermark shall be fifty (50) feet; provided however, that such setback shall not apply to docks, wharves, boat launching ramps, and riverwalks.
5. When a proposed commercial use is contiguous to an existing single-unit or duplex dwelling, the Planning Commission may require and additional buffer consisting of a twenty-five (25) foot side and/or rear setback, a four (4) foot high landscaped berm or solid fence up to four (4) feet in height, or any combination thereof.
D. Building Height. Except as a part of a Planned Unit Development and as set forth below, no structure in the G-I District shall exceed two and four (4) stories in height or fifty (50) feet in height. Buildings or structures in the G-I Districts may be erected or altered to a height of 60 feet, provided that a fire lane shall be provided within twenty (20) feet of the building or structure. Said fire lane shall be paved and shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. All such structures shall require the approval of the Fire Chief.
E. Area: No principle structure shall be constructed in the District which is less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of building area, and is less than twenty feet wide.
F. Lot Coverage: Not more than seventy percent (70%) of the parcel area shall be covered by buildings.
SECTION 1704 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL RENAISSANCE ZONE STANDARDS
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this district to provide for industrial development in certain parts of Manistee City, which have been designated by the Michigan Legislature as Renaissance Zones, pursuant to P.A. 376 of 1996 (being the Michigan Renaissance Zone Act, MCL 125.2681 et. seq.); to provide for alternative permit processing in cooperation with the Manistee County Economic Development Office; to provide for an accelerated schedule for special use permit review and action; to provide protection to Manistee Lake, its water quality, to protect its shoreline from erosion or instability, to minimize the disturbance of heavy metals which may be on the lake bottom; to recognize, encourage and maintain a higher proportion of industries in the central and southern portion of the lake near railroad and shipping access that does not adversely affect the area; to prioritize the use of certain lakefront property on Manistee Lake for industrial businesses which require the use of the lake and require being in the proximity of the lake, (conversely, it is the intent of this district
As Updated thru March 2, 2018
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Seventeen G-I General Industrial District
to encourage the development of businesses which do not need proximity to Manistee Lake to be located in those other landward areas); while at the same time to be consistent with the provisions of Manistee City Master Plan, the Manistee Lake Management Plan of 1982, the Manistee County Land Use Plan and the Manistee County Economic Development Strategy.
B. Renaissance Zone Conditions. Any permitted or special uses in this district shall meet the following conditions to be able to apply for a zoning permit under this ordinance:
1. The entrepreneur will make a minimum investment in improvements (building, equipment, etcetera) on land in the Renaissance Zone.
2. The business enterprise will, as much as possible, result in new employment in Manistee County with a minimum commitment for new hires at a minimum wage of $7.50 per hour.
C. Streamlined Permit Review. Because one of the primary purposes of this district is to accommodate industrial economic development through Michigan's Renaissance Zone program both permitted use and Special Use permits may be applied for on behalf of a client by the Manistee County Economic Development Office as a means to reduce paperwork, streamline the permit process for potential economic development in Manistee County.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
ARTICLE EIGHTEEN
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL USES
SECTION 1800 SPECIAL USES
A Special Use is a use that is permitted within a specified zone district after meeting specific requirements listed in this Article 18. Such uses may not be appropriate in all circumstances, but with certain restrictions or conditions can be made compatible in others. It is the purpose of this Article to name, describe, and list any additional requirements for each individual conditional land use. Due to the nature of the use, Special Uses require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and to the community as a whole.
SECTION 1801 SPECIAL USE PROCEDURES
A Special Use application shall be submitted and processed according to the following procedures. The applicant is strongly encouraged to take advantage of the Optional Sketch Plan Review, as provided for in Section 2202 prior to the submission of an application:
[Annotation: The language to encourage the applicant to use the Optional Sketch Plan Review was added by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
A. Submission of Application. Applications shall be submitted through the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee and any applicant escrow payments as required by Section 2701 and in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by the City Council to cover the costs of processing the application. An application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a Special Use application form. An application, which is incomplete or otherwise not in compliance with this Ordinance, shall be returned to the applicant. No application shall be processed until properly prepared and submitted and all required fees and escrow payments paid in full. [Annotation: Language was deleted that required applications to be placed on an agenda for Planning Commission by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
B. Data Required. For submission to the Planning Commission Twelve (12) copies of an application for a Special Use permit shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator and accompanied by the following documents and information. [Annotation: The language for submission to the Planning Commission was added by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
1. A complete Special Use permit application including the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant and owner(s).
b. Legal description, property parcel number, and street address of the subject parcel of land.
c. Area of the subject parcel of land stated in acres, or if less than one (1) acre, in square feet.
d. Present zoning classification of the parcel.
e. Present and proposed land use.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
f. A letter or signed narrative describing in detail the proposed special use and detailing why the location selected is appropriate.
g. Applicant's statement of the expected effect of the special use on emergency service requirements, schools, storm water systems, sanitary sewer facilities, automobile and truck circulation patterns, and local traffic volumes.
h. Any additional material information necessary to consider the impact of the project upon adjacent properties and the general public as may be required by this ordinance, by the City Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission; including, but not limited to, measures which will be undertaken to control soil erosion, shoreline protection, excessive noise, or adverse impacts of the development on the surrounding properties; elevations on all buildings, including accessory buildings; and, an environmental assessment.
i. A statement and other evidence or proof by the applicant of present and future compliance with the standards required for approval in this Article and other standards imposed by this Ordinance affecting the special use under consideration.
j. Declaration of property ownership, purchase agreement or evidence of agent interest in the parcel that is the subject of the request.
[Annotation: Item J was added by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
2. A complete Site Plan containing all the applicable data required by Article 22, Site Plans.
3. Supporting statements, evidence, data, information and exhibits that address the standards and requirements for assessing Special Use permit applications as provided in Section 1802.
4 Any additional information deemed necessary for the Planning Commission to determine the impact of the proposed Special Use on the adjacent properties, public infrastructure, and community as a whole. Such information may take the form of, but is not limited to, a traffic impact analysis as required by Section 2203, E, 2, an environmental assessment as required by Section 2203, E, 1, a market study as required by Section 2203, E, 3, or reports and/or testimony by officials representing state, county or local departments of public safety (police and fire), health, highways or roads, and/or environment. (Note: the Planning Commission may request this additional information after the Public Hearing on the application.) [Annotation: Note was added by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
5. The Zoning Administrator may, with the approval of the Planning Commission, waive the submission of materials outlined in this Section if such materials are determined to be not applicable to the proposed Special Use or relevant to the consideration of the Planning Commission.
C. Special Use review procedures. An application for Special Use Approval shall be processed as follows:
1. Zoning Administrator Review. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application to determine that the basic information required for a Special Use application has been
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
provided. Any deficiencies shall be noted and the Applicant advised of the additional information required. Upon determining the adequacy of the application, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a Public Hearing within 45 days and forward copy of the application for the Special Use request to the Planning Commission. [Annotation: This section was amended to expedite the application process by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
2. Public Hearing Procedures. The administrator shall notify the following persons, so the notice is sent not less than 15 days before the date that the application will be considered, and the notices sent to:
a. The applicant.
b. The owner of the property, if different
c. The owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
d. Occupants of any structures within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
e. The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the City of Manistee. The notice shall include:
1) The Nature of the Special Use Permit being requested.
2) The property(ies) for which the request has been made.
3) A listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is (are) subject of the Special Use. (Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used).
4) The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date the application will be considered.
5) The date, time and location the public hearing will take place.
6) The address where written comments with signature will be directed prior to the consideration.
7) For members of the Commission only, a complete copy of the special use permit application and supporting documents in the record.
[Annotation: This section was amended to comply with the noticing requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
3. Planning Commission Action. After the Public Hearing and upon review of the merits of the Special Use permit application, the Planning Commission shall review the application and any reports of City planning personnel, planning or engineering or other consultants. If the Planning Commission determines additional information is needed to reach a decision, the applicant shall furnish all required information in a timely manner. Upon review of all relevant information, the Planning Commission shall reach a decision
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Such decision shall be reached not later than the second regularly scheduled meeting following the public hearing on the application or receipt of any additional information requested unless the applicant and the Planning Commission mutually agree to extend the time allowed for the Planning Commission to reach a decision. However, the Planning Commission shall render a decision within 30 days of an applicant’s written request for a determination whether or not all requested information has been submitted. The Planning Commission's decision shall be incorporated in a motion containing conclusions reached relative to the proposed Special Use which motion shall provide the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. [Annotation: This section was amended to clarify the time allotted to make a determination by the Planning Commission by amendment 07-12, effective 5/29/07]
4. Basis for Action. In arriving at their decision, the Planning Commission shall refer to and be guided by those standards set forth in this Article. If the facts regarding the Special Use do not establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the standards and requirements set forth in this Article can and will be met, the application shall be denied.
5. Attachment of Conditions. Subject to the terms of Section 1802, B, the Planning Commission may prescribe conditions of approval deemed necessary for the protection of the general welfare, individual property rights, and to ensure that the purposes of this Ordinance are met.
D. Issuance of a Special Use permit. Upon approval by the Planning Commission, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the Special Use permit. It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to monitor compliance with the terms, conditions and restrictions of any Special Use permit and take any enforcement action necessary in the event of a violation of the Special Use permit.
E. Appeals. No decision or condition related to a Special Use application shall appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An appeal of a Special Use decision or condition may be taken to Circuit Court.
F. Duration of Approval. The Special Use permit shall become effective upon Planning Commission approval.
1. The Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall not issue a Building Permit and Land Use Permit until approval of such Special Use permit and the satisfaction of any conditions pertaining to such approval.
2. Until a building permit has been granted pursuant to the Special Use permit, there shall be no construction or excavation of said land, nor there any use of the land in anticipation of the Special Use unless such use is incorporated in the conditions of approval adopted by the Planning Commission.
3. Land subject to a Special Use permit may not be used or occupied for such special use until after a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, or the approval of the Zoning Administrator has been granted for uses not subject to the requirements for a certificate of occupancy.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
G. Amendments. Amendments to Special Use permits shall be handled in the same manner as the initial Special Use permit application. Minor non-substantive changes to a site plan in accordance with Section 2208 may be made to an existing Special Use permit with the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
H. Transfers. Prior to completion of construction related to a special use, the special Use permit, with any and all associated benefits, conditions and required security may be transferred to a new owner only upon the sale or transfer of the property in question and only upon the approval of the Planning Commission. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the Planning Commission is satisfied that the proposed owner has similar qualifications and capabilities as the approved owner. The responsibility for affecting the transfer shall be the original owner. The original owner, upon transferring the Special Use permit, shall advise the Zoning Administrator of said transfer in order to insure the continued validity of the permit, compliance with security, and other conditions. Following completion of construction and commencement of the special use, the special use permit shall run with the land, subject to Section 1801, I, 4, pertaining to abandonment.
I. Expiration. A Special Use permit shall be valid for as long as the approved use continues in accordance with the terms and conditions of the approved permit. The Special Use permit will expire on the occurrence of one or more of the following conditions:
1. If replaced or superseded by a subsequent permitted use or Special Use permit.
2. If the applicant requests the rescinding of the Special Use permit.
3. If a condition of approval included stipulation to expire the Special Use permit by a certain date.
4. If the use is abandoned, moved or vacated for a period of one year.
J. Violations. Any violation of the terms, conditions or limitations of a Special Use permit shall be cause for revocation or suspension of the permit. The Planning Commission may either revoke or suspend, pending correction of the violation, any Special Use permit. The act to revoke or suspend the permit shall occur after giving notice to the permit holder, specifying the alleged violation(s) and disclosing when a hearing will be held on the matter. The notice shall be delivered by registered mail. Any interested party may appear in person or by attorney at the hearing. The act to revoke or suspend the permit shall occur after or at the hearing on the matter. Before revoking or suspending the permit, the Planning Commission shall make a finding that a material violation of the Special Use permit exists. The permit holder shall be given reasonable opportunity to correct the violation(s).
SECTION 1802 SPECIAL USE REVIEW STANDARDS
A. General Review Standards. The Planning Commission, before acting on a Special Use permit application, shall employ and be guided by standards which shall be consistent with and promote the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, and ensure that the land use or activity authorized shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
The Planning Commission shall review each application and take action to approve a special use application only if it finds that such Special Use meets each of the following standards, together with any and all Special Use standards reflected for the zoning district, and any and all applicable specific review standards found in this Article. The Planning Commission shall find adequate evidence that each use at its proposed location will be consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare of the City and shall comply with the following standards:
1. The Special Use shall be consistent with the adopted City of Manistee Master Plan.
2. The Special Use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be consistent with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and such use will not change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed.
3. The Special Use shall not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future uses in the same general vicinity and in the community as a whole.
4. The Special Use shall be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, storm water drainage, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities, and schools; or persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall provide adequately for such services.
5. The Special Use shall not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community.
6. The Special Use shall not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any person, property or general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, toxic emissions, fumes, glare, or odors.
7. The Special Use shall meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance; be related to the standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration; and will be in compliance with these standards.
B. Conditions and Approval Standards. The Planning Commission may establish reasonable conditions of approval for a Special Use permit. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, conditions necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Further, the Planning Commission may adopt specific review standards for any proposed Special Use proposed if this Article 18 does not provide such specific review standards for such use. Any such conditions imposed or specific review standards employed shall:
1. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, and the social and economic wellbeing of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and land owners in the vicinity of the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 7
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
3. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, be related to the standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards.
C. Specific Review Standards. In addition to the general review standards set forth in Section 1802, A, of this Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall apply the specific review standards set forth in this Article 18 for each named Special Use. In the event this Article 18 does not set forth specific review standards for the Special Use under consideration, pursuant to Section 530, the Zoning Administrator may propose, and the Planning Commission may incorporate specific review standards for such use. Provided, however, that any such standards adopted and any such conditions applied shall conform with the requirements of Section 1802, B, herein.
SECTION 1803 RESERVED
SECTION 1804 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS WITH FOOTPRINT GREATER THAN THE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
A. Definition. An accessory structure, as defined herein, which is a supplementary building on the same parcel as the principal building, or part of the principal building, with a ground floor area or building footprint greater than the ground floor area or building footprint of the principal building on the parcel.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. In all zoning districts on parcels of less than one (1) acre, the floor area of an accessory building as defined in this Section shall not exceed the ground floor area or building footprint of the principal building by more than fifty percent (50%).
2. In all zoning districts, except the Industrial district, the following standards shall be applied:
a. On parcels of more than one (1) acre, but less than five (5) acres, the floor area of an accessory building as defined in this Section shall not exceed the ground floor area or building footprint of the principal building by more than one hundred percent (100%).
b. On parcels of five (5) acres, or more, the floor area of an accessory building as defined in this Section shall not exceed the ground floor area or building footprint of the principal building by more than two hundred percent (200%).
3. Only within the Industrial district on parcels larger than one (1) acre, the ground floor area or footprint of accessory buildings may exceed the area of the principal building without limitation, providing all other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are met.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 8
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
4. The floor area limitations of this Section shall be applied cumulatively for all accessory buildings on a parcel.
5. Accessory buildings as defined in this Section shall comply with all yard, setback and building height standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1805 ACCESSORY USES, RELATED TO USES PERMITTED
A. Definition. A use naturally and normally incidental to, and subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to, the principal use of the land or buildings and located on the same parcel as the principal use. [Annotation: Language was added “and located on the same parcel as the principal use” by amendment 08-01, effective 2/29/08]
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. A determination of whether a proposed accessory Special Use is related to uses permitted shall be made by the Planning Commission upon the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator. In preparing such a recommendation, the Zoning Administrator shall evaluate the proposed use in terms of the potential generation of traffic, congestion, noise, odors, dust, litter, and similar impacts. In addition, the proposed use shall be evaluated to determine the degree to which it may support or conflict with other uses permitted.
2. For purposes of interpreting Accessory Uses Related to Uses Permitted;
a. A use may be regarded as incidental or insubstantial if the viability of the principal use is not dependent in any significant way on the accessory use.
b. To be commonly associated with a principal use it is not necessary for an accessory use to be connected with such principal use more times than not, but only that the association of such accessory use with such principal use takes place with sufficient frequency that there is common acceptance of their relatedness.
3. An accessory use shall not generate any effects on neighboring properties, including, but not limited to, noise, parking, traffic, glare, or dust, greater than or more burdensome than such impacts from the main use on the property.
4. Where an Accessory Use Related to Uses Permitted is proposed, and regulations are contained in this Ordinance for said use, those regulations shall be met; provided, the Planning Commission may impose additional conditions on approval, to protect the health, wellbeing, safety, and economy of the City and its residents.
SECTION 1806 RESERVED
SECTION 1807 ADAPTIVE REUSE
A. Definition. The development of a new use for a building originally designed for a special or specific purpose which has become obsolete. Adaptive Reuse is the redevelopment, including expansion, into uses which might not otherwise be permitted in a Zoning District.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 9
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
Such uses may include residential, retail, office, eating and drinking establishments and service uses.
B. Statement of Intent: There are many older buildings throughout the community which have architectural significance or historic significance, but due to their size and or location may no longer be suited for their intended purpose. This Section attempts to provide flexibility in maintaining the viability of these resources to the community.
C. Regulations and Conditions: A building originally designed and constructed for another purpose may be adaptively reused in accordance with the following standards and conditions.
1. The Adaptive Reuse of a building in the C-3 District shall meet the following standards:
a. The buildings outside the Manistee Commercial Historic District shall be consistent in scale and exterior materials with nearby existing buildings.
b. Prior to application for special land use approval under this Section, proposed exterior modifications of buildings located in the Manistee Commercial Historic District must receive approval from the Historic District Commission for all exterior modifications.
c. For buildings fronting on River Street, at least the first 25 feet of depth at street level of the building shall be dedicated to Retail, Eating or Drinking Establishment, or Personal Service Establishment.
d. Condominium bylaws and master deeds and/or building leases shall provide a general description of the types of uses proposed to occupy retail, service or office spaces within the building and the procedures to be followed to accommodate changes in the nature of businesses to occupy such spaces. The Planning Commission may consider and rely upon such documents, or if unavailable at the time of application, written descriptions of the proposed content of such documents, in reaching a finding that proposed retail, service or offices uses will be generally compatible with residential uses in the building.
e. Parking shall be located at the rear or side of the building or within an enclosed building and shall be appropriately buffered or screened. Required parking shall be provided within two hundred (200) feet of the building. One (1) space shall be provided per dwelling unit.
f. The number of dwellings permitted in an adaptive reuse building shall not exceed one dwelling for each 1,500 square feet of floor Area.
g. All dwellings shall provide a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of living space.
h. Dwellings in the building shall be accessed by a secure entrance dedicated for the exclusive use of building residents and guests.
2. The Adaptive Reuse of a building in the P-D, R-1, R-2, R-3, W-F, C-1, C-2, Districts shall meet the following standards:
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 10
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
a. The building shall be consistent in scale and exterior materials with nearby existing buildings.
b. Buildings proposed for adaptive reuse may include retail, office, eating and drinking establishments and service uses. Such uses shall be compatible with neighboring uses and offer services to the residents of the immediate neighborhood and/or the general public. Condominium bylaws and master deeds and/or building leases shall provide a general description of the types of uses proposed to occupy retail, service or office spaces within the building and the procedures to be followed to accommodate changes in the nature of businesses to occupy such spaces. The Planning Commission may consider and rely upon such documents, or if unavailable at the time of application, written descriptions of the proposed content of such documents, in reaching a finding that proposed retail, service or offices uses will be generally compatible with residential uses in the building.
c. Parking shall comply with the requirements of Section 514. Parking shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the building.
d. All dwellings shall provide a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of living space.
e. Dwellings in the building shall be accessed by a secure entrance dedicated for the exclusive use of building residents and guests.
f. The minimum lot size shall be consistent with the District standards for Multiple Unit Dwellings.
g. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
3. Signage shall comply with the requirements of Article 21.
[Annotation: Section 1807 Adaptive Reuse was amended by Ordinance 08-03, effective 2/29/08] [Annotation: PD was added by Amendment Z12-08; effective 10/27/12]
SECTION 1808 ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY
A. Definition. A governmental or non-governmental establishment having as its principal function the receiving of adults for foster care. It includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults, who are aged, emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An Adult Foster Care Small Group Home shall be an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity of more than six (6) not more than twelve (12) adults who shall be provided foster care. An adult foster care large group home shall be an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity of thirteen (13) or more adults who shall be provided foster care. Adult foster care does not include any of the following:
1. Nursing homes and hospitals licensed Article 17 of Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended;
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 11
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
a. Hospital for the mentally ill or a facility for the developmentally disabled operated by the department of mental health under Act 258 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended;
b. County infirmary operated by a county department of social services under section 55 of Act 280 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended;
c. A child caring institution, children’s camp, foster family home, or foster family group home licensed or approved under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended;
d. An establishment commonly described as an alcohol or a substance abuse rehabilitation center, a residential facility for persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions, a maternity home, or a hotel or rooming house which does not provide or offer to provide foster care; and
e. A veteran’s facility created by Act 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, as amended.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Adult Foster Care Facilities serving more than six (6) residents shall not be considered a single family dwelling.
2. Adult Foster Care Facilities shall, as a condition of Special Use approval, at all times maintain all valid state and local licenses.
3. An adult foster care facility shall not be located within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of any other adult foster care facility.
4. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
5. A large group home shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
6. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
7. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1809 RESERVED
SECTION 1810 ANIMAL GROOMING FACILITY
A. Definition. Any property, structure, building, or premise in or on which pets and other domesticated animals are bathed and/or groomed for commercial gain, but excluding any veterinary or clinical services.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The applicant shall set forth procedures for managing wastes and no animal wastes, biohazard materials or byproducts shall be buried or incinerated on site.
2. The applicant shall disclose the species and breed of pets to be groomed on the premises and the Planning Commission may condition any special use approval on said
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 12
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
disclosure. The Planning Commission may further establish restrictions on the species and breed to be groomed to those least likely to present a hazard or nuisance in the neighborhood.
3. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line.
4. Such facilities shall not incorporate any overnight boarding services.
5. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
6. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
7. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
8. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
SECTION 1811 AUTOMOBILE REPAIR FACILITY
A. Definition. Any establishment, building, premises, or land where commercial services are furnished involving automobile and truck repair, maintenance, and painting for the general public, and where rental, leasing, storage and salvage operations and parking services are incidental to the principal activities.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Dismantled, wrecked or inoperable vehicles or any vehicle parts or scrap of any kind shall not be kept outdoors where they are visible from any adjoining property or right-of-way. The Planning Commission may require an opaque fence up to eight (8) feet in height and/or an evergreen landscape buffer not less than eight (8) feet in height at time of planting to buffer any vehicles from neighboring uses or passers-by.
2. Not more than two (2) vehicles shall be parked on site for the purpose of selling or renting such vehicles.
3. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
4. All equipment including hydraulic hoists, pits, lubrication and repair facilities shall be entirely enclosed within a building. No outdoor storage of merchandise or equipment shall be permitted.
5. All hazardous material storage and handling shall be conducted in accord with Section 520 hereof, and with any applicable State or Federal requirements.
6. All repair and maintenance activities shall be performed entirely within an enclosed building.
7. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for such uses consistent with the character of the land uses in the vicinity.
8. All signs shall be in accordance with Article 21 of this Zoning Ordinance.
9. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 13
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
11. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1812 RESERVED
SECTION 1813 BED AND BREAKFAST
A. Definition. An owner-occupied residential building wherein up to six (6) rooms or suites are offered, for compensation, as overnight lodging for transient guests and which may provide one or more meals per day for overnight guests only.
B. Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Planning Commission that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. Basic Standards. It is the intent to establish reasonable standards for Bed and Breakfast establishments to assure that:
a. The property is suitable for transient lodging facilities. In this connection, a Bed and Breakfast establishment shall meet the requirements of the City of Manistee Rental Property Code (Chapter 1482 of the City of Manistee Codified Ordinances) and shall be subject to periodic inspections as provided in said code.
b. The use is not incompatible with other allowed uses in the vicinity.
c. The impact of the establishment is no greater than that of a private home with houseguests.
d. A bed and breakfast shall maintain a smoke detector in proper working order in every sleeping room and a fire extinguisher in proper working order on every floor in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping rooms.
e. All signs shall be in accordance with Article 21 of this Zoning Ordinance.
f. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
g. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
h. A Bed and Breakfast establishment shall be regulated under the terms of this Section 1813, and not as a home occupation.
[Annotation: C-2 was added to number of sleeping rooms (6) by Amendment Z10-02, effective 10/30/10] [Annotation: Item h. which established the number of sleeping rooms in each zoning district was deleted by Amendment Z12-06; effective 10/27/12]
2. Specific Standards. The following requirements together with any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance shall be complied with:
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 14
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
a. The minimum lot size shall be consistent with the District minimum for Single Family Dwellings.
b. Parking; Two (2) for the use of the owner/occupant and one (1) off-street space per rental sleeping room. Parking shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the building.
c. The establishment shall have at least two (2) exits to the outdoors.
d. The establishment shall be the principal dwelling unit on the property and shall be owner-occupied at all times.
e. The rooms utilized for sleeping shall be a part of the primary residential use and not specifically constructed for rental purposes. Provided, however, that carriage houses in existence as of the effective date of this section, and located on the same parcel as a Bed & Breakfast may be utilized for sleeping rooms, in accordance with this Section.
f. The Bed and Breakfast shall not alter the residential character of the building or structure.
g. The rental sleeping rooms shall have a minimum size of one hundred-twenty (120) square feet for one (1) or two (2) occupants with an additional fifty (50) square feet for each occupant to a maximum of four (4) occupants per room.
h. Special Use approval shall not be granted if the essential character of the lot or structure in terms of traffic generation or appearance will be changed substantially.
i. A site plan shall include a floor plan layout of the proposed structure drawn to a scale of not less than 1” = 8’ that shows the specific layout of the proposed facility in accord with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
j. The permit holder shall secure and maintain all required state and local permits.
k. No conference/meeting room facilities will be permitted.
l. The Bed and Breakfast shall employ no more than three (3) persons in addition to the owners and their immediate family, including spouses, siblings and children.
m. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate and shall not be visible from lot lines. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1814 BILLBOARD
A. Definition. An outdoor sign used as advertising for hire, e.g., on which display space is made available to parties other than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel in exchange for a rent, fee, or other consideration. [Annotation: Definition of “Billboard” was amended by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
B. Intent. It is the intent of this Section 1814 to:
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 15
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
1. Protect the City’s distinctive community character and natural landscape
2. Protect scenic resources and view sheds located within the City,
3. Enhance the economic base of the community associated with tourism and the community’s overall economic well-being by protecting natural and scenic resources
4. Satisfy the public need for commercial information provided by billboards while promoting aesthetic and balanced use of lands and scenic resources along public rights-of-way in the City
C. Regulations and Conditions.
1. A Billboard may be considered an accessory use under Section 516 hereof if located on a parcel with an existing use. If located on a vacant parcel of land, such parcel shall meet the lot area and width requirements of the C-1 district shall be considered a principal structure on a parcel of land.
2. It is hereby determined that a reasonable number of billboards provide the traveling public and the community with helpful information and a reasonable number of billboards can be important to the economic well-being of local and regional businesses. It is further determined that an excess number of billboards in the community will detract from the aesthetic character and scenic nature of the community and present the traveling public with confusing visual clutter rather than helpful information. The Planning Commission shall not approve a special land use application for a new billboard in the City of Manistee if such approval would result in there being more than ten (10) billboard structures or more than nineteen (19) billboard faces in the City.
[Annotation: for the purposes of establishing this maximum number both permitted billboards and lawfully constructed nonconforming billboards were counted. The billboards that were in place on February 21, 2006 when the Ordinance was adopted were eight (8) on US-31, one (1) on River Street, and one (1) on Fifth Street.]
[Annotation: This section was amended to correct the number of billboards and annotate how the number was established by amendment 07-13, effective 5/29/07]
3. Not more than two (2) billboards may be located per one-quarter linear mile of highway/roadway regardless that such billboards may be located on different sides of the highway. The one-quarter linear mile measurement shall not be limited to the boundaries of the City of Manistee where the road extends beyond such boundaries. Double-faced billboard structures (i.e., structures having back-to-back billboard faces) and V-type billboard structures showing only one face visible to traffic proceeding from any given direction on a highway shall be considered as one billboard. Otherwise, billboard structures having more than one billboard face, including billboard structures with tandem (side-by-side) or stacked (one above the other) billboard faces, shall be considered as two billboards and shall be prohibited in accordance with the minimum spacing requirement set forth in subparagraph 4 below.
4. No billboard shall be located within six hundred sixty (660) feet of another billboard abutting either side of the same highway.
5. No billboard shall be located closer than the required front yard setback from the street right-of-way or a side yard setback from any interior boundary lines of the premises on
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 16
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
which the billboard is located.
6. A site plan shall be submitted illustrating distances and spacing of existing billboards, residential districts and uses, and setbacks.
7. The surface display area (sign face) of any side of a billboard may not exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet and shall be continually maintained in good condition.
8. The height of a billboard shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet above the natural grade of the ground on which the billboard is established with not less than ten (10) feet of clearance beneath the sign face.
9. No billboard shall be placed on top of, cantilevered or otherwise suspended above the roof of any building.
10. A billboard may be illuminated, provided such illumination is confined to the surface of the sign and is so located as to avoid glare, upward light or reflection onto any portion of an adjacent street or highway, property, the path of on-coming vehicles, or any adjacent premises. In no event shall any billboard have flashing or intermittent lights, nor shall the lights be permitted to rotate or oscillate. A billboard shall not include an Electronic Message Board as defined, but may include an Electronic Sign as defined, provided that the area of such Electronic Sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
11. A billboard must be constructed in such a fashion that it will withstand all wind and vibration forces, which can normally be expected to occur in the vicinity. A billboard must be maintained so as to assure proper alignment of structure, continued structural soundness, and continued readability of message.
12. A billboard established within a business, commercial, or industrial area, as defined in the "Highway Advertising Act of 1972" (PA 106 of 1972, as amended) bordering interstate highway, freeways or primary highways as defined in said Act shall, in addition to complying with the above conditions, also comply with all applicable provisions of said Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder, as such may from time to time be amended.
SECTION 1815 RESERVED
SECTION 1816 CAR WASH
A. Definition. Any facility or premises or portions thereof used for washing automobiles, including, manual wash facilities, coin washes, and those with automatic and semiautomatic application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water, and forced air and/or heat for drying.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. All such facilities shall be connected to a public sewer system and all wastewater discharge facilities shall be designed and maintained in accordance with the City of Manistee Industrial Pre-Treatment program to properly manage excess loading to the City’s wastewater collection and treatment system.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 17
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2. All washing activities shall be carried out within a building.
3. No vacuum equipment shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from any property line which abuts a property zoned or used for residential purposes.
4. Noise generated on site from any source shall not exceed 60 decibels measured at any property line.
5. Adequate drainage shall be provided, to prevent flooding, freezing of runoff, and environmental damage.
6. Manual and coin Car Washes shall provide adequate space for drying and waxing vehicles.
7. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that vehicle stacking areas for the drive-through facility are adequate to handle the highest volume likely at the facility without encroaching on the public right-of-way or the drive aisles, parking or pedestrian areas on site.
8. The applicant shall demonstrate that no litter and debris will travel off-site. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
9. All parking areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
10. All signs shall comply with Article 21 of this Ordinance.
11. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
12. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
13. A car wash shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
SECTION 1817 CEMETERY
A. Definition. Any one (1) or a combination of more than one (1) of the following (as per MCL 456.522): a burial ground for earth interment; a mausoleum for crypt entombment; a crematory for the cremation of human remains; and a columbarium for the deposit of cremated remains.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Cemeteries shall be established in compliance with Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended, Public Act 88 of 1875, as amended, and other applicable state laws.
2. A proposed cemetery that provides a chapel or other enclosure for graveside, internment and committal services shall be appropriately designed to accommodate occasional gatherings, including necessary restroom facilities and utilities.
3. A landscape buffer of ten (10) feet shall be provided where a Cemetery abuts a residentially zoned or used parcel.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 18
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
4. The use shall be so arranged that adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area.
5. A cemetery shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
6. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be designed so as to minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and funeral processions or visitors entering or leaving the site.
7. No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a property line that abuts any residentially used or zoned property.
8. All parking areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
9. All signs shall comply with Article 21 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1818 RESERVED
SECTION 1819 RESERVED
[Annotation: Communication Tower was DELETED as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1820 CONTRACTOR’S FACILITY
A. Definition. A facility, building, structure, grounds, or portion thereof used to store tools, trucks, equipment, supplies, resources, and materials used by building construction professionals, contractors, and subcontractors. Such facilities typically will include outdoor storage, assembly or staging areas.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Any outdoor storage area shall conform to the yard, setback, and height standards of the zoning district in which it is located. Within the R-3, C-1, C-2 and C-3 districts, no outdoor storage shall be permitted except within yard provided with fencing or other screening satisfactory to the Planning Commission.
2. Uses shall produce no detectable objectionable dust, fumes, or odors at any property line.
3. All travel surfaces shall be paved, as a condition of approval.
4. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
5. Cranes, booms or other extensions on equipment, trucks or other vehicles parked on site shall be stored in the lowest possible configuration.
6. There shall be no off-site discharge of storm water except to an approved drainage system in accord with the City’s engineering requirements.
7. Noise generated on site from any source shall not exceed 60 decibels measured at any property line.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 19
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
8. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for such uses consistent with the character of the land uses in the vicinity.
9. Any hazardous materials proposed to be stored, used or handled on site shall be disclosed by the applicant and all such storage, use and handling shall be conducted in accordance with Section 520 hereof, and any applicable State or Federal requirements.
10. All signs shall be in accordance with Article 21 of this Zoning Ordinance.
11. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
12. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1821 RESERVED
SECTION 1822 RESERVED
[Annotation: Section 1822 Convenience Store, with Fuel Pumps was deleted by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 1823 CONVENIENCE STORE
A. Definition. Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, and freshly prepared foods, such as salads and sandwiches and beverages, for on-site or off-site consumption.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for Convenience Stores to protect the character of the land uses in the vicinity.
2. The site plan shall include measures satisfactory to the Planning Commission to control blowing trash, dust or debris from the facility.
3. Convenience stores located in the R-2 and R-3 districts shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
4. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. Such facilities shall at all times be maintained in a manner consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
7. All parking areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
8. All signs shall comply with Article 21 of this Ordinance.
9. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
[Annotation: “Without Fuel Pumps” deleted from title and Item B.1 by Amendment Z17-04, effective 6/6/17]
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 20
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1824 RESERVED
SECTION 1825 DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL
A. Definition. A commercial facility which is not a private home and in which at least thirteen (13) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. All required state and local licensing shall be maintained at all times.
2. All outdoor areas used for care and play area shall have appropriate fencing for the safety of the children. Such fence shall consist of a 6-foot high opaque fence along the area adjoining another residence, and a 4-foot to 6-foot high fence in the rear yard and in the side yard up to the front building line. Play areas abutting a public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
3. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
4. Such facilities shall be located at least 1,500 feet from any one of the following:
a. A licensed or pre-existing operating group or commercial day-care home.
b. An adult foster care facility.
c. A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to 7 or more people.
d. A community correction center resident home halfway house or similar facility under jurisdiction of the County Sheriff or the Department of Corrections.
5. Such facilities shall at all times be maintained in a manner consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
6. The Planning Commission shall not prohibit evening operations completely, but may establish limitations on hours of operation and/or activities between the hours of 10PM and 6AM.
7. All parking areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
8. Commercial Day Care facilities shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
9. All signs shall comply with Article 21 of this Ordinance.
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 21
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1826 DAY CARE, GROUP
A. Definition. A private home in which at least seven (7), but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. All required state and local licensing shall be maintained at all times.
2. All outdoor areas used for care and play area shall have appropriate fencing for the safety of the children. Such fence shall consist of a 6-foot high opaque fence along the area adjoining another residence, and a 4-foot to 6-foot high fence in the rear yard and in the side yard up to the front building line. Play areas abutting a public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
3. Such facilities shall be located at least 1,500 feet from any one of the following:
a. A licensed or pre-existing operating group or commercial day-care home.
b. An adult foster care facility.
c. A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to 7 or more people.
d. A community correction center resident home halfway house or similar facility under jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections.
4. Such facilities shall at all times be maintained in a manner consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
5. The Planning Commission shall not prohibit evening operations completely, but may establish limitations on hours of operation and/or activities between the hours of 10PM and 6AM.
6. All parking areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
7. All signs shall comply with Article 21 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1827 RESERVED
SECTION 1828 DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT
A. Definition. An establishment that by design, physical facilities, services or by packaging procedures encourages or permits some or all customers to receive services or goods while remaining in their vehicles.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 22
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
1. All automobile queuing for a drive-through window shall be separated from other on-site traffic patterns.
2. Pedestrian areas shall be clearly marked.
3. The drive-through lane(s) shall be designed to accommodate a full-size passenger vehicle pulling a recreation-vehicle trailer.
4. Stacking areas shall be designed in accordance with Section 514.K of this Ordinance. [Annotation: Stacking Areas was amended by Amendment Z17-03, adopted 6/16/17]
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
7. Any commercial establishment with a drive-through facility which adjoins a property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be effectively screened from view from such property.
8. All parking areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
9. All signs shall comply with Article 21 of this Ordinance.
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1829 DUPLEX
A. Definition. A dwelling designed for or occupied by two families only, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. In any subdivision or site condominium, the Planning Commission may establish a limit on the number of duplexes within said development.
2. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
3. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1830 RESERVED
SECTION 1831 DWELLING, ACCESSORY
A. Definition. A dwelling located in an accessory structure on the same parcel as another, single unit dwelling.
B. Regulations.
1. Intent. The intent of this Section is to permit the use of accessory buildings as an accessory dwelling unit where such use will not be out of character with the surrounding
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 23
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
neighborhood. In the R-2 and R-3 districts, the Planning Commission may approve the use of an existing accessory structure as a dwelling unit subject to the following requirements.
2. A proposed accessory dwelling shall be located on a parcel with not less than 10,000 square feet in area and not less than 80 feet of width.
3. Such accessory dwellings shall conform to all dimensional, structural and maintenance requirements of this ordinance, the City of Manistee Building Code and the Housing Code.
4. Accessory dwellings shall have a minimum of 400 square feet, and no more than 1,000 square feet of living area.
5. Not more than one (1) accessory dwelling shall be permitted on any one (1) parcel.
6. At least one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for an accessory dwelling.
SECTION 1832 DWELLING, MULTIPLE UNIT
A. Definition. A building which is a dwelling designed for or occupied by three or more families, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Parking areas intended for the use of residents of Multiple Unit Dwellings shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the building.
2. Within the R-2 district Multiple Unit Dwellings shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
3. In the C-3 District, dwelling units shall not be located on the street level or basement except in those locations where resident privacy can be provided by building design, courtyards, topography or similar design; such as daylight or walkout dwelling units along the riverfront or into a secured and private side or rear yard. Provided, however, that in a mixed-use building fronting on River Street, at least the first 20 feet of depth at street level of the building shall be dedicated to a commercial use. [Annotation: Item 3 was amended by amendment Z17-07, effective 7/28/17]
4. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
5. No multiple unit structure shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet from any other multiple unit structure located on the same parcel.
6. Groups of Multiple Unit Dwellings located on one parcel shall have common ownership. For the purposes of this paragraph, a condominium unit shall be considered a single parcel.
7. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
8. Safe pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns shall be established in group building developments, as determined by the Planning Commission.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 24
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
9. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
10. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
11. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1833 RESERVED
SECTION 1834 DWELLING, SINGLE UNIT
A. Definition. A structure or building is used exclusively for human habitation by one (1) family and so designed and arranged as to provide living, sleeping, sanitary, and kitchen accommodations.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Within the C-3 district, new single-unit dwellings shall be prohibited. Provided, however, the Planning Commission may permit as special land uses, Planned Unit Developments which may include including any number of new, single-unit dwellings within any portion of the C-3 district, in accordance with the terms of Section 1870, hereof. Provided, further that single unit dwellings in existence at the time of the adoption of this Section shall not be considered non-conforming, but shall be treated as special land uses.
2. New single dwelling units located in the R-4 and C-2 districts shall incorporate landscaping or other buffers satisfactory to the Planning Commission to screen the dwelling unit from adjoining higher density residential or commercial development.
SECTION 1835 EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT
A. Definition. A retail establishment selling food and drink for consumption on the premises, including restaurants, taverns, coffee houses, bakeries, lunch counters, refreshment stands and similar facilities selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate on-site consumption or for take-out.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Such facilities shall maintain, at all times, all required state and local licenses and permits.
2. Such facilities shall be located and designed such that no objectionable noise in excess of 60 decibels shall be carried onto adjoining property zoned for, or occupied by, residential uses.
3. Such facilities shall be located and designed such that no objectionable odor or fumes shall be carried onto property located in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts.
4. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. so that any refuse or dumpster shall not be visible from any building,
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 25
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
dwelling, adjacent property, or street. The site plan shall include measures satisfactory to the Planning Commission to control blowing trash, dust or debris from the facility. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
5. The Planning Commission may establish reasonable hours of operation for eating and drinking establishments.
6. Within the R-2 and R-3 districts, Eating and Drinking Establishments shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
7. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
8. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
9. All parking shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 514 of this Ordinance.
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1836 RESERVED
SECTION 1837 EDUCATIONAL FACILITY
A. Definition. Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge, including a pre-school, an elementary, middle, or high school, college or university, trade school and the like, whether public or private, that meets state requirements, where applicable.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. An education facility shall have its primary access directly from a paved, all-season road.
2. All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed with a durable fence six (6) feet in height, or four (4) feet in height if adjoining a right-of-way. Provided, however, the Planning Commission may permit chain link or wrought iron fences up to six (6) feet in height adjoining a right-of-way upon a finding that such fences are necessary for the safety of pupils of the facility.
3. All required state and local licenses, charters, permits and similar approvals shall be issued prior to occupancy for any educational purposes and shall be maintained in good standing.
4. In the R-2 and R-3 districts, an Educational Facility shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
5. The Planning Commission may establish standards to limit noise generated by an Educational Facility to no more than 60 decibels at the property line, taking into account the nature of the facility, the surrounding uses and zoning and the probable frequency of objectionable noise levels that may be generated by the use.
6. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
7. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 26
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
8. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
9. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
10. An Educational Facility that incorporates any gymnasium, theater, auditorium, or large meeting space meeting the definition of a Large Place of Public Assembly, it shall also comply with the requirements pertaining to Large Places of Public Assembly, Section 1868 herein.
SECTION 1838 FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
A. Definition. Commercial establishments such as banks, savings and loans, credit agencies, investment companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, security and commodities exchanges, and insurance agencies.
B. Regulations and Conditions. Financial Institutions proposed within the R-3 District shall be subject to the following requirements.
1. The minimum parcel area shall be not less than the required minimum parcel area for a single-family dwelling in the district.
2. A financial institution shall adhere to the dimensional standards of the R-3 District, provided that no side setback is less than fifteen (15) feet.
3. All parking areas that abut property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be effectively screened with landscaping or an approved fencing and all landscaping and buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Ordinance.
4. Special land use approval shall not be granted for a financial institution proposed to be located within an existing structure in a residential district if the essential character of the lot or structure in terms of traffic generation or appearance will be changed substantially. However, any proposed Financial Institution shall be designed to be comparable with existing building heights and uses in the vicinity, and shall be architecturally similar to adjacent homes.
5. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
6. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
7. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
8. A Financial Institution shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
9. In the R-3 District, no drive-through facilities or activities shall be permitted. The proposed Financial Institution shall not adversely affect traffic circulation and access in the surrounding area.
SECTION 1839 RESERVED
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 27
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1840 GALLERY OR MUSEUM
A. Definition. Repositories of objects connected with literature, art, history, culture, or science collected and displayed for the edification, amusement, entertainment, or education of patrons and consumers.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for such uses consistent with the character of the land uses in the vicinity.
2. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use does not significantly affect traffic circulation and transportation safety in the area in which it is proposed.
4. A Gallery or Museum shall front on and be accessed from an key street segment, as defined herein, unless the Planning Commission finds that the proposed facility will generate minimal traffic impact within the vicinity.
5. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
6. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
7. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1841 GASOLINE STATION
A. Definition. Any building, structure, or land, or portion thereof, and any associated appurtenances, intended and used for the retail sale, supply, and dispensing of fuels, lubricants and similar products for motor vehicles.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for Gasoline Stations to protect the character of the land uses in the vicinity.
2. A Gasoline Station that includes a Convenience Store shall meet the standards of Section 1823 hereof.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Commission proper design and licensing measures as required by State and federal statutory and regulatory authority.
4. All buildings, pump islands and other facilities shall be located in conformance with the yard and setback requirements of the zoning district.
5. Dismantled, wrecked, or immobile vehicles shall not be permitted to be stored on site.
6. No vehicles shall be parked on site for the purpose of selling or renting such vehicles.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 28
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
7. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
8. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. The site plan shall include measures satisfactory to the Planning Commission to contain blowing dust, trash and debris from leaving the site. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
9. Such facilities shall at all times be maintained in a manner consistent with the character of the surrounding uses.
10. Any hazardous materials proposed to be stored, used or handled on site shall be disclosed by the applicant and all such storage, use and handling shall be conducted in accordance with Section 520 hereof, and any applicable State or Federal requirements.
11. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
12. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
13. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1842 RESERVED
SECTION 1843 GOLF COURSE
A. Definition. A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards such as waterways, which may include such accessory uses as a pro shop, a clubhouse, banquet facility, driving range, practice greens and service buildings. For the purposes of this Section, a golf course may be fully open to the public, open to the public on a limited basis or a membership-only club. [Annotation: “banquet facility” was added to definition by Amendment Z10-06, effective 10/30/10]
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The design and layout of a golf course shall be configured to prevent stray golf shots from traveling off the site and onto rights-of-way, neighboring properties or lands within the golf course development designed for uses other than the playing of golf.
2. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance, to provide for adequate parking for banquets, weddings, golf tournaments, conferences, etc.
3. Any accessory uses and buildings associated with the Golf Course, and any buildings on the site shall conform to setback and dimensional requirements of the R-1 District.
4. A new golf course development shall include storm water management facilities satisfactory to the City Engineer and/or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality intended to prevent the runoff of storm water carrying excess concentrations of fertilizer or nutrients from entering natural streams, Lake Michigan, Manistee Lake or the Manistee River Channel.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 29
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
7. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1844 GREENHOUSE AND NURSERY
A. Definition. Land, or portion thereof, including a building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment. A Greenhouse and Nursery may be used to raise flowers, shrubs, and plants for commercial sale or personal enjoyment.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. All storage of materials shall take place in an enclosed building, bin or other enclosure satisfactory to the Planning Commission to contain blowing dust and debris.
2. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
3. Refuse and waste shall be disposed of in a manner which precludes any odors and fumes from being perceptible at any lot line; and any pesticides, fertilizers, or other chemicals shall be handled in a manner which precludes pollution of the environment and the City’s water resources.
4. A Greenhouse or Nursery shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
7. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1845 RESERVED
SECTION 1846 HOME BASED BUSINESS
A. Definition. A business operation carried out for gain from a residential property which operation is clearly subordinate and incidental to the residential nature of the property and which involves business activities generally conducted at other locations.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 30
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. A Home Based Business shall be treated as a Major Home Occupation subject to the provisions of Section 18471, B, 2, and to the following additional standards:
a. In addition to the occupants of the residence and not more than two nonresident employees, a Home Based Business may employ other persons, provided their work activities are undertaken at locations other than the location of the home occupation.
b. The applicant shall disclose the nature, size and number of any vehicles or other equipment associated with the Home Based Business and the Planning Commission may establish limits on the outdoor storage and parking of such equipment or vehicles to preserve the essentially residential character of the neighborhood. No outdoor storage of materials or scrap shall be permitted.
c. The operator of a proposed Home Based Business shall attach an operational plan for the Home Based Business to the application for a zoning permit for the Major Home Occupation. The operational plan shall provide the following information:
1) The hours the Home Based Business will operate.
2) A description of employee parking and workforce staging plans.
3) A site plan in accord with Article 22, indicating the location of any storage of vehicles and equipment as well as any employee or customer parking.
4) A description of the shipping and delivery requirements of the Home Based Business.
5) A description of any material used in the Home Based Business which will be stored on the premises.
2. The Planning Commission shall review the application for a Home Based Business and take action to approve it, if it finds that the proposed Home Based Business shall meet the requirements of this Section and Section 1847, B, 2, hereof.
3. Any change or alteration in the nature or activities of a Home Based Business shall be regarded as a new Home Based Business and shall require a new application hereunder.
4. A failure to fulfill the terms of the Home Based Business, the site plan and its attachments shall be grounds for revocation of Planning Commission approval of a Home Based Business.
SECTION 1847 HOME OCCUPATION
A. Definition. An activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, secondary, incidental, and accessory use in the resident’s dwelling, but not a hobby. Without limiting the foregoing, any dwelling used by an occupant of that dwelling to give instruction in a craft or fine art within the dwelling shall be considered a home occupation.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 31
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
1. Minor Home Occupations. Home occupations shall receive a zoning permit upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the proposed home occupation shall comply with all of the following requirements.
a. The home occupation(s) shall be conducted entirely within enclosed structures and shall be limited to the personal residence of the person engaging in the home occupation and not more than one approved accessory building.
b. The home occupation(s) shall be an accessory use to the residential use of the property.
c. The activities and carrying on of the home occupation shall be operated in such a manner that other residents of the area, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of the existence of the home occupation. [Annotation: This section was amended to allow a sign by amendment 07-14, effective 5/29/07] [Annotation: This section was amended deleting reference to signage by amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
d. With the exception of material purchased over the counter for household cleaning, lawn care, operation of a photocopy machine, paint, printing, arts and craft supplies or heating fuel, the home occupation(s) shall not involve the:
1) Generation of any hazardous waste as defined in P.A. 64 of 1979, as amended, being the Hazardous Waste Management Act (MCL 229.433 et. seq.), or
2) Use of materials which are used in such quantity, or are otherwise required, to be registered pursuant to the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Chapter XVII, part 1910.2 (Dept. of Labor Regulations).
e. Not more than one (1) automobile associated with the home occupation may be parked on the street at any time. Any other parking shall be on the parcel where the home occupation is taking place, however, an additional parking area shall not be constructed and the existing driveway prior to the establishment of the home occupation shall be used for other customer parking.
f. Only the inhabitants of the residence plus not more than one (1) non-resident shall be employed by the home occupation.
g. No additional rooms or accessory structures may be added to the dwelling to accommodate the home occupation.
2. Major Home Occupations. Home occupations shall receive a zoning permit upon a finding by the Planning Commission that the proposed home occupation shall comply with the following requirements.
a. The home occupation(s) shall be conducted entirely within enclosed structures and shall be limited to the personal residence of the person engaging in the home occupation and not more than two approved accessory buildings.
b. The home occupation(s) shall be an accessory use to the residential use of the property.
c. The activities and carrying on of the home occupation shall be operated in such a manner that other residents of the area, under normal circumstances, would not be
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 32
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
aware of the existence of the home occupation. [Annotation: This section was amended deleting reference to signage by amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
d. With the exception of material purchased over the counter for household cleaning, lawn care, operation of a photocopy machine, paint, printing, arts and craft supplies or heating fuel, the home occupation(s) shall not involve the:
1) Generation of any hazardous waste as defined in P.A. 64 of 1979, as amended, being the Hazardous Waste Management Act (MCL 229.433 et. seq.), or
2) Use of materials which are used in such quantity, or are otherwise required, to be registered pursuant to the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Chapter XVII, part 1910.2 (Dept. of Labor Regulations).
e. Not more than one (1) automobile associated with the home occupation may be parked on the street at any time. Any other parking shall be on the parcel where the home occupation is taking place and parking for not more than two (2) automobiles may be constructed in addition to the area of the driveway in existence prior to the establishment of the home occupation.
f. Only the inhabitants of the residence plus not more than two (2) non-residents shall be employed by the home occupation.
3. Any change or alteration in the nature or activities of a Home Occupation shall be regarded as a new Home Occupation and shall require a new application hereunder.
SECTION 1848 RESERVED
SECTION 1849 HOTEL
A. Definition. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The property shall be suitable for transient lodging facilities with overnight lodgers staying typically not longer than seven (7) nights.
2. A hotel that includes auditorium or public meeting space shall be further regulated under the provisions of Places of Public Assembly, per Section 1868.
3. A hotel that includes an eating and drinking establishment shall be further regulated pursuant to Section 1823.
4. The use and the impact of the establishment shall be compatible with other allowed uses in the vicinity in terms of parking, traffic, noise, and odors, and shall not adversely impact the subject neighborhood.
5. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
6. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05,
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 33
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
effective 6/16/17]
7. Within the R-2 district, a Hotel shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
8. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
9. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance, except off-street parking for overnight guests may be located off-site, but not more than two (200) feet from the facility.
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
11. Any failure on the part of the operator to maintain proper licensing shall be grounds for the revocation of a special use permit for a hotel.
SECTION 1850 LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT
A. Definition. A service business which provides washers and dryers and other facilities for rental use to the general public for cleaning garments, bedclothes, and other household and personal materials and a facility which provides cleaning and dry cleaning services to the general public.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Pursuant to Section 520 hereof, all storage tanks or other facilities used to store hazardous, toxic, odorous, explosive or flammable substances shall be equipped with appropriate containment structures or equipment; to prevent any migration of such substances into the groundwater or surface waters of the City; and to prevent said substances from being perceptible outside such containment.
2. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
3. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
4. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
5. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
6. The Planning Commission may impose hours of operation limitations to protect the character of surrounding uses.
7. A Laundry or dry cleaning facility located in the C-2 district shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
SECTION 1851 MARIHUANA FACILITIES
A. Definition. Marihuana Facilities means an enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., including a marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 34
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
provisioning center, marihuana secure transporter, or marihuana safety compliance facility. The term does not include or apply to a “primary caregiver” or “caregiver” as that term is defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. A marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana secure transporter, marihuana safety compliance facility, and marihuana provisioning center, in accordance with the provisions of state law, may be permitted through the issuance of a special use permit pursuant to Article 18 Standards and Requirements for Special Uses provided that:
a. In the P-D District such uses shall be permitted only as part of a mixed use building or development in which no more than forty-nine percent (49%) of the combined floor area of a building or buildings within the development are utilized and shall be further regulated by the provisions of Section 1858.
b. At the time of application for a special use permit the marihuana facility must be licensed by the State of Michigan and then must be at all times in compliance with the laws of the State of Michigan including but not limited to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq.; and all other applicable rules promulgated by the State of Michigan.
c. The use or facility must be at all times in compliance with Chapter 866 Medical Marihuana Facilities all other applicable laws and ordinances of the City of Manistee.
d. A marihuana facility, or activities associated with the licensed growing, processing, testing, transporting, or sales of marihuana , may not be permitted as a home business or accessory use nor may they include accessory uses except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
2. Marihuana Growers and Marihuana Processors. Marihuana growers and marihuana processors shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Odor. As used in this subsection, building means the building, or portion thereof, used for marihuana production or marihuana processing.
1) The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter.
2) The filtration system shall consist of one or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three. The filter (s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM.
3) The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed upon manufacturer’s recommendation, or a minimum of once every 365 days, whichever occurs first.
4) Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building.
5) Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum length of time needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 35
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
6) An alternative odor control system is permitted if the special use permit applicant submits and the municipality accepts a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Michigan demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required. The municipality may hire an outside expert to review the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted.
b. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
c. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
d. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
3. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility. All activities of a marihuana safety compliance facility, including all transfers of marihuana, shall be conducted within the structure and out of public view.
4. Marihuana Secure Transporter. A marihuana secure transporter shall be subject to the special regulations and standards applicable to Section 1889 Warehouse, Public uses in the Ordinance. [Annotation: Section 1851 Marihuana Facilities was added by amendment Z18-03, effective March 2,2018]
5. Marihuana Provisioning Center. Marihuana Provisioning Centers shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Hours of Operation: Hours of operation shall be between the hours of 10am and 8pm during any day of the week.
b. Patrons/customers/clients: No one under the age of 21 shall be permitted within the establishment/building(s)
c. Use/consumption of marihuana products: No use or consumption of marihuana or marihuana products may be conducted within the establishment/building or on the premises.
d. Sale of Marihuana and Marihuana products: Marihuana and marihuana products may only be sold within the establishment/building.
e. Delivery of Marihuana and Marihuana Products: All deliveries/transfer of Marihuana and Marihuana products must occur within the establishment/building.
f. Signage: Refer to the sign standards contained within Article 20: Marihuana Sales Overlay District.
g. Parking: All off-street parking shall be in compliance with section 514 of this Ordinance.
h. Landscaping: Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Ordinance.
i. Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with section 525 of this Ordinance. [Annotation: Section 1851 Marihuana Provisioning Center was added by amendment Z1-13, effective May 16, 2019]
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 36
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1852 MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
A. Definition. Marihuana Establishments means an enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951 et seq., including Marihuana Grower, Marihuana Safety Compliance, Marihuana Processor, Marihuana Microbusiness, Marihuana Retailer or Marihuana Secure Transporter.
B. Regulations and Conditions
1. A marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana safety compliance, marihuana retailer, marihuana microbusiness and marihuana secure transporter may be permitted through the issuance of a special use permit in certain districts pursuant to Article 18 Standards and Requirements for Special Uses provide that:
a. In the P-D District marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana safety compliance and marihuana secure transporter shall be permitted only as part of a mixed use building or development in which no more than forty-nine percent (49%) of the combined floor area of a building or buildings within the development are utilized and shall be further regulated by the provisions of Section 1858.
b. At the time of application for a special use permit the marihuana establishment must be licensed by the State of Michigan and then must be at all times in compliance with the laws of the State of Michigan including but not limited to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951 et seq.; and all other applicable rules promulgated by the State of Michigan.
c. The use of establishment must at all times be in compliance with Chapter 867 Recreational Marihuana Establishments and all other applicable laws and ordinances of the City of Manistee.
d. A marihuana establishment, or activities associated with the licensed growing, processing, testing, transporting, or sales of marihuana, may not be permitted as a home business or accessory use nor may they include accessory uses except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
2. Marihuana Growers, Marihuana Processors and Marihuana Microbusinesses: Marihuana growers, marihuana processors and marihuana microbusinesses shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Odor: As used in this subsection, building means the building or portion thereof, used for marihuana production or marihuana processing.
1) The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 37
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2) The filtration system shall consist of one or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubit feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three. The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM.
3) The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed upon manufacturer’s recommendation, or a minimum of once every 365 days, whichever occurs first.
4) Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building.
5) Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum length of time needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building.
6) An alternative odor control system is permitted if the special use permit applicant submits and the municipality accepts a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Michigan demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required. The municipality may hire an outside expert to review the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted.
b. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this ordinance.
c. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this zoning ordinance.
d. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
3. Marihuana Safety Compliance Establishment: All activities of a marihuana safety compliance establishment, including all transfers of marihuana, shall be conducted within the structure out of public view.
4. Marihuana Secure Transporter Establishment: A marihuana secure transporter shall be subject to the special regulations and standards applicable to Section 1889 Warehouse, Public uses in the Ordinance.
5. Marihuana Retailer and Marihuana Microbusiness with retail uses shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Hours of Operation: Hours of operation shall be between the hours of 10am and 8pm during any day of the week.
b. Patrons/customers/clients: No one under the age of 21 shall be permitted within the establishment/building(s)
c. Use/consumption of marihuana products: No use or consumption of marihuana or marihuana products may be conducted within the establishment/building or on the premises.
d. Sale of Marihuana and Marihuana products: Marihuana and marihuana products may only be sold within the establishment/building.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 38
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
e. Delivery of Marihuana and Marihuana Products: All deliveries/transfer of Marihuana and Marihuana products must occur within the establishment/building.
f. Marihuana Microbusiness Growers:
i. All grow areas may not be viewable to the public or from publicly accessible areas of the building/establishment.
ii. Grow areas are permitted within the same building as retail uses but must be completely separate and separated by lock and key from retail uses.
g. Signage: Refer to the sign standards contained within Article 20: Marihuana Sales Overlay District.
h. Parking: All off-street parking shall be in compliance with section 514 of this Ordinance.
i. Landscaping: Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Ordinance.
j. Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with section 525 of this Ordinance. [Annotation: Section 1851 Marihuana Provisioning Center was added by amendment Z1-13, effective May 16 ,2019]
SECTION 1853 MARINA
A. Definition. A facility, including three (3) or more waterfront boat slips, which provides for the servicing, storing, fueling, berthing, and securing of boats and that may include a communication tower, eating, sleeping, and retail facilities intended primarily for the owners, crews, and guests of boat owners using the marina. [Annotation: Definition of Marina was amended by adding “communication tower” by Amendment Z12-01, effective 6/19/12]
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Such facilities shall maintain, at all times, all required state and local licenses and permits.
2. Marinas shall be located only on parcels contiguous to, and with direct access to, navigable water.
3. Marinas shall not interfere with riparian interests or the integrity and quality of the water body.
4. Vehicular ingress and egress to the marina shall be within the riparian owner’s interest area, or written authorization shall be secured from an adjacent property owner granting such access.
5. All Marinas shall be similar in architectural design, scale and character to adjacent structures and activities in the vicinity.
6. The increased use of the water body associated with the marina shall not create congestion, reduce safety, or aggravate existing congestion and safety problems
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 39
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
currently recognized. Marinas shall not constitute any navigational hazards, as determined by the Planning Commission.
7. All Marinas shall provide watercraft sanitary holding tank pump out services, in accordance with Act 451 of 1994 (Part 301 of Inland Lakes and Stream Act).
8. Onshore storage of boats and/or trailers may only be incorporated in a Marina special use approval where the Planning Commission is satisfied that such storage will be effectively screened from view from adjoining properties and rights-of-way.
9. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
10. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance, except that the parking requirement for a Marina shall be 0.33 parking spaces for each boat slip.
11. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
12. Any failure on the part of the operator to maintain proper licensing shall be grounds for the revocation of a Special Use permit for a Marina.
SECTION 1854 MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE
A. Definition. A facility in which medical, dental, health and related providers maintain offices and may provide services to patients on an out-patient basis.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Within the R-2 and R-3 districts, a medical or dental office shall not exceed seven thousand (7,000) square feet in gross floor area.
2. As a condition of approval, the Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for the Medical or Dental Office, if in the judgment of the Planning Commission such restrictions are needed to assure the compatibility of the facility with neighboring uses.
3. The exterior of the building shall be compatible with neighboring uses.
4. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. Any disposal of bio hazardous waste shall be in conformance with state and local requirements. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. Within the R-2 and R-3 districts, Medical or Dental office shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
7 All signs shall be in accordance with Article 21 of this Zoning Ordinance.
8. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
9. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 40
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1855 MINI/SELF STORAGE FACILITY
A. Definition. A structure or group of structures divided into storage units, stalls or lockers of no more than five hundred (500) square feet in area each and which are offered to the public for a fee for the storage of goods.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The area of the proposed site shall be at least one (1) acre.
2. The use shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable Local, State and Federal laws.
3. All storage shall be inside an enclosed building; no outdoor storage shall be permitted.
4. Within the R-3 district, mini-storage facilities shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
5. Each storage unit shall have an individual door to the outdoors and shall be accessible by the owner of the storage items in accordance with hours of operation approved by the Planning Commission. Such hours of operation shall be posted at the entrance to the facility.
6. The storage of perishable, flammable, toxic, or hazardous substances and the use of the facility to store goods or products for commercial or industrial purposes shall be prohibited.
7. No activities except for rental of storage units, and pick-up and deposit of storage shall be permitted.
8. Parking shall be provided as needed for the office uses as provided in Section 514 of this Ordinance.
9. All parking, maneuvering and drive lane areas shall be provided with a paved surface and all drive aisles shall be twenty-five (25) feet in width. The Planning Commission shall approve the circulation pattern within the site, which shall be clearly marked.
10. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
11. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
12. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1856 MINE, SAND, AND GRAVEL
A. Definition. A facility, property, or portion thereof designed, constructed, or used for the commercial open pit or subterranean extraction of sand, gravel or minerals. This term also includes quarrying, groundwater diversion, soil removal, milling and crushing, and other preparation customarily done as part of a mining activity.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. General Site Plan Requirements: In addition to the regular application for a Special Use and payment of fees, the application shall be accompanied by a General Site Plan. The
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 41
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
plan shall be drawn to a scale of 1" - 100' and said plan shall include the following information:
a. Name and address of owner(s) of land which removal will take place.
b. Name, address and telephone number of person, firm, or corporation who will be conducting the actual removal operation.
c. Location, size and legal description of the total site area to be mined.
d. A plan for extraction and reclamation for the total project which shall include:
1) Surface overburden and topsoil stripping and stockpiling plans.
2) Provisions for grading, re-vegetation, and stabilization that will prevent soil erosion, sedimentation and public safety problems.
3) A feasible and detailed plan for the re-use of the reclaimed site, consistent with the intent of the zoning district(s) in which the facility is located.
e. Surface water drainage provisions and outlets.
f. The location and size of any structures
g. Approved soil erosion permits. If such permit has not been issued, a copy of the permit application may be appended to the special use application and any approval shall be conditioned upon issuance of such soil erosion permit.
2. Reclamation: All extraction areas shall be reclaimed progressively as they are worked out. Reclaimed sites shall be reasonably natural and inconspicuous and shall be reasonably lacking in hazard. All slopes and banks remaining above water level and below water level to a depth of six (6) feet shall be graded to angles which do not exceed one (1) foot in elevation for each three (3) feet of horizontal surface and they shall be treated to prevent erosion or any other potential deterioration. No more than five (5) acres of the site shall be open at any time.
3. Site Development Requirements:
a. Setbacks in which no part of the mining operation may take place, except for ingress and egress shall be as follows:
1) Excavation below the existing grade of adjacent roads or property lines shall not take place within twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent property line or road right-of-way.
2) No machinery will be erected or maintained within one hundred (100) feet of any property or road right-of-way line.
b. Fencing: If fencing is deemed a necessary requirement, the Planning Commission shall specify the type, characteristics, and location of the required fencing.
c. Interior access roads, parking lots, haul road, loading and unloading areas and stockpiled materials shall be maintained so as to limit the nuisance caused by wind-blown dust.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 42
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
d. Hours of operation shall be established by the Planning Commission as part of the special use approval.
e. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line.
4. Failure to maintain all required State or Federal licenses and/or to develop and maintain a surface mining operation in accord with the terms of the Special Use permit may result in the immediate revocation of said Special Use permit and any and all other sanctions and/or penalties available to the City, County, and/or State.
5. Evidence of Continuing Use: When activities on or the use of the mining area, or any portion thereof, have ceased for more than one (1) year or when, by examination of the premises or other means, the Zoning Administrator determines a manifestation of intent to abandon the mining area, the Zoning Administrator shall give the operator written notice of their intention to declare the mining area or portion thereof abandoned. Within thirty (30) days following receipt of said notice, the operator shall have the opportunity to rebut the Zoning Administrator’s evidence and submit other relevant evidence to the contrary. If the Zoning Administrator finds the operator's evidence of continued use satisfactory, it shall not declare abandonment.
6. Financial Guarantees: A minimum performance guarantee of $3,000.00 plus a minimum $2,000.00 per excavated acre shall be filed with the City Treasurer. The performance guarantee shall be in the form of a letter of credit, a certified check, a cash bond or an insurance policy with the City named as an insured party. The bond shall be returned when all conditions stipulated in the Special Use permit have been met and the Special Use permit revoked prior to its release. There shall be no partial release of the bond.
7. Issuance of a Special Use Permit: Permits for surface mining shall be issued to the operator. If an operator disposes of his interest in an extraction area prior to final reclamation by sale, lease, assignment, termination of lease, or otherwise, the Planning Commission may release the operator from the duties imposed upon him by this Ordinance, as to the operation, but only if the successor, operator, or property owner assumes the obligations of the former operator with reference to the reclamation activities. At that time the Special Use permit may be transferred.
8. Permit Expiration: If approval for a Special Use permit is granted by the Planning Commission it shall extend a specific period of time not to exceed five (5) years. Those permits granted for a period exceeding one (1) year shall be inspected a minimum of once a year by the Zoning Administrator to insure compliance with the permit and Ordinance.
9. Modification of the General Site Plan: The General Site Plan may be modified at any time by mutual consent of the operator and the Planning Commission to adjust to changed conditions, technology, or to correct an oversight. The Planning Commission may require the modification of the General Site Plan when:
a) Modification of the plan is necessary so that it will conform to the existing laws.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 43
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
b) It is found that the previously approved plan is clearly impractical to implement and maintain.
c) The approved plan is obviously not accomplishing the intent of the Ordinance.
SECTION 1857 RESERVED
SECTION 1858 MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT
A. Definition. A development of a tract of land, building, or structure with a variety of complementary and integrated uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed mixing of uses will reduce traffic generation and provide a substantial amenity for the City of Manistee.
2. The mixing of uses will be compatible with adjacent land uses, the natural environment, and the capacities of affected public services and facilities, and such use shall be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of City of Manistee residents. The mixing of uses shall be consistent with the policies set forth in the City of Manistee Comprehensive Plan.
3. The development shall consolidate and maximize usable open space, wherever possible.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed mixing of uses will not constitute a nuisance to future inhabitants or users of the development, or the City in general.
5. Off-street parking facilities for such mixed uses may be provided collectively, provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, unless the Planning Commission finds that such requirements are may be modified due to varying hours of operation or other factors.
6. A proposed Mixed-Use Development shall be designed in such a manner that will lead to compatible, efficient, and attractive uses of property in the City of Manistee, and shall:
a. Encourage unique retail, office and residential use alternatives.
b. Continue and augment the City’s traditional neighborhood patterns.
c. Establish neighborhood places that will define and strengthen the community character and supplement the identity of the City.
d. Provide for the redevelopment of underutilized sites.
e. Facilitate pedestrian oriented development using design options such as sidewalk cafes, rear parking, residential condominiums above small-scale service uses, and enhanced landscape open spaces, squares, and parks.
7. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the development and access to the development shall be safe, convenient, non-congested and well defined. Shared access to parking areas will be required, where appropriate.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 44
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
8. A Mixed-Use Development shall not infringe unreasonably on any neighboring uses.
9. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1859 MORTUARY
A. Definition. A facility for the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation and for visitation and for the conduct of memorial and funeral services.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. A proposed Mortuary shall be located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of one-half (1/2) acre. Provided, however, that such facility shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage requirements of this ordinance.
2. A proposed Mortuary with a total combined seating capacity of one hundred (100) or more shall be regarded as a Large Place of Public Assembly and shall meet the standards of Section 1868.
a. The use shall be so arranged that adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area.
3. A mortuary shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
4. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be designed so as to minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and funeral processions or visitors entering or leaving the site.
5. No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a property line that abuts any residentially used or zoned property.
6. Loading and unloading areas used by ambulances, hearses, or other such service vehicles shall be obscured from all residential view with a wall six (6) feet in height. Evergreen landscaping may also be required by the Planning Commission.
a. All required federal, state and local licensing and permits shall be maintained at all times.
7. A mortuary that includes a crematorium shall not be located in R-2, R-3 or C-2 districts.
8. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
9. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
10. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
11. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 45
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1860 RESERVED
SECTION 1861 MOTEL
A. Definition. An establishment providing sleeping accommodations to the general public with a majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building, as distinguished from a boarding house, hotel, lodging house, or an apartment.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The property shall be suitable for transient lodging facilities with overnight lodgers staying typically not longer than seven (7) nights.
2. A Motel that includes auditorium or public meeting space shall be further regulated under the provisions of Places of Public Assembly, per Section 1868, and a Motel that includes an Eating and Drinking Establishment shall be further regulated by the provisions of Section 1835.
3. The use and the impact of the establishment shall be compatible with other allowed uses in the vicinity in terms of parking, traffic, noise, design, and odors.
4. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
7. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
9. Any failure on the part of the operator to maintain proper licensing shall be grounds for the revocation of a special use permit for a motel.
10. Within the P-D and W-F district, a Motel shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
[Annotation: PD was added by amendment Z-12-08; effective 10/27/12]
SECTION 1862 NURSING HOME OR CONVALESCENT HOME
A. Definition. A residential care facility providing long-term care for elderly, infirm, terminally-ill, physically, emotionally and/or developmentally disabled persons, licensed in accord with Article 17 of Act 368 of 1978, as amended.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. A nursing home proposed to be located within the R-2 district shall not provide care for more than twenty (20) persons.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 46
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2. The use shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable Local, State and Federal laws. As a condition of Special Use approval, at all times the nursing home shall maintain all valid state and local licenses.
3. A nursing home shall not be located within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of any other nursing home.
4. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
5. A Nursing Home located in the R-2 or R-3 districts shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
6. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
7. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1863 RESERVED
SECTION 1864 OUTDOOR SALES FACILITY
A. Definition. The display and sales of products and services primarily outside of a building or structure, including vehicles, garden supplies, boats and aircraft, farm equipment, motor homes, burial monuments, manufactured housing, recreational vehicles, building and landscape materials, and lumber yards.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. An Outdoor Sales Facility shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
2. Lot area, lot width, and other dimensional requirements of the zoning district shall be complied with; provided, that no item or items displayed outdoors shall be greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height.
3. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
4. The Planning Commission may establish, as a condition of approval, hours of operation for the Outdoor Sales Facility.
5. The Planning Commission may establish, as a condition of approval, buffering mechanisms, including, but not limited to, evergreen landscaping, berms, and fencing; and such conditions may be in addition to the Landscaping and Buffering standards of Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance to mitigate the visual impact of an Outdoor Sales Facility.
6. The Planning Commission may make reasonable inquiries of the applicant, including, but not limited to, what types of items will be for sale. Certain items, as determined by the Planning Commission, may be restricted for display to rear or side yards and with adequate screening or fencing.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 47
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
7. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line. Unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission, the use of amplifiers, banners, and other attention gathering devices shall be prohibited. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
8. The outdoor sales area shall be paved, or mechanisms to prevent the creation of dust shall be implemented. The site plan shall include measure satisfactory to the Planning Commission to contain blowing dust, trash and debris on the site.
9. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1865 PARKING FACILITY
A. Definition. A parking area used to temporarily store motor vehicles.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. A Public Parking Facility shall be designed in accord with the standards of Section 514 of this Ordinance.
2. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided pursuant to standards set forth in of Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance; provided, that landscaping and buffering shall be provided to screen any Parking Facility from an adjacent residentially zoned or used parcel.
3. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Commission the need for the proposed parking facility, and also the sufficiency of the spaces provided to meet the needs of adjacent land uses.
5. A site plan shall be submitted illustrating clearly marked circulation patterns. The City shall retain the right to approve or deny locations of curb cuts, spaces, and drive aisles.
6. Within the R-2, R-3 districts, a Parking Facility shall front on a key street segment, as defined herein.
[Annotation: Definition was changed deleting Language “available to the public, with or without fee”, Item #2 had Language “Public” deleted, Item #6 was added by amendment 08-02, effective 2/29/08]
SECTION 1866 RESERVED
SECTION 1867 PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
A. Definition. An establishment engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel, including linen supply, beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, health clubs and similar facilities.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 48
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
1. Such facilities shall be located, designed or incorporate measures satisfactory to the Planning Commission such that no objectionable noise, odor or fumes shall be carried onto adjoining property located within the R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 districts.
2. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
3. As a condition of approval, the Planning Commission establish hours of operation for a Personal Service Establishment, if in the judgment of the Planning Commission such restrictions are needed to assure the compatibility of the facility with neighboring uses.
4. The exterior of the building shall be compatible with, and similar to, neighboring uses.
5. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
6. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
7. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
9. Any failure on the part of the operator to maintain proper licensing shall be grounds for the revocation of a special use permit for a personal service establishment.
SECTION 1868 PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
A. Definitions.
1. Place of Public Assembly: Buildings, structures and grounds, including theaters, churches, auditoriums, sports arenas, lecture halls and other similar facilities intended for commercial or non-commercial entertainment, instruction, worship or similar activities involving assembled groups of people numbering thirty (30) or more.
2. Place of Public Assembly, Large: A place of public assembly shall be considered a large facility if it has either two thousand (2000) square feet or more in gross floor area, total seating capacity of more than one hundred (100) in the largest room intended for public assembly, or the capability to expand to meet these standards in the future.
3. Place of Public Assembly, Small: A place of public assembly shall be considered a small facility if it has either less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in gross floor area or total seating capacity of no more than one hundred (100) in the largest room intended for public assembly.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Large Places of Public Assembly.
a. A Large Place of Public Assembly shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein, unless it is located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of five (5) acres. [Annotation: The language “unless it is located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of five (5) acres was added by amendment Z11-09, effective 1/28/12]
[Annotation: on May 9, 2013 the Zoning Board of Appeals interpreted the Zoning Ordinance and determined
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 49
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
since a Large Place of Public Assembly which is located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of five (5) acres does not need to front on or be accessed primarily from a key street segment, if that Large Place of Public Assembly were to include an Eating and Drinking Establishment as an accessory use, and is located in the R-2 or R-3 districts, it would not need to front on or be accessed from a key street segment.]
b. A Large Place of Public Assembly that includes an Eating and Drinking Establishment shall meet the standards of Section 1835, hereof.
c. The Zoning Administrator may require the completion of a traffic impact study under the terms of Section 2203, E, 2 of this Zoning Ordinance.
d. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
e. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
f. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
g. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
2. Small Places of Public Assembly
a. A Small Place of Public Assembly located in the R-1 and R-2 districts shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
b. A Small Place of Public Assembly that includes an Eating and Drinking Establishment shall meet the standards of Section 1835, hereof.
c. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
e. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
f. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
g. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1869 RESERVED
SECTION 1870 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
A. Definition. A special land use intended to accommodate developments with mixed or varied uses, innovative design features and/or sites with unusual topography or unique settings.
B. Statement of Intent. It is the purpose of this section to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development, and to encourage innovation and variety in land use and design of projects. The basic provisions concerning Planned Unit Development are the subdivision, development, and use of land as an integral unit, combining more than one primary land use and which may provide for single-family residential, multi-family residential, education, business, commercial, recreation, park and common use areas, which are compatible with one another and provide for efficient use of land. The objectives of these Planned Unit Development standards shall be:
1. To permit flexibility in the regulation of land development.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 50
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2. To encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout, and type of structures constructed.
3. To achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy, and the providing of public services and utilities.
4. To encourage useful open space, and to provide improved housing, employment, and shopping opportunities particularly suited to the needs of the residents of the State and City.
5. To encourage the innovative use, re-use, and improvement of existing sites and buildings.
C. Regulations and Conditions: In its establishment and authorization as a special use, in addition to the foregoing provision, the following procedures, standards and conditions shall be observed. Where the Planning Commission determines it is necessary to allow a more flexible and innovative development to occur it may recommend that the terms of the Manistee Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations be adjusted in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Planned Unit Developments shall meet the following general standards:
1. The use shall be compatible with adjacent land use, the natural environment, and the capacities of affected public services and facilities, and that such use is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Manistee and the benefits of the development shall not be achievable under any single zoning classification.
2. The use shall be consistent with the City of Manistee Master Plan and the Future Land Use Map.
3. The use and development shall be warranted by the design and additional amenities made possible with and incorporated by the development proposal.
4. The development shall consolidate and maximize usable open space.
5. Landscaping shall be provided to insure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property and to create a pleasant pedestrian scale outdoor environment.
6. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, allowing safe, convenient, non-congested and well-defined circulation within and access to the development shall be provided.
7. Existing important natural, historical and architectural features within the development shall be preserved.
D. Dimensional and Use Standards: In acting upon the application, the Planning Commission may alter lot size standards, required facilities, buffers, open space areas, setback requirements, height limits, building size limits, off-street parking regulations, landscaping rules, and miscellaneous regulations, where such regulations or changes are reasonable and consistent with the intent, objectives, and standards set forth in Section 1870, 2. Further, the Planning Commission may also alter residential density limits, providing they are
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 51
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
generally compatible with the purpose and intent of the Planned Unit Development Section B of this ordinance, are compatible with adjacent land uses, and do not over burden roadway capacity.
The Planning Commission may authorize principal and other uses not permitted in the district where the land is located, provided that such are consistent with the intent of this section and the standards set forth herein. Dimensional and parking use restrictions of the underlying zoning shall not apply to the area within an approved PUD unless expressly retained in the permit.
Any deviations granted under this section which do not conform to the City of Manistee Master Plan shall include written findings of fact justifying the exceptional variance.
[Annotation: The last paragraph was added by amendment 07-15, effective 5/29/07]
E. PUD Application. A planned unit development application shall be submitted to the Site Plan Review Committee (Subcommittee) of the Planning Commission for review, analysis, and recommendation. An application fee is required and shall be non-refundable. The City Council shall by resolution establish the amount of the application fee. All land for which application is made must be owned by or under the control of the applicant, and the parcel must be capable of being planned and developed as one integral unit including any non-contiguous parcels. The application must be signed by all applicants and must contain the materials described in this Section. Failure of the applicant to provide such requested information in a timely manner may delay the process of review. The following shall accompany a planned unit development special use application, unless waived by the Site Plan Review Committee (Note: the Planning Commission may request this additional information after the Public Hearing on the application: [Annotation: The paragraph was changed to provide review by the Site Plan Review Committee to expedite the application process by amendment 07-15, effective 5/29/07]
1. A detailed narrative description of the applicant's intent and objectives (physical, social, and environmental).
2. A certified boundary survey and legal description of the property.
3. A statement of present ownership of all land contained in the PUD.
4. Population profile for the development.
5. Proposed financing.
6. Development staging.
7. Estimated impact of the proposed development on roads, schools, and utilities, including water and sewer, fire protection and emergency services.
8. Waste emissions and methods of handling smoke, dust, noise, odors, liquid and solid wastes, and vibrations, if applicable.
9. Market and economic feasibility.
10. Such other information pertinent to the development or use.
11. Twelve (12) copies of a Preliminary Site Plan, that includes all the requirements of
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 52
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
Article 22 plus:
a. A scale drawing of the site and proposed development thereon, including the date, name and address of the preparer, a certified boundary survey and legal description of the property.
b. Property parcel number (from the Assessment Roll of the City).
c. Existing and proposed topography of the site at two (2) foot contour intervals, its relationship to adjoining land, and proposed changes in topography.
d. Illustration of existing natural and man-made features, existing land use and zoning for the entire site and surrounding area within one hundred (100) feet.
e. All water features; springs, streams and creeks, lakes and ponds, wetlands, and flood plains.
f. Proposed setbacks from property lines and building separations distances.
g. Locations, heights and sizes of existing and proposed structures and other important features.
h. A rendering of the exterior elevation of the proposed buildings and structures, on-site parking, sidewalks, and travel lanes.
i. A land use tabulation summary shall be provided indicating types of uses, acreage for each land use, number of units, densities and land use intensities.
j. The percentage of land covered by buildings, parking and landscape open space, or preserved open space.
k. Dwelling unit density where pertinent.
l. Location of public and private rights-of-way and easements contiguous to and within the proposed development which are planned to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned, including grades and types of construction of those upon the site.
m. Curb-cuts, driving lanes, parking, and loading areas.
n. Location and type of drainage, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and other facilities.
o. Location and nature of fences, landscaping and screening. The proposed landscape massing, open spaces and their intended use, active and passive recreation facilities pursuant to the landscaping and buffering standards of Section 531.
p. Signage characteristics and on-site illumination.
q. The location of all existing trees having five (5) inches or greater diameter at breast height, identified by common or botanical name. Trees proposed to remain, to be transplanted or to be removed shall be so designated. Cluster of trees standing in closed proximity (3-5 feet or closer) may be designated as a "stand" of trees, and the predominant species, estimated number and average size shall be indicated.
r. Any additional material information necessary to consider the impact of the project upon adjacent properties and the general public, as may be requested by the Planning Commission.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 53
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
F. Procedure.
1. Prior to formal submittal of application, applicant shall meet at least once with the Site Plan Review Committee. When the applicant is ready to submit a formal application to the Planning Commission, it shall be accompanied with written review and recommendation from the Site Plan Review Committee. The Zoning Administrator shall then schedule a public hearing. [Annotation: The last paragraph was changed by amendment 07-15, effective 5/29/07]
2. A public hearing by the Planning Commission shall be held on each planned unit development request properly filed under the terms of this ordinance The administrator shall notify the following persons not less than 15 days before the date that the application will be considered:
a. The applicant.
b. The owner of the property, if different
c. The owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
d. Occupants of any structures within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
e. The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the City of Manistee. The notice shall include:
1) The Nature of the Planned Unit Development being requested.
2) The property(ies) for which the request has been made.
3) A listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is (are) subject of the Planned Unit Development. (Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used).
4) The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date the application will be considered.
5) The date, time and location of when the public hearing will take place.
6) The address where written comments with signature will be directed prior to the consideration.
[Annotation: This section was changed to comply with the requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act by amendment 07-15, effective 5/29/07]
G. Decisions.
1. If the Planning Commission determines that the PUD application is consistent with the intent of this Section and with the other standards and requirements herein contained, it shall adopt a resolution approving the proposed PUD in accordance with the
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 54
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
application and material submitted, or approving the proposed PUD in accordance with the application and material submitted and subject to any conditions that the Planning Commission believes are necessary to carry out the intent and standards of this ordinance. Such conditions of approval shall:
a. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare of the community, including those who will use the proposed development,
b. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed PUD, and
c. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, the standards established for planned unit development and be necessary to assure compliance with this Ordinance.
2. If the Planning Commission determines that the PUD application is not consistent with the intent of this Section, it shall adopt a resolution denying the application.
3. In either event, the decision of the Planning Commission shall recite the findings of fact and the reasons upon which it is based.
H. Effect. After approval of a PUD, the land to which it pertains shall be developed and used in its entirety only as authorized and described in the order approving the PUD or only as authorized by the provisions of this Ordinance which would apply if the PUD order had not been issued.
I. Phased PUD. Each phase of a PUD shall be planned, developed, and approved to exist as a complete development able to stand on its own in the event subsequent phases are not implemented.
J. Amendments. An order approving a PUD may be amended as follows:
1. Minor amendments. Minor amendments are those which will have no foreseeable effect beyond the property boundary such as minor changes in the location of buildings, the alignment of utilities, and the alignment of interior roadways and parking areas. Minor amendments for good cause may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator provided no such changes shall increase the size or height of structures, reduce the efficiency or number of public facilities serving the PUD, reduce usable open space, alter the land uses proposed, or encroach on natural features proposed by the plan to be protected.
2. Major amendments. Any amendment not qualifying as a minor amendment is considered to be a major amendment and must be reviewed and authorized by the Planning Commission according to the procedures authorized by this section for approval of a planned unit development.
K. Termination. The PUD order shall expire two years from date of final approval if the applicant has not commenced substantial construction and is not diligently proceeding to completion. Upon written request stating the reasons therefore, the Planning Commission may extend the time for commencement of construction. An approved PUD may be rescinded at any time by the Planning Commission for violation of the order by the
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 55
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
applicant, its successors, agents or assigns after notice to the current owners and occupiers of the PUD area and after a hearing on the violation. Upon termination of an approved PUD the zoning requirements shall revert to the current requirements for the zoning district designated for the property prior to the order.
L. Ordinance Amendment. A planned unit development approval shall not be considered an ordinance amendment or a rezoning of the property.
SECTION 1871 POWER GENERATING FACILITY
A. Definition. A facility designed and used for the production of electrical energy primarily for the purpose of commercial sale of electrical energy to wholesale and retail customers connected to electrical transmission grid. Such facilities may include coal, diesel, fuel oil, natural gas combustion as well as solid waste incinerators.
Regulations and Conditions.
1. A proposal to establish a Power Generating Facility shall not be approved unless the Planning Commission reaches a finding, based on objectively verified evidence, that all processes to be used in the handling of fuel material, the combustion of fuels, the disposal of any byproduct, the handling of cooling water, the transmission of electrical energy, the handling of process chemicals and liquids, the maintenance of equipment and all processes and procedures associated with the facility shall be the most advanced such systems in terms of the following criteria:
a. Potential environmental impacts on air, surface water, ground water, soils, and natural features, shall be minimized or fully mitigated,
b. Potential community impacts on nearby land uses, public infrastructure and the economic vitality of the community shall be demonstrated to be either neutral or positive,
c. Potential impacts on the health of residents of the City of Manistee and surrounding communities and on plant and wildlife communities in the vicinity shall be negligible,
d. Potential safety impacts on the residents of the City of Manistee and surrounding communities and employees of the facility shall be fully and adequately addressed.
2. The applicant shall fully disclose
a. The nature and quantity of all fuels, chemicals, hazardous materials to be used or stored on site and all uses and activities shall at all times comply with Section 520 hereof.
b. All operating and procedural details of the proposed facility including, but not limited to, equipment specifications, maintenance schedules, capital replacement schedules and plans for eventual decommissioning of the facility.
c. The chemical constituents of all emissions to the air, groundwater and surface waters.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 56
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
d. The organizational, capital and operating financial structure for the proposed facility including resumes of officers, all members of the board of directors and key technical staff assisting in the development.
e. The proposed phasing of the project including any change in ownership of the facility during development or following start-up.
f. All required federal, state and local permits needed for facility operation, the procedures for permit application, the standards for review and approval, the specific agencies responsible for permit review and the status of all such permit applications.
3. An application for a Power Generating Facility shall include an environmental assessment in accord with the requirements of the City of Manistee as established by the Zoning Administrator.
4. Wastewater discharges to the City of Manistee municipal wastewater system shall conform to the requirements of the City’s industrial pre-treatment program. No toxic or hazardous materials shall be discharged to groundwater or surface waters. No process or cooling waters shall be discharged to Manistee Lake or the Manistee River Channel if the average temperature of such process or cooling water exceeds the natural and seasonally adjusted temperature of the receiving body of water by more than five degrees (5?) Fahrenheit.
5. All manufacturing and processing activities shall take place inside a fully enclosed building or structure. Outdoor storage shall be permitted but shall be buffered with a wall of evergreens, or 6-foot tall fencing designed to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
6. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line.
7. All local, county, state, and federal laws, statutory, and regulatory requirements shall be met at all times. Any failure to comply with any federal or state licensing or permitting requirement shall be grounds for the revocation of any special use permitted issued pursuant to this section.
8. In addition to the provisions of Section 531, the Planning Commission may require additional open space and landscape buffer screening the proposed special use from adjacent property.
9. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
10. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
11. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1872 RESERVED
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 57
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1873 PROCESSING AND MANUFACTURING
A. Definition. Establishments engaged in a series of operations, in a continuous and regular action or succession of actions, taking place or carried on in a definite manner associated with chemical or mechanical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, liquors, food and fiber products, minerals and compounds, and such related activities as storage, packaging, shipping and scrapping.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The applicant shall disclose the nature and quantity of all chemicals, hazardous materials to be used or stored on site and all uses and activities shall at all times comply with Section 520 hereof.
2. Wastewater discharges to the City of Manistee municipal wastewater system shall conform to the requirements of the City’s industrial pre-treatment program. No toxic or hazardous materials shall be discharged to groundwater or surface waters.
3. Within one hundred (100) feet of a R-1, R-2, or R-3 district, all manufacturing and processing activities shall take place inside a fully enclosed building or structure. Outdoor storage shall be permitted but shall be buffered with a wall of evergreens, or 6-foot tall fencing designed to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
4. All local, county, state, and federal laws, statutory, and regulatory requirements shall be met at all times. Any failure to comply with any federal or state licensing or permitting requirement shall be grounds for the revocation of any special use permitted issued pursuant to this section.
5. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line.
6. In addition to the provisions of Section 531, the Planning Commission may require additional open space and landscape buffer screening the proposed special use from adjacent property.
7. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
8. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
9. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1874 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
A. Definition. The office of a member of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of that profession.
B. Regulations and Conditions. Professional offices proposed within the R-2 and R-3 districts shall be subject to the following requirements.
1. The minimum parcel area shall be not less than the required minimum parcel area for a single-family dwelling in the R-2 and R-3 Districts and a professional office shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 58
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2. An office building shall be setback not less than 15 feet from any adjoining property zoned or used for residential purposes.
3. All parking areas that abut property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be effectively screened with landscaping or an approved fencing and all landscaping and buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Ordinance.
4. Special land use approval shall not be granted for an office building proposed to be located within an existing structure in a residential district if the essential character of the lot or structure in terms of traffic generation or appearance will be changed substantially.
5. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
6. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
7. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
8. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1875 RESERVED
SECTION 1876 PROFESSIONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
A Definition. An establishment engaged in providing assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, businesses, industries, governments, and other enterprises, including printing, legal, engineering, consulting, and other similar services.
B. Regulations and Conditions. Professional service establishments may be permitted as special land uses in the R-2 and R-3 districts, subject to the following requirements.
1. The minimum parcel area shall be not less than the required minimum parcel area for a single-family dwelling in the district and within the R-2 and R-3 districts, a professional service establishment shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
2. A building containing a professional service establishment shall be setback not less than 15 feet from any adjoining property zoned or used for residential purposes, unless within the C-3 district.
3. All parking areas that abut property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be effectively screened with landscaping or an approved fencing and all landscaping and buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Ordinance.
4. Special land use approval shall not be granted for a professional service establishment proposed to be located within an existing structure in a residential district if the essential character of the lot or structure in terms of traffic generation or appearance will be changed substantially.
5. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 59
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
6. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
7. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
8. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1877 RETAIL BUSINESS
A. Definition. An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
2. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposed retail special use will be essentially compatible with the character of the proposed site and the existing uses in the vicinity. The Planning Commission may require reasonable site improvements to assure the proposed special use is designed to fit into the framework of the existing neighborhood.
3. Site circulation patterns and access locations on the property shall provide for the safe and efficient movement of pedestrians and vehicles and within the R-2 and R-3 districts.
6. A retail business in the R-2 and R-3 districts shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance.] [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. The Planning Commission may establish architectural design standards for retail business uses located within the R-2 and R-3 to assure compatibility with the residential character of the vicinity.
7. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
8. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for retail uses consistent with the character of the neighborhood
9. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance; provided, the Planning Commission shall retain the right to require additional landscaping and buffering as necessary to preserve the neighborhood.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 60
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1878 RESERVED
SECTION 1879 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
A. Purpose of Regulation. The purpose and intent of the sections of this Ordinance pertaining to the regulation of sexually oriented businesses is to regulate the location and operation of, but not to exclude, sexually oriented businesses within the City and to minimize their negative secondary effects. It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, which cause negative secondary effects upon nearby residential, educational, religious, and other similar public and private uses. The regulation of sexually oriented uses is necessary to ensure that their negative secondary effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of surrounding areas and will not negatively impact the health, safety and general welfare of City residents. The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to offend the guarantees of the First Amendment to the United Sates Constitution or to deny adults access to sexually oriented businesses and their products, or to deny sexually oriented businesses access to their intended market. Neither is it the intent of this Ordinance to legitimize activities that are prohibited by the Ordinances of the City, or state or federal law. If any portion of Section 1879, including the definitions appearing in Article 2 and referenced in Section 1879, is found to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City intends said portion to be disregarded, reduced and/or revised so as to be recognized to the fullest extent possible by law.
B. Definitions. Definitions associated with sexually oriented businesses are found in Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance.
C. Regulations and Conditions. Sexually Oriented Businesses shall be subject to the following standards:
1. The proposed Sexually Oriented Business shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residentially zoned property, park, school, child care organization, place of worship or other Sexually Oriented Business. The distance between a proposed Sexually Oriented Business and any residence, residentially zoned property, park, school, child care organization, place of worship or other sexually oriented business shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property line upon which the proposed Sexually Oriented Business is intended to be located to the nearest property line of the residence, residentially zoned property, school, child care organization, place of worship, or other Sexually Oriented Business.
2. Entrances to the proposed Sexually Oriented Business shall be posted on both the exterior and interior walls, in a location clearly visible to those entering and exiting the business, and using lettering no less than two (2) inches in height that:
a. "Persons under the age of eighteen (18) are not permitted to enter the premises," and
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 61
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
b. "No alcoholic beverages of any type are permitted within the premises unless specifically allowed pursuant to a license duly issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission."
3. No product or service for sale or gift, or any picture or other representation of any product or service for sale or gift shall be displayed so as to be visible from the nearest adjoining road right-of-way or a neighboring property.
4. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M., Mondays through Saturdays.
5. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
6. All signs shall be in accordance with Article 21 of this Ordinance. Provided, however, that no sign visible from the nearest adjoining road right-of-way or a neighboring property shall display or depict any Specified Anatomical Areas or Specified Sexual Activities
7. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Ordinance. Provided, however that all off-street parking areas shall be illuminated during all hours of operation of the Sexually Oriented Business, and until one hour after the business closes, such that the off-street parking areas are visible from the nearest adjoining road right-of-way.
8. As a condition of approval and continued operation of a Sexually Oriented Business, such business shall acquire and comply with all pertinent federal, state and local requirements governing its operation and licensing.
9. Any booth, room or cubicle available in any Sexually Oriented Business used by patrons for the viewing of any entertainment characterized as showing Specified Anatomical Areas or Specified Sexual Activities shall:
a. Be constructed in accord with the Michigan Building Code, as amended.
b. Be unobstructed by any door, lock or other entrance and exit control device.
c. Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times from the adjoining aisle of any occupant.
d. Be illuminated by a light bulb of wattage not less than sixty (60) watts, and
e. Have no holes or openings, other than doorways, in any side or rear walls.
SECTION 1880 SPORTS AND RECREATION CLUB
A. Definition. A facility designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities, including aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities, and saunas, showers, massage rooms, and lockers, whether operated as a business and open to the public for a fee, or operated by a nonprofit
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 62
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
organization and open only to bona fide members and guests of such organization, or operated by a governmental agency.
B. Regulations and Conditions. Sports and Recreation Clubs, whether open to the public or by private membership, shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Such facilities shall maintain, at all times, all required state and local licenses and permits.
2. Any such facilities serving alcoholic beverages shall front on and be accessed from a key street segment, as defined herein.
3. Such facilities serving alcoholic beverages and/or food shall also meet the requirements of Section 1835, pertaining to Eating and Drinking Establishments.
4. Such facilities that include paint-ball, archery, and/or shooting ranges shall employ effective physical barriers and isolation distances to assure that no projectile shall carry, or be perceptible, beyond the property limit.
5. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line.
6. The Planning Commission may require that any or all of the property of a club facility be fenced to contain any debris or materials used or discarded on site and/or to prevent unauthorized access to the grounds.
7. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
8. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
9. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
10. All parking shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 514 of this Ordinance.
11. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1881 RESERVED
SECTION 1882 STUDIO FOR PERFORMING AND GRAPHIC ARTS
A. Definition. A facility designed, constructed, or used for instructional, practice or production purposes in graphic and performing arts, including sculpture, painting, music, photography, drama, dance and other similar pursuits.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The use shall not bring unreasonable amounts of traffic to residential areas.
2. Within the R-2 district, the facility shall be designed to resemble neighboring residential buildings.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate that noise will not be perceptible at any lot line.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 63
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
4. The Planning Commission may establish hours of operation for a Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
5. A Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts that includes an auditorium or performance space with seating for more than one hundred (100) persons shall meet the requirements of Section 1868.
6. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
7. All parking shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 514 of this Ordinance.
8. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
9. Within the R-2 and R-3 districts, a Studio for Performing and Graphic Arts shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
SECTION 1883 TATTOO PARLOR
A. Definition. An establishment where persons are tattooed for consideration, other than by a licensed medical practitioner or cosmetologist; or any place where tattooing is regularly conducted whether or not it is in exchange for compensation.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Tattoo Parlors shall, as a condition of Special Use approval, at all times maintain all valid state and local licenses.
2. A proposed Tattoo Parlor shall not be approved if it is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any Educational Facility, religious institution, Day Care, or other Tattoo Parlor.
3. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served, offered or consumed at a Tattoo Parlor.
4. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
5. All parking shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 514 of this Ordinance.
6. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
7. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
8. Any biohazard materials or byproducts shall be disposed of as required by the Manistee County Health Department, the Michigan Department of Public Health, or other duly appointed authority.
SECTION 1884 RESERVED
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 64
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
SECTION 1885 THEATER
A. Definition. A building or structure, grounds or part thereof devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances or lectures.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. If the applicant is proposing a drive-in theater, the applicant shall demonstrate the estimated duration of the proposed Special Use, and what, if any, use is proposed on the site during the day. A drive-in theater:
a. May include refreshment stands.
b. Shall include modern restrooms on-site.
c. Shall not include any amusement rides.
d. Shall provide buffering mechanisms to prevent projected images from being visible from neighboring properties or rights-of-way.
2. All dumpster enclosures shall be in accordance with Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. [Annotation: Changed to reflect Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures by Amendment Z17-05, effective 6/16/17]
3. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
4. A Theater shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein.
5. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
6. All parking shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 514 of this Ordinance.
7. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1886 USES SIMILAR TO USES PERMITTED AS SPECIAL LAND USES
A. Definition. Uses that have characteristics similar to specifically cited Special Uses in terms of trip generation and type of traffic, parking and circulation, utility demands, environmental impacts, physical space needs, clientele and other off-site impacts.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. The Planning Commission upon the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator shall make a determination of whether a proposed use is similar to one or more uses permitted by Special Use permit. In preparing such a recommendation, the Zoning Administrator shall evaluate the proposed use in terms of the potential generation of traffic, congestion, noise, odors, dust, litter and similar impacts. In addition, the proposed use shall be evaluated to determine the degree to which it may support or conflict with other uses in the vicinity.
2. The Planning Commission shall determine whether or not a proposed Special Use is similar to other permitted Special Uses, and may require of the applicant further information to demonstrate such similarity.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 65
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
3. Upon a finding of such similarity, the Planning Commission may establish any regulations and conditions necessary to protect the health, wellbeing, safety, and economy of the City and its residents.
SECTION 1887 RESERVED
SECTION 1888 VETERINARY CLINIC
A. Definition. A facility where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic use.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. Animal wastes, biohazard materials or byproducts shall be disposed of as required by the Manistee County Health Department, the Michigan Department of Public Health, or other duly appointed authority. All other wastes shall be contained in leak-proof and odor proof containers removed not less frequently than once per week. No animal wastes, biohazard materials or byproducts shall be buried or incinerated on site. Any failure on the part of the operator to maintain proper licensing shall be grounds for the revocation of a special use approval for a Veterinary Clinic.
2. Said use shall be located on a parcel not less than one-half (1/2) acre in size, provided all operations and the housing of animals are contained in one or more completely enclosed buildings.
3. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Planning Commission to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line.
4. Any outdoor exercise areas for animals shall be adequately fenced to prevent both escape from and entry into the facility.
5. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
6. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
7. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
8. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
SECTION 1889 WAREHOUSE, PUBLIC
A. Definition. A structure used for storage and repackaging of goods, wares, raw materials, equipment, parts and other materials by the owner or operator on behalf of the owner(s) of such items.
B. Regulations and Conditions.
1. All local, county, state and federal laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration and the like, shall be met at all times during operation of any Public Warehouse.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 66
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
3. The applicant shall disclose the nature of any perishable, flammable, toxic, or hazardous substances to be stored on the facility and the nature of all appropriate and proposed protection procedures and devices and all uses and activities on site shall, at all times, comply with Section 520 hereof.
4. No processing or manufacturing shall take place within a public warehouse.
5. All parking areas and truck maneuvering areas shall be paved or treated to minimize dust and the site plan shall demonstrate provisions to contain blowing dust, trash and debris on the site.
6. No material shall be stored outdoors except within areas effectively screened from view from adjoining properties and rights-of-way.
7. No trucks, trailers or other equipment shall be stored in the front yard or closer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line.
8. All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article 21 of this Ordinance.
9. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Section 514 of this Ordinance.
10. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1890 RESERVED
SECTION 1891 WELLS, EXTRACTION
A. Definition. Wells installed for the commercial extraction of ground water, crude oil, brine, natural gas, sour gas or similar products. This definition may include any surface or subsurface pumping or processing equipment or facilities.
B. Regulations and Conditions. The following standards shall apply to all Extraction Wells.
1. Intent: The activity of drilling and exploring for, producing, processing, transporting and storing oil, gas, brine or other products extracted from subterranean deposits within the City of Manistee involves, or may involve, hazardous and/or toxic substances and practices and the intent of this section is to provide for the protection of citizens, workers and property from dangerous and nuisance conditions associated with extraction wells.
2. All Extraction Wells shall be established, operated and maintained in conformity with all state and federal statutes and regulations pertaining thereto.
3. No new Extraction Well shall be located nearer than three hundred (300) feet from an adjoining property line, unless such adjoining property shall contain an existing extraction well.
4. A new Extraction Well for the purpose of exploring for or producing oil, natural gas or hydrocarbons shall be considered a principal use, regardless of other activities carried
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 67
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
out on the site. Extraction Wells for the purpose of exploring for or producing ground water, brine, salt water or related products, may be considered an accessory use pursuant to Section 516, providing such Extraction Wells include facilities for storage, processing, transporting, refining, combining, packing or other activities.
5. An existing Extraction Well located in the L-I or G-I districts may be reworked, deepened or otherwise operated as an existing use without reference to this section, whether it is currently working or not; provided all State and Federal statutes and regulations are fully met.
6. A new Extraction Well site shall be completely fenced to prohibit unauthorized entry at all times.
7. A new Extraction Well shall include measures or controls satisfactory to the Planning Commission to minimize any objectionable dust, fumes, or odors at any property line.
8. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
9. Height limitations set forth in Sections 1603, E and 1703, E shall apply to derricks and other drilling equipment, unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission. In considering a request for such a waiver, the Planning Commission may require site improvements, screening, increased setbacks or other measures to mitigate the imposing nature of tall structures.
10. A new Extraction Well shall include measures or controls satisfactory to the City Engineer to prevent any discharge of any hazardous materials to the City of Manistee sanitary sewer system, stormwater system or any natural or man-made stream or lake. There shall be no off-site discharge of storm water except to an approved drainage system in accord with the City’s engineering requirements.
11. Noise generated on site from any source shall not exceed 60 decibels measured at any property line.
12. Any hazardous materials proposed to be stored, used or handled on site shall be disclosed by the applicant and all such storage, use and handling shall be conducted in accordance with Section 520 hereof, and any applicable State or Federal requirements.
13. All signs shall be in accordance with Article 21 of this Zoning Ordinance.
14. All parking shall be in accordance with Section 514 of this Zoning Ordinance.
15. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided in accordance with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1892 WINDMILL (WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM)
A. Definition. A Windmill or a Wind Energy Conversion System shall mean all, or any combination of, the following:
1. A mill or machine operated by wind acting on oblique vanes or sails that radiate from a horizontal shaft;
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 68
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
2. A surface area, either variable or fixed, for utilizing the wind for electrical or mechanical power;
3. A shaft, gearing, belt, or coupling utilized to convey the rotation of the surface areas into a form suitable for driving a generator, alternator, or other mechanical or electricity producing device;
4. The generator, alternator, or other device to convert the mechanical energy of the surface area into electrical energy;
5. The tower, pylon, or other structure upon which any, all, or some combination of the above are mounted, and
6. A Wind Monitoring Station
B. Regulations and Conditions. The following standards shall apply to all Wind Energy Conversion Systems as defined herein except a Wind Monitoring Station.
1. A Windmill or Wind Energy Conversion System shall be located on a parcel at least two and one-half (2-1/2) acres in size.
2. In addition to the special use application, the applicant shall submit an evaluation of the likely impacts of the proposed facility in the following areas:
a. Noise and vibration at any property line,
b. Potential impacts on wildlife, including native and migrating birds,
c. Shadow and glare impacts on adjacent properties, and
d. Aesthetic impacts of the Windmill on adjoining properties.
3. The applicant shall also submit an appropriately scaled site plan, illustrating the following:
a. Property lines, dimensions, acreage, and contours with appropriate intervals for site evaluation,
b. Location and elevation of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System,
c. Location and dimensions of all existing structures and uses on the lot within 300 feet of the system,
d. Height of any structures or trees over thirty-five (35) feet within a five hundred (500) foot radius on-site or off-site of the proposed Wind Energy Conversion System,
e. Surrounding land use and all structures irrespective of height, within five hundred (500) feet of the Wind Energy Conversion System location,
f. Standard drawings of the structural components of the Wind Energy Conversion System, including structures, tower, base, and footings. A registered engineer shall certify drawings and any necessary calculations that the system complies with all applicable local, state, and federal building, structural and electrical codes,
g. Evidence from a qualified individual that the site is feasible for a Wind Energy Conversion System,
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 69
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
h. Certification from a registered engineer or qualified person that the rotor and over speed control have been designed for the proposed use on the proposed site,
i. That there is a substantial need for the proposed use,
j. Registered Engineer's certification of the design and safety of the proposed tower to withstand winds of eighty-five (85) miles per hour, and
k. Registered Engineer's certification that if the Windmill were to fall, no building or structure – existing or potential – would be damaged.
4. Setbacks.
a. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall maintain a minimum setback of two (2) times the total height of the Wind Energy Conversion System from any property line.
b. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall maintain a minimum setback of at least five (5) times the Wind Energy Conversion System height from the right-of-way line of any public road or highway.
c. In all cases the Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall maintain a minimum distance of at least 1.25 times the Wind Energy Conversion Systems height from any habitable structure.
5. Dimensions.
a. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall not exceed a total height of one hundred fifty (150) feet unless the parcel on which the Wind Energy Conversion Systems is to be located is ten (10) acres or larger, in which case the maximum total height may be two hundred (200) feet. Such total height shall include both support structure and the highest elevation of the windmill rotor.
b. In all cases the minimum height of the lowest position of the Wind Energy Conversion System’s blade shall be at least thirty (30) feet above the ground.
6. Siting and Design Standards.
a. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall not be placed on visually prominent ridgelines.
b. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall be designed and placed in such a manner to minimize, to the greatest extent feasible, adverse visual and noise impacts on neighboring areas.
c. Colors and surface treatment of the Wind Energy Conversion Systems and supporting structures shall, to the greatest extent feasible, minimize disruption of the natural characteristics of the site.
d. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall be equipped with air traffic warning lights, which adequately warn oncoming air traffic without being unreasonably obtrusive to neighboring properties.
7. Safety Measures.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 70
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
a. Each Wind Energy Conversion System shall be equipped with both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the rotor blade so it does not exceed the design limits of the rotor.
b. The Planning Commission shall determine the height, color, and type of fencing for Wind Energy Conversion System installation.
c. Appropriate warning signs shall be posted. The Planning Commission shall determine the type and placement of the signs, pursuant to paragraph 11 below.
d. Each Windmill shall be properly grounded to safely sustain natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code.
8. An approved Windmill shall be exempted from height restrictions of the zoning district.
9. Any Windmill facility shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices. Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within twelve (12) feet of the ground. A locked, protective fence at least six (6) feet high shall enclose a tower capable of being climbed.
10. The Wind Energy Conversion System operator shall maintain a current insurance policy which will cover installation and operation of the Wind Energy Conversion System. The amount of said policy shall be established as a condition of approval. The applicant shall provide documentation or other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the Windmill can be successfully operated in the climatic conditions found in the City of Manistee. The Windmill shall be warranted against any system failures reasonably expected in severe weather operation conditions, as a condition of approval.
11. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall include no sign or advertising of any kind, except for one sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet posted at the base of the tower, and said sign shall contain the following information:
a. “Warning: high voltage.”
b. Manufacturer’s name.
c. Operator’s name.
d. Emergency phone number.
e. Emergency shutdown procedures.
12. Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall be designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.
13. If any Wind Energy Conversion System remains non-functional or inoperative for a continuous period of one (1) year, the permittee shall remove said system at their expense. Removal of the system shall mean the entire structure, including foundations, transmission equipment, and fencing, from the property. If removal of towers and appurtenant facilities is required and the permit holder, or successors, fails to remove the towers and appurtenant facilities from the property within 30 days from the date of notification by the Zoning Administrator, the City of Manistee may proceed to remove the towers and appurtenant facilities; in which case, the salvage becomes property of the City; and costs of removing the facilities will remain the burden of the permit holder.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 71
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
C. A Wind Monitoring Station may be approved by the Planning Commission either as a principal or accessory use in the R-1, R-3 or L-I districts upon the review and approval of a site plan prepared in accord with Article 22 and upon a finding that the proposed Wind Monitoring Station shall meet the requirements of Section 1802, A, 1 through 6.
SECTION 1893 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY
A. Definition. Structures or other materials attached directly to the ground in excess of forty-five (45) feet in height which may be utilized in conjunction with other equipment to transmit and/or receive radio, telephone, cellular telephone, television, microwave or any other form of telecommunication signals.
B. Purpose and Intent. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended on February 6, 1996 sets forth provisions concerning placement, location and construction of towers and related facilities for communication. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of Wireless Communication Facilities, which include antenna structures. In order that such towers not cause visual pollution or create a safety hazard or reduce property values on adjacent properties, reasonable regulations for the location, use of existing structures (e.g., water towers, school and church steeples, tall buildings), design of structures and towers, is appropriate. Wireless Communication Facilities are specifically determined to NOT be essential services nor to be public utilities as such terms are used in this Ordinance. The intent of these provisions is to encourage users of towers to:
1. Protect land uses from potential adverse impacts of wireless communication facilities.
2. Place the location of new wireless communication facilities in non-residential-zoned areas.
3. Minimize the total number of wireless communication facilities throughout the community.
4. Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing wireless communication facilities sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use wireless communication facilities.
5. Locate them on City-owned water towers where feasible and to the satisfaction of the City.
6. Configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the wireless communication facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques.
7. Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
8. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
9. In furtherance of these goals, the City of Manistee shall give due consideration to natural features, the Manistee River and its resources, the City of Manistee Master Plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and other characteristics and policies of the City in approving sites for the location of wireless communication facilities. It is not the intent to regulate ham radio antennae under this section.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 72
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
C. Administratively Approved Uses. The following uses may be approved by the Zoning Administrator after conducting an administrative review:
1. The wireless communications equipment will be located on an existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing equipment compound.
2. The existing wireless communications support structure or existing equipment compound is in compliance with this ordinance.
3 The proposed collocation will not do any of the following:
a) Increase the overall height of the wireless communications support structure by more than 20 feet or 10% of its original height, whichever is greater.
b) Increase the width of the wireless communications support structure by more than the minimum necessary to permit location.
c) Increase the area of the existing equipment compound to greater than 2,500 square feet.
4. The proposed location complies with the terms and conditions of any previously approved wireless communications support structure or equipment compound.
5. Microcell Networks: Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of wireless communication facility.
D. Antenna Placement on City Owned Facilities. Wireless Communication Facilities may be installed on City of Manistee-owned water towers or other facilities, and their accessory equipment and shelters may be installed on City of Manistee-owned property, in any zoning district, with a lease approved by the City Council, and subject to the requirements of the Site Plan Review provisions of Article 22.
E. Review Provisions and Zoning Districts Allowed. Except as provided in paragraphs C and D hereof, Wireless Communication Facilities and their accessory equipment and shelters shall be considered a Special Use in R-3, W-F, C-1, and L-I Districts.
F. Additional Information Required for Review. In addition to the requirements of Section 1802.2 and Article 22, Wireless Communication Facilities applications shall include:
1. Name and address of the proposed operator of the site.
2. Name and address, including phone number of the person responsible for determining feasibility of the location as provided in this section.
3. Preliminary design of all proposed structures, including elevations and renderings showing the proposed facility from four vantage points located not less than 200 feet nor more than 500 feet from the proposed tower location.
4. Registered Engineer's certification of the design and safety of the proposed tower to withstand winds of 85 miles per hour. Such certification shall set forth the fall zone area for the proposed tower. If such fall zone area is less than that of a circle whose radius is equivalent to the height of the proposed tower, such certification shall provide structural calculations and detail sufficient to demonstrate the accuracy of such lesser fall zone area determination. Such certification shall be provided by an engineer licensed to practice in Michigan.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 73
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
5. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.
6. A notarized statement signed by the applicant indicating the number and type of additional antennae the proposed tower will accommodate.
7. Each applicant shall provide an inventory of existing towers, tall structures, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the City of Manistee, or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower or tall structure. The Zoning Administrator may share such information with other applicants applying for approvals under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the City, provided, that the Zoning Administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
8. The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known. The applicant shall also demonstrate the reasons such existing towers or tall structures cannot be used in lieu of the proposed Wireless Communication Facilities.
9. After an application for a special land use approval is filed with the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is administratively complete. If, before the expiration of the 14-day period under Section 10, the Zoning Administrator notifies the applicant that the application is not administratively complete, the Zoning Administrator shall specify the information necessary to make the application administratively complete, or notify the applicant that a fee required to accompany the application has not been paid, specifying the amount due. The running of the 14-day period is tolled until the applicant submits to the body or official the specified information or fee amount due. Notice under this section shall be given in writing or by electronic notification. A fee required to accompany any application shall not exceed the City’ actual, reasonable costs to review and process the application or $1,000.00 whichever is less.
10. The Commission is responsible for approving special land uses and shall approve or deny the application not more than 90 days after the application is considered to be administratively complete.
G. Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, or Alternative Technology. No new wireless communication facilities shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Commission that no existing wireless communication facilities, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed wireless communication facilities.
H. General Provisions. Construction of Wireless Communication Facilities including their accessory equipment are allowed in the City of Manistee subject to the following provisions:
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 74
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
1. A Wireless Communication Facilities shall be considered a principal use and shall be placed on parcels (whether the land is owned or leased by the tower owner) which have an area no less than the minimum parcel area and width for the district.
2. All setbacks for the zoning district shall be met and in addition, no tower shall be placed closer to any property line than the radius of the certified fall zone as provided in Section 1819, F, 4, hereof, and in no case less than 200 feet from any residence or 200 feet from a zoning district which does not permit Wireless Communication Facilities.
3. All proposed towers of more than forty-five (45) feet in height shall be submitted to the Michigan Aeronautics Commission and FAA for review and approval prior to approval by the City of Manistee. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the wireless communication facilities governed by this ordinance shall bring such wireless communication facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring wireless communication facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
4. The wireless communication facilities shall be painted or screened so as to blend into the background.
5. The service building shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with buildings within three hundred feet of the property on which it is located.
6. All connecting wires from towers to accessory buildings and all electrical and other service wires to the facility shall be underground.
7. Monopole tower design is preferred. If the applicant proposes to use a guyed or lattice tower, the applicant shall demonstrate why a monopole design cannot be used.
8. All exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Section 525 hereof.
9. The Commission may require landscape screening of the service building and fencing.
10. Strobe lights shall not be allowed except as required by FAA.
11. The Commission may, at its sole discretion, require that the tower be camouflaged to resemble a tree, steeple, clock tower, or otherwise be made less obtrusive.
12. Signs; No signs shall be allowed on a wireless communication facilities, except for one sign of not more than two (2) square feet, listing the name, address and contact telephone number of the operator and not more than two (2) signs not to exceed two (2) square feet signaling “danger” or “no trespassing.”
13. Towers shall be enclosed by a locked gate and security fencing at least 6 feet in height, and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
14. Applicant shall certify its intent to lease excess space on the proposed tower for co-located antennae of other operators. Such certification shall include a commitment to respond to any requests for information from another potential shared use applicant; to
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 75
Article Eighteen Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
negotiate in good faith and allow for leased shared use if an applicant demonstrates that it is technically practicable, and; to make no more than a reasonable charge for a shared use lease.
15. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the maximum height for a Wireless Communication Facilities in the City of Manistee shall be two hundred (200) feet.
16. Separation distances between proposed and pre-existing wireless communication facilities are as follows: monopole over 35 feet in height - 1,500 feet; lattice and guyed towers - 5,000 feet.
I. Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. A Wireless Communication Facilities that is unused for a period of twelve (12) months shall be removed. The owner is responsible for the removal of an unused tower. An unused tower shall be considered Junk pursuant to Section 650.02 of the City of Manistee Codified Ordinances.
J. Bonds. The owner of a Wireless Communication Facility; including equipment/accessory buildings, shall post a bond with the City of Manistee in an amount to cover the reasonable estimated costs and expenses of dismantling and removing the Wireless Communication Facilities. The amount of the bond shall be established by the Commission, and may be adjusted from time to time to reflect changing costs and expenses of dismantling and removing the facility.
K. Nonconforming Uses.
1. Pre-existing wireless communication facilities that do not meet the requirements of this section shall be allowed to continue in use as they presently exist. Modifications to height and type of construction of pre-existing wireless communication facilities shall not be permitted, except in conformance with this Section.
2. Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming wireless communication facilities. Nonconforming wireless communication facilities that are damaged or destroyed may not be rebuilt except in conformance with the requirements of this Section.
[Annotation: Wireless Communication Facility was added as a Special Use by Amendment Z17-02, effective 6/16/17]
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
ARTICLE NINETEEN
U.S. 31 CORRIDOR OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION 1900 FINDINGS
Conditions along U.S. 31 are unique and are changing in Filer and Manistee Township, the City of Manistee and the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians Reservation. A primary function of this state highway is to move traffic through the City of Manistee, Filer Township, Manistee Township, Little River Band of Ottawa Indians Reservation and to points beyond. Studies of motorists traveling along this segment of U.S. 31 indicate, however, that a very high percentage of the traffic has an origin or destination in the city, townships or reservation. Thus, U.S. 31 also has a secondary, but important, function to provide access to adjacent and nearby land uses.
The need for this overlay district is based, in part, on specific studies for U.S. 31 that conclude the road is in need of improved access management. The road’s capacity is insufficient to accommodate volumes in the future. Continued development along the corridor will increase traffic volumes and introduce additional conflict points which will further erode traffic operations and increase potential for crashes. Numerous published studies and reports document the positive relationship between well-designed access management systems and traffic operations and safety. Those reports and experiences of other communities demonstrate that implementing standards on the number and placement of access points (driveways and side street intersections) can preserve the capacity of the roadway and reduce the potential for crashes while providing a good business environment. The standards set forth in this Article are based on recommendations published by various national and Michigan transportation agencies that were refined during preparation of the U.S. 31 Corridor Improvement Plan.
The City of Manistee finds that special comprehensive standards are needed along the U.S. 31 corridor based upon the following findings:
A. The combination of roadway design, function (arterial highway), traffic speeds, current and projected traffic volumes, traffic crashes and other characteristics necessitate special access standards.
B. Studies by transportation organizations in Michigan and nationally have found a direct correlation between the number of access points and the number of crashes.
C. The standards of this overlay zone are based upon considerable research and recommendations by the Michigan Department of Transportation (“MDOT”).
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
D. Preservation of roadway capacity through access management protects the substantial public investment in the roadway system and helps avoid the need for costly reconstruction, which disrupts businesses.
SECTION 1901 PURPOSE
The Michigan Department of Transportation has jurisdiction within the highway’s right-of-way, while Filer and Manistee Township, Little River Band of Ottawa Indians and the City of Manistee have authority for land use and site plan decisions within individual parcels along the highway. The standards of this overlay district were created to help ensure a collaborative process between the MDOT and the townships, reservation and city on access decisions along U.S. 31 to implement the recommendations of the U.S. 31 Corridor Improvement Plan and other adopted community plans.
Among the specific purposes of this Corridor Overlay Zoning District are to:
A. Preserve the capacity of U.S. 31 by limiting and controlling the number, location and design of access points and requiring alternate means of access through shared driveways, service drives, and access off at cross streets in certain locations.
B. Encourage efficient flow of traffic by minimizing the disruption and conflicts between through traffic and turning movements.
C. Improve safety and reduce the potential for crashes.
D. Avoid the proliferation of unnecessary curb cuts and driveways, and eliminate or reconfigure existing access points that do not conform to the standards herein, when the opportunities arise.
E. Implement the recommendations of the City of Manistee, Filer and Manistee Township Comprehensive Plans and the U.S. 31 Corridor Improvement Plan.
F. Require longer frontages or wider minimum lot widths than are required in other zoning districts to help achieve access management spacing standards.
G. Required coordinated access among adjacent lands where possible.
H. Require demonstration that resultant parcels are accessible through compliance with the access standards herein prior to approval of any land divisions to ensure safe accessibility as required by the Land Division Act.
I. Improve situations where existing development within the corridor area does not conform to the standards and intent of this overlay district.
J. Identify additional submittal information and review procedures required for parcels that front along U.S. 31.
K. Avoid the need for unnecessary and costly reconstruction which disrupts business operations and traffic flow.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
L. Ensure efficient access by emergency vehicles.
M. Improve safety for pedestrians and other non-motorized travelers through reducing the number of conflict points at access crossings.
N. Establish uniform standards to ensure fair and equal application.
O. Provide landowners with reasonable access, though the access may be restricted to a shared driveway or service drive or via a side street, or the number and location of access may not be the arrangement most desired by the landowner or applicant.
P. Promote a more coordinated development review process for the townships, reservation and city with the Michigan Department of Transportation and the Manistee County Road Commission.
SECTION 1902 APPLICABILITY
The standards of this Section shall apply to all lands with frontage along U.S. 31 and illustrated as the U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay Zone on the Zoning Map, or within 200 feet of the U.S. 31 right-of-way.
The regulations herein apply in addition to, and simultaneously with, the other applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance. Permitted and special land uses within the U.S. 31 Corridor Overlay Zone shall be as regulated in the underlying zoning district (as designated on the zoning map), and shall meet all the applicable requirements for that district, with the following additional provisions:
A. The number of access points is the fewest needed to allow motorists reasonable access to the site.
B. Access spacing from intersections and other driveways shall meet the standards within the U.S. 31 overlay zone district, and the guidelines of the City of Manistee Department of Public Works and the recommendations of the U.S. 31 Corridor Improvement Plan as appropriate.
C. Provision has been made to share access with adjacent uses, either now or in the future, including any necessary written shared access and maintenance agreements to be recorded with the County.
D. No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be erected unless the Overlay Zone Regulations are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement
E. No land division or subdivision or site condominium project shall be approved within this overlay zoning district unless compliance with the access spacing standards herein is demonstrated.
F. Any change in use on a site that does not meet the access standards of this overlay district, shall be required to submit a site plan for approval by the Planning Commission and submit
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
information to the MDOT to determine if a new access permit is required.
G. For building or parking lot expansions, or changes in use, or site redevelopment that cannot meet the standards of this ordinance due to parcel size or configuration, the Planning Commission shall determine the extent of upgrades to bring the site into greater compliance with the access standards of this overlay district. In making its decision, the Planning Commission shall consider the existing and projected traffic conditions, any sight distance limitations, site topography or natural features, impacts on internal site circulation, recommendations within the U.S. 31 Corridor Improvement Plan, and any recommendations from the MDOT. Required improvements may include removal or rearrangement or redesign of site access points.
H. The standards herein were developed collaboratively between the townships, the reservation, the city and MDOT. Where conflict occurs, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
SECTION 1903 ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL INFORMATION
In addition to the submittal information required for site plan review in Article 22, the following shall be provided with any application for site plan or special land use review. The information listed in items 1-4 below shall be required with any request for a land division.
A. Existing access points. Existing access points within 250 feet on either side of the U.S. 31 frontage, and along both sides of any adjoining roads, shall be shown on the site plan, aerial photographs or on a plan sheet.
B. The applicant shall submit evidence indicating that the sight distance requirements of the Department of Public Works are met.
C. Dimensions between proposed and existing access points (and median cross-overs if applicable in the future).
D. Where shared access is proposed or required, a shared access and maintenance agreement shall be submitted for approval. Once approved, this agreement shall be recorded with the Manistee County Register of Deeds.
E. Dimensions shall be provided for driveways (width, radii, throat length, length of any deceleration lanes or tapers, pavement markings and signs) and all curb radii within the site.
F. The site plan shall illustrate the route and dimensioned turning movements of any expected truck traffic, tankers, delivery vehicles, waste receptacle vehicles and similar vehicles. The plan should confirm that routing the vehicles will not disrupt operations at the access points nor impede maneuvering or parking within the site.
G. Traffic impact study. Submittal of a traffic impact study may be required for any special land use that would be expected to generate 100 or more vehicle trips during any peak hour, or 1000 or more vehicle trips daily, or where modifications from the generally
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
applicable access spacing standards are requested. The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a firm or individual that is a member of the Institute of Transportation Engineers with demonstrated experience in production of such studies. The methodology and analysis of the study shall be in accordance with accepted principles as described in the handbook “Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies, a Recommended Practice for Michigan,” developed by the MDOT and other Michigan transportation agencies. The Department of Public Works may require calculations or micro-scale modeling to illustrate future operations at the access points and nearby intersections and/or to evaluate various access alternatives.
H. Review coordination. The applicant shall provide correspondence that the proposal has been submitted to the MDOT or Manistee County Road Commission (MCRC) for their information. Any correspondence from the MDOT and MCRC shall be considered during the site plan review process. The Township, City or Little River Band of Ottawa Indians may request attendance at coordination meetings with representatives of the applicable road agency. A review of access shall not be requested from the road agency during a land division or site plan review by the City. The approval of a land division or site plan does not negate the responsibility of an applicant to subsequently secure access permits from the road agency.
SECTION 1904 ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
Access points (not including driveways that serve a single family home, duplex or essential service facility structure) shall meet the following standards. These standards are based on considerable research in Michigan and nationally, and were prepared concurrent with guidelines promoted by the MDOT.
A. Each lot/parcel shall be permitted one access point. This access point may consist of an individual driveway, a shared access with an adjacent use, or access via a service drive or frontage road. As noted above, land divisions shall not be permitted that may prevent compliance with the access location standards of this overlay district.
B. An additional driveway may be permitted by the Planning Commission upon finding the conditions 1 and 2, or 3 and 4, below exist. The additional driveway may be required to be along a side street or a shared access with an adjacent site. Approval by the Planning Commission does not release applicant from having to also obtain approval of applicable road agencies, which may or may not approve the request.
1. The site has a frontage of over 660 feet and the spacing standards between access points listed below are met, and
2. The additional access will not prevent adjacent lands from complying with the access spacing standards when such lands develop or redevelop in the future.
or
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
3. A traffic impact study, prepared in accordance with accepted practices as described in this chapter, demonstrates the site will generate over 300 trips in a peak hour or 3000 trips daily, or 400 and 4000 respectively if the site has access to a traffic signal, and
4. The traffic study demonstrates the additional driveway will provide improved conditions for the motoring public and will not create negative impacts on through traffic flow.
C. Access points shall be spaced based upon recommendations of the U.S. 31 Corridor Management Plan, the City Engineer and Michigan Department of Transportation.
D. Where the subject site adjoins land that may be developed or redeveloped in the future, including adjacent lands or potential outlots, the access shall be located to ensure the adjacent site(s) can also meet the access location standards in the future.
E. Access points along sections of U.S. 31 with an existing or planned median shall be located in consideration of existing or approved median crossovers. A sufficient length for weaving across travel lanes and storage within the median shall be provided, consistent with MDOT published standards. The City supports MDOT policies to limit the number of median crossovers to maintain traffic flow and reduce the potential for accidents. In some cases, existing median cuts may need to be redesigned to meet current design standards.
F. Access points shall be aligned based upon recommendations within the U.S. 31 Corridor Management Plan, the City Engineer and Michigan Department of Transportation.
G. Minimum spacing of access points from intersections shall be in accordance with the U.S. 31 Corridor Management Plan and the recommendations of the Michigan Department of Transportation.
H. Where direct access consistent with the various standards above cannot be achieved, access should be via a shared driveway or service drive. In particular, the Planning Commission may require development of frontage roads, or rear service drives where such facilities can provide access to signalized locations, where service drives may minimize the number of driveways, and as a means to ensure that traffic is able to more efficiently and safely ingress and egress.
Frontage roads or service drives shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
1. Service drives and frontage roads shall be set back as far as reasonably possible from the intersection of the access driveway with the public street. A minimum of twenty-five (25)
Access Setback
Right-of-way
25 Feet
Rear Service Drive Design
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 7
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
feet shall be maintained between the public street right-of-way and the pavement of the frontage road, with a minimum 60 feet of throat depth provided at the access point.
2. The alignment of the service drive can be refined to meet the needs of the site and anticipated traffic conditions, provided the resulting terminus allows the drive to be extended through the adjacent site(s). This may require use of aerial photographs, property line maps, topographic information and other supporting documentation
3. In cases where a shared access facility is recommended, but is not yet available, temporary direct access may be permitted, provided the plan is designed to accommodate the future service drive, and a written agreement is submitted that the temporary access will be removed by the applicant, when the alternative access system becomes available. This may require posting of a financial performance guarantee.
I. Driveways shall be located to provide safe sight distance, or as determined by the applicable road agency.
J. No driveway shall interfere with municipal facilities such as street lights or traffic signal poles, signs, fire hydrants, cross walks, bus loading zones, utility poles, fire alarm supports, drainage structures, or other necessary street structures. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to order and effect the removal or reconstruction of any driveway which is constructed in conflict with street structures. The cost of reconstructing or relocating any new or proposed such driveways shall be at the expense of the abutting property owner.
SECTION 1905 MODIFICATION OF ACCESS STANDARDS
A. Modification by the Planning Commission. Given the variation in existing physical conditions along the corridors, modifications to the spacing and other standards above may be permitted by the Planning Commission as part of the site plan review process upon a finding that all of the following conditions apply:
1. Practical difficulties exist on the site that make compliance unreasonable (sight distance limitations, topography, wetlands, drain or water body, woodlands that will be preserved, existing development, unique site configuration or shape), or existing off-site access points make it impractical to fully comply with the standards.
2. The use involves an access improvement to an existing site or a new use that will generate less traffic than the previous use.
3. The proposed modification is consistent with MDOT guidelines and MDOT staff support the proposed access design.
4. The proposed modification is consistent with the general intent of the standards of this overlay district and the recommendations of the U.S. 31 Corridor Study.
5. If deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, a traffic study by a qualified traffic engineer has been provided that certifies the modification will improve traffic
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 8
Article Nineteen US 31 Corridor Overlay
operations and safety along U.S. 31, and is not simply for convenience of the development.
6. The applicant shall demonstrate with dimensioned drawings that such modification shall not create non-compliant access to adjacent lands that may develop or redevelop in the future.
7. Roadway improvements will be made to improve overall traffic operations prior to the project completion or occupancy of the first building.
8. Indirect or shared access is not reasonable due to practical difficulties.
9. Such modification shall be demonstrated to be the minimum necessary.
B. Appeals. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, in accord with Section 2209.
Updated August 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Marihuana Sales Overlay District
ARTICLE TWENTY
MSO Marihuana Sales Overlay District
SECTION 2000: Purpose and Intent
It is the intent of this overlay district to provide a location for the sale of marihuana and marihuana infused products from licensed provisioning centers under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act MCL 333.27101 et seq. or from licensed marihuana retailers or licensed marihuana microbusinesses under the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, MCL 333.27951 et seq.
Special Uses:
• Marihuana Provisioning Center
• Marihuana Retailer
• Marihuana Microbusiness
SECTION 2001: Uses Permitted by Right
All uses of the underlying zoning district outlined as a permitted use shall remain a permitted use allowable in this overlay district.
SECTION 2002: Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit
All special uses of the underlying zoning district outlined as a special use shall remain an allowable special use in this overlay district.
The following uses of buildings and land may be permitted within the MSO District, as a special land use subject to the provisions of Article 18, Special Use Approval.
A. Marihuana Provisioning Center
B. Marihuana Retailer
C. Marihuana Microbusiness
SECTION 2003: Dimensional Standards
A. All dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district shall apply to all lots, parcels and structures within the overlay district.
SECTION 2004: Mixed Use and Dwellings
A. Dwellings shall not be permitted in the same building/structure as a marihuana business outlined in section 2000.
SECTION 2005: Sign Standards
A. These standards shall apply to all marihuana related businesses outlined in Section 2000
B. Sign permitting and standards shall follow the standards set forth in Article 21, except the following standards shall preside within this overlay district:
1) Signs may not be internally illuminated
2) No flashing, flickering, strobing, scrolling or other changes in light intensity may occur on any portion of a sign or light that is directed at a sign.
3) No Pole Signs are permitted
Updated August 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Twenty Marihuana Sales Overlay District
SECTION 2006: Additional Standards
A. Site Plan requirements subject to Section 2203, except for upper story dwellings, which are subject to Section 2201.A
B. Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting requirements subject to Section 514
C. Landscaping Requirements subject to Section 531
D. Dumpsters and Enclosures subject to Section 506
E. Outdoor Lighting requirements, subject to Section 525
F. US 31 Corridor Overlay District requirements, subject to Article 19
Parcels included in the Marihuana Sales Overlay Zone (MSO) are provided below:
51-174-705-01, 51-174-705-10, 51-174-706-01, 51-174-707-05, 51-174-708-05, 51-174-708-07, 51-174-708-11, 51-101-250-01, 51-174-708-10, 51-101-275-03, 51-101-250-02, 51-101-275-04, 51-101-250-05, 51-101-250-06, 51-101-250-09, 51-101-250-08, 51-146-704-19, 51-146-704-23, 51-146-709-07, 51-146-709-03, 51-146-709-09
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty One Signs
ARTICLE TWENTY-ONE
SIGNS
[ANNOTATION: Article 21 Signs was repealed and replaced by Amendment Z17-06, effective 6/16/17]
SECTION 2100 PURPOSE
Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the City of Manistee, to improve pedestrian and vehicular safety, and to promote and preserve the general attractiveness of the community. Accordingly, it is the intention of this Ordinance to establish regulations governing the display of signs that will:
A. Encourage and protect the public health, safety, welfare and convenience;
B. Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the City by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs, and thereby encourage improved communication with the public;
C. Restrict signs and lights which overload the public's capacity to receive information, which increase the probability of traffic congestion and accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision, and which are deemed to detract from the aesthetics of the community; and
D. Reduce conflict between signs and their illumination and public and private land uses.
SECTION 2101 PROCEDURES
A. Sign Permit Application. The Zoning Administrator may approve sign permit applications. Applications require a fee, as determined by City Council.
1. The Historic District Commission may approve exceptions to this Article 21.
2. The City Council may approve exceptions to this Article 21 for community events.
B. Inspection and Compliance. The Administrator shall inspect each sign for which a permit is issued. If the sign is in full compliance with this Ordinance the Administrator shall issue a Certificate of Compliance. If the construction is not in full compliance with this Ordinance the Administrator shall give the applicant notice of the deficiencies. If the deficiencies have been corrected upon re-inspection, the Administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance. If the deficiencies are not corrected within thirty (30) days, the permit shall be revoked and the sign shall be removed at the expense of the applicant.
C. Permit Lapse. A sign permit shall lapse once the purpose of the sign has ended the sign and supporting structure shall be removed within 180 calendar days. A sign whose permit has lapsed shall be removed by the owner within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice to remove from the City.
D. Permit Assignment. A sign permit shall be assignable to the successor of a business on the same parcel, except where the proposed sign is materially or substantially different in any way to the sign which was permitted. The Administrator shall make this determination.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Twenty One Signs
SECTION 2102 GENERAL STANDARDS
A. Computations. The following standards shall be met when calculating the area and height of a sign.
1. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display.
2. The sign area for a sign with more than one (1) face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one (1) point.
3. The height of the uppermost portions of pole signs shall not exceed twenty (25) feet. The height of the uppermost portions of ground signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in all districts except the GI district, where the uppermost portions of such signs shall not exceed twelve (12) feet. The uppermost portions of wall, marquee and projecting signs shall not project higher the roofline of the structure to which it is attached.
4. Where a sign projects or protrudes over any public or private sidewalk or walkway the bottommost point of the sign structure shall be at least eight (8) feet from said walkway. Area of Signs (marquee, suspended and wall).
a. For properties fronting on US 31 in the G-C, P-D, C-1, C-2, C-3 and W-F districts or properties with a minimum of 10,000 sq. ft. of parcel area that front on a Key Street Segment in the R-2 Zoning District, marquee, suspended and wall signs shall be permitted and the maximum cumulative sign area permitted expressed in square feet shall be not more than 1.5 times the principal building width, measured from corner to corner, facing the public right-of-way or 50 square feet for each storefront, whichever is greater.
b. For properties that do not front on US 31 in the P-D, C-1, C-2, C-3 and WF districts or properties with a minimum of 10,000 sq. ft. of parcel area that front on a Key Street Segment in the R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, marquee, suspended and wall signs shall be permitted and the maximum cumulative sign area permitted expressed in square feet shall not be more than 1.5 times the principal building width, measured from corner to corner, facing the public right-of-way, or fifty (50) square feet for each storefront, whichever is greater.
c. For properties with water frontage in the R-3 P-D, C-2, C-3 and WF marquee, suspended and wall signs shall be permitted on the water front side and the maximum cumulative sign area permitted expressed in square feet shall not be more than .75 times the principal building width, measured from corner to corner, facing the public right-of-way, or twenty-five (25) square feet, for each storefront whichever is greater. Each boat slip will be permitted a sign not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet.
d. Allocation of Signage. Signage may be transferred to a side of the building where signage is not allocated.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Twenty One Signs
B. Illuminated Signs: Sources of Illumination shall not flash on and off or change color or intensity. Exceptions include:
1. Halo signs, where lighting is behind the lettering and the source of the illumination is not seen by a direct line of sight.
2. Electronic changeable message displays (any sign that uses electronic means within a display area to cause one message or display to be replaced by another, movable display or video) shall be limited to:
a. One contiguous dynamic element on the face of the sign at a time.
b. A dynamic element that does not change more than once every 15 minutes, and changes are instantaneous without any special effects.
c. Static images and messages.
d. Only that brightness that is necessary for clear and adequate visibility.
e. Intensity or brilliance that does not impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver.
All illuminated signs, including, halo, and electronic changeable message displays, shall be equipped with a mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness in response to ambient conditions, or turns the illumination off during daylight hours. Externally illuminated signs shall be lit by use of a light shining downward onto the sign. The source of the light shall be baffled so it is not visible beyond the property line.
C. The Historic District Commissions: Signs and the illumination of signs in the Historic District Commission require requires Historic District Commission approval.
D. Substitution: Sign messages may be changed at any time. Any change of the structure or size of a sign, or structure the sign is mounted on requires approval under this Ordinance for purposes of compliance with this Ordinance.
E. Setbacks. All signs shall be setback at least four (4) feet from the public right-of-way to the front of the sign structure, provided clear vision can be maintained, pursuant to Section 513.
F. Billboards. Refer to Section 1814.
G. Covering. Covering around a pole shall be limited to a width of not more than thirty (30) percent of the width of the sign face. Signage or copy shall not be permitted on pole coverings.
SECTION 2103 EXEMPT SIGNS
The following signs shall be exempt from regulations in this Article.
A. Any public notice, traffic control or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. Any sign wholly located within a building including window signs. Except signs in the Historic District that require Historic District Commission approval
C. Flags up to twenty-four (24) square feet in area.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Twenty One Signs
D. Signs posted by a governmental agency or on their behalf by an authorized contractor.
E. Portable signs shall be permitted in the R-2, R-3 for properties with a minimum of 10,000 sq. ft. of area that front on a Key Street Segment, G-C, W-F, and C-1 districts subject to a determination by the Zoning Administrator that its placement will not impact safety or visibility for motorists and pedestrians and further limited as follows:
1. 8 square feet per side;
2. One per storefront; and
3. Permitted only during hours of operation of business.
F. Temporary Signs on the property during construction, maintenance or improvements and relating to construction, maintenance or improvements on the property during the period of time of work.
SECTION 2104 PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following signs shall not be allowed in any district.
A. Signs which are illegal under State laws or regulations and applicable local ordinances or regulations, and which are not consistent with the standards in this Ordinance.
B. Signs that are not clean and in good repair, not securely affixed to a supporting structure, and signs that are out of compliance with applicable building and electrical codes.
C. Off-Premise Signs. Except as provided in Section 1814 of this Ordinance.
D. Signs that are not official traffic signs that appear to or attempt to regulate, warn, or direct the movement of traffic.
E. Signs located in, projecting into or overhanging within a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement, except the following:
1. Signs posted by a governmental agency, transit company, public utility, or construction related signs placed by a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the right-of-way.
2. Projecting, marquee, and suspended signs projecting over a public right-of-way as permitted and regulated in the P-D, C-2 and C-3 districts.
3. Banners that have been approved by the City Council.
F. Portable signs shall be permitted in the P-D, C-2 and C-3 districts subject to a determination by the Zoning Administrator that said placement will not impact safety or visibility for motorists and pedestrians and provided clear vision can be maintained, pursuant to Section 513 and further limited as follows:
1. 8 square feet per side;
2. One per storefront; and
3. Permitted only during hours of operation of business.
As Amended thru June 16, 2017
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Twenty One Signs
SECTION 2105 SIGN REGULATION TABLE
Zoning Districts Permitted Sign Types Max. # of Signs Allowed Max, Total sign Area Allowed
G-C
Ground
1 ( for each 600 feet of frontage)
32 Sq. Ft. (limited to 8 feet in height)
Marquee, Suspended, Wall
n/a
50 square feet or 1.5 x of principal building width whichever is greater
Projecting
1
One per storefront no greater than 48 Sq. Ft.
Portable
1 ( no permit needed)
8 Sq. Ft. (only during hours of operation)
R-1, R-2, R-3,
& R-4
Ground, Marquee, Projecting,
Suspended, Wall
n/a
16 Sq. Ft.
(Ground signs limited to 8 feet in height)
Properties with frontage on US 31 or properties with a minimum of 10, 000 sq. ft. of parcel area that front on a Key Street Segment in the R-2 Zoning District
R-2, P-D, C-1, C-2, C-3,
& W-F
Ground, Pole
1
80 Sq. Ft. (Ground signs limited to 8 feet in height)
Marquee, Suspended, Wall
n/a
50 square feet or 1.5 x of principal building width whichever is greater
Projecting
1
One per storefront no greater than 48 Sq. Ft.
Portable
1 ( no permit needed)
8 Sq. Ft. (only during hours of operation) Properties not fronting on US 31 or properties with a minimum of 10, 000 sq. ft. of parcel area that front on a Key Street Segment in the R-2 & R-3 Zoning Districts Internally lit signs are prohibited in the Historic District
R-2 & R-3, P-D, C-2, C-3, & WF
Ground
1
16 Sq. Ft. (limited to 8 feet in height)
Marquee, Suspended, Wall
n/a
50 square feet or 1.5 x of principal building width whichever is greater
Projecting
1
One per storefront no greater than 16 Sq. Ft.
Portable
1 ( no permit needed)
8 Sq. Ft. (only during hours of operation) Properties with water frontage Lighting of ground mounts signs on the riverwalk is prohibited
R-3, P-D, C-2, C-3 & W-F
Ground
1
16 Sq. Ft. (limited to 8 feet in height)
Marquee, Suspended, Wall
n/a
25 Sq. Ft. or .75 x of principal building width
Each boat slip will be permitted (1) one sign not to exceed 25 square feet.
Projecting
1
16 sq. ft.
Portable
1 (no permit needed)
8 Sq. Ft. (only during hours of operation) Industrial Properties
L-I & G-I
Ground
1 (for each 600 feet of frontage)
64 sq. ft. (limited to 12 feet in height)
Marquee, Suspended, Wall
n/a
64 Sq. Ft. (For parcels on corner lots an additional 64 sq. ft. of signage will be permitted)
Projecting
1
48 Sq. Ft.
All signs shall be setback at least four (4) feet from the public right-of-way to the front of the sign structure, provided clear vision can be maintained, pursuant to Section 513.
Where a sign projects or protrudes over any public or private sidewalk or walkway the bottommost point of the sign structure shall be at least eight (8) feet from said walkway.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
ARTICLE TWENTY-TWO
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION 2200 PURPOSE
The intent of this section is to provide for consultation and cooperation between the applicant and the Planning Commission in order that the applicant may accomplish his/her objectives in the utilization of land within the regulations of the Ordinance, with minimal adverse effect on the land, shores, roadways, natural features, infrastructure, and on existing and future uses of property in the immediate vicinity, and to insure that a proposed land use or activity is in compliance with this Ordinance. In this connection, a site plan includes the documents and drawings required by the Zoning Ordinance to insure that a proposed land use or activity is in compliance with local ordinances and state and federal statutes.
SECTION 2201 SCOPE
Every application for a zoning permit shall include a site plan. A zoning permit shall not be issued or otherwise authorized until a site plan, submitted in accordance with this Article 22, shall have been reviewed and approved, and any required securities have been received, based on the following submittal requirements:
A. Basic Site Plans shall be required for new dwellings, additions to dwellings, or construction of accessory structures, single family dwellings; accessory structures and additions to existing single family dwellings; and accessory structures and additions to multiple unit dwellings which do not result in an increase in the number of units, the site plan shall be subject to Zoning Administrator review. Site plans shall comply with Section 2203 C. [Annotation: “Basic Site Plan” language was changed to specify “accessory structures, single family dwellings; accessory structures and additions to existing single family dwellings; and accessory structures and additions to multiple unit dwellings which do not result in an increase in the number of units” by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
B. Medium Site Plan shall be required for all uses other than those that may submit a basic site plan or require a detailed site plan. Additions and alterations to existing structures will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator who shall reserve the right to forward it to the Site Plan Review Committee for approval. Medium Site Plans for new construction shall be reviewed by the Site Plan Review Committee who shall reserve the right to forward it to the Planning Commission for approval. Site plans shall comply with Section 2203D. [Annotation: “Medium Site Plan” added by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
C. Detailed Site Plans shall be required for all special uses. The site plan shall be subject to Planning Commission review. Detailed Site plans shall comply with Section 2203 E. [Annotation “Detailed Site Plan” language amended to reference Special Uses all other language was removed by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
SECTION 2202 OPTIONAL SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
Preliminary sketches of proposed site and development plans may be submitted for review to the Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning Commission or a committee of the Planning Commission, prior to official review and approval. The purpose of such procedure is to allow discussion between an applicant and the Zoning Administrator and/or Planning Commission, to better inform the applicant of the acceptability of the proposed plans prior to incurring extensive engineering and other costs which might be necessary for final site plan approval. Such sketch plans shall, at a minimum, include the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant or developer, including names and addresses of any officers of a corporation or partners of a partnership, together with telephone numbers.
B. Legal description, property parcel number, and street address of the subject parcel of land.
C. Sketch plans showing tentative site and development plans, produced on a scaled drawing illustrating existing and proposed structures, parcel boundaries, natural features, and all improvements, easements, streets, and sidewalks.
D. The Planning Commission shall not be bound by any comments or observations made pertaining to a sketch plan.
SECTION 2203 APPLICATION PROCEDURE
Request for site plan review shall be made by filing with the Zoning Administrator the required filing fee and escrow, the application form and either a basic, medium or detailed site plan, together with any special studies required. The Zoning Administrator may waive any site plan submittal requirement upon a finding that the required information is not applicable to the site. The following describes the required submittals. [Annotation: “medium” was added by Amendment Z10-04, effective10/30/10]
A. An application fee and review escrow as determined by resolution of the City Council.
B. One copy of the completed application form for site plan review which shall contain at a minimum the following information (a narrative attachment is recommended in addition to the application form to sufficiently address all of the following items):
1. Name, address and signature of applicant and property owner
2. Legal description, property parcel number and street address of the subject parcel of property.
3. Area of the subject parcel of property stated in acres, or if less than one (1) acre, in square feet.
4. Present zoning classification on parcel and on adjacent parcels.
5. Present and proposed land use.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
6. Applicant's statement of the expected effect on emergency service requirements, schools, storm water systems, automobile and truck circulation patterns and local traffic volume.
7. A description of the proposed development and the land use proposed.
C. Basic Site Plan. A basic site plan shall be required for new dwellings, additions to dwellings, or construction of accessory structures, single family dwellings; accessory structures and additions to existing single family dwellings; and accessory structures and additions to multiple unit dwellings which do not result in an increase in the number of units, the site plan shall be subject to Zoning Administrator review. Basic site plans shall include and illustrate at a minimum the following information: [Annotation: Language was changed to same language as Section 2201 Scope by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
1. A scale drawing of the site and proposed development thereon, including the date, name and address of the preparer, parcel lines and parcel area.
2. The scale of the drawing and north arrow which shall be not less than 1” = 200’ nor greater than 1” = 20’.
3. Existing man-made features, including dwellings, fences, landscaping and screening, accessory structures, and similar features; and the heights and floor area of such structures and other important features.
4. Proposed man-made features, including location of dwelling addition and/or accessory structures, fences, landscaping and screening, as applicable; and heights and floor area of such structures and other important features.
5. Setback lines and their dimensions.
6. Location of existing and proposed driveways and curb cuts, if any.
7. Location of existing public and private rights-of-way and easements contiguous to and on the property.
8. Natural features, including trees with a diameter at breast height of three inches or more, water bodies and wetlands, high-risk erosion areas, beach, sand dunes, slopes in excess of 25%, drainage and similar features.
9. Any other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator to aid in the review of the Site Plan.
D. Medium Site Plan. A medium site plan shall be required for all uses other than those that may submit a basic site plan or require a detailed site plan. Additions and alterations to existing structures will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator who shall reserve the right to forward it to the Site Plan Review Committee for approval. Medium Site Plans for new construction shall be reviewed by the Site Plan Review Committee who shall reserve the right to forward it to the Planning Commission for approval. A medium site plan shall
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
include six (6) copies of all required information including any documents rendered in color and a digital PDF of the Site Plan shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Department. Unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator the site plan shall be prepared by an Engineer, Architect, Landscape Architect or Surveyor licensed to work in Michigan and shall include and illustrate at a minimum the following information:
1. A scale drawing of the site and proposed development thereon, including the date, name, address and professional seal of the preparer. In no instance shall the scale of the drawing be greater than one inch equals 20 feet nor less than one inch equals 200 feet. One copy shall be submitted in a photo-reduced form on 17” x 11” paper.
2. The scale of the drawing and north arrow.
3. A vicinity map illustrating the property in relation to the surrounding street system.
4. Topography of the site and its relationship to adjoining land illustrated at 2-foot contours and including an area extending 100 feet from the parcel boundary.
5. Existing man-made features, including buildings, fences, landscaping, parking, screening and the locations, heights and footprint of each.
6. Illustration of all proposed improvements and buildings, fences, landscaping, parking and screening, including location, height, footprint of each.
7. Setback lines and their dimensions.
8. Percentage of land covered by buildings and impervious surfaces and that reserved for open space.
9. Dwelling unit density where pertinent; including a density schedule demonstrating number of each dwelling type, if applicable.
10. Project phasing, if applicable.
11. Location of public and private rights-of-way and easements contiguous to and within the proposed development which are planned to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned, including grades and types of construction of those upon the site.
12. Curb-cuts, driving lanes, parking and loading areas, including the number of parking spaces and parking calculations; vehicular circulation patterns and features, location and size of all parking spaces and the identification of service lanes and parking.
13. Curb-cuts and driveways on adjacent properties.
14. Location and type of drainage, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other facilities, including surface and subsurface drainage for all impermeable surfaces on the site and all drainage calculations.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
15. Existing and proposed water main, sanitary and storm sewer, natural gas, electric, telephone, cable television and other utilities, the proposed location of connections to existing utilities and any proposed extensions thereof.
16. Proposed changes to the topography of the site illustrated at no greater than two (2) foot contours.
17. Soil erosion and sediment control measures which shall include preventative soil erosion devices or measures, both during and after any site work related to the development.
18. Detail on proposed signage including an illustration of all proposed signs, their surface area, height and nature of illumination, in accordance with Article 21.
19. A lighting plan in conformance with Section 525.
20. A written and illustrated landscape plan prepared in accord with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
21. If the parcel is a result of a parcel division undertaken after the adoption of this Ordinance, the site plan shall illustrate all structures and buildings, drawn to scale located on the previously undivided property.
22. Any additional material information necessary to consider the impact of the project upon adjacent properties and the general public as may be requested by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission.
23. Any required approvals, permits, changes or modifications required by any applicable regulatory agency.
24. Special Groundwater Protection. Site Plans for facilities which use or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) per month or ninety five (95) liters (approximately twenty five (25) gallons) per month, whichever is less; or store greater than one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) or ninety five (95) liters (approximately twenty five (25) gallons), whichever is less; shall be subject to the following additional site plan submittal requirements:
a. Location and size of interior and exterior areas and structures to be used for storage, use, loading/unloading, recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances.
b. Location of all underground and aboveground storage tanks for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding tanks, chemical storage, hazardous waste storage, collection of contaminated stormwater or wash water, and all similar uses.
c. Location of exterior and interior drains, on-site sewage systems, dry wells, catch basins, retention/detention areas, sumps and other facilities designed to collect, store or transport stormwater or wastewater. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
d. Location of all water wells on the site and within one hundred fifty (150) feet surrounding the parcel's property boundaries.
e. Delineation of areas on the parcel which are known or suspected to be contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup.
f. Submission of the "Hazardous Substances Reporting Form for Site Plan Review."
g. Submission of the "State/County Environmental Permits Checklist."
h. If the area covered by the site plan includes territory within a Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone, submit a site plan review report prepared by a Manistee County Groundwater Staff Review Group (c/o Manistee County Planning Department). The site plan review report shall be a written document reporting on a county review of the same site plan prepared for this section. If the area covered by the site plan does not include territory within a Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone, a site plan review report prepared by the Manistee County Groundwater Staff Review Group may be submitted at the option of the applicant or may be required at the option of the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator. [Annotation: “Medium Site Plan” added by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
E. Detailed Site Plan. A detailed site plan shall be required for all Special Uses. Detailed site plan shall include fifteen (15) copies of all required information including any documents rendered in color and a digital PDF of the Site Plan shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Department. Unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator the site plan shall be prepared by an Engineer, Architect, Landscape Architect or Surveyor licensed to work in Michigan and shall include and illustrate at a minimum the following information: [Annotation: this section was changed by deleting Planner and replacing with Surveyor by Amendment 07-20, effective 5/29/07] [Annotation: Detailed Site Plan Language was changed to same language as Section 2201 Scope by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
1. A scale drawing of the site and proposed development thereon, including the date, name, address and professional seal of the preparer. In no instance shall the scale of the drawing be greater than one inch equals 20 feet nor less than one inch equals 200 feet. One copy shall be submitted in a photo-reduced form on 17” x 11” paper.
2. The scale of the drawing and north arrow.
3. A vicinity map illustrating the property in relation to the surrounding street system.
4. Topography of the site and its relationship to adjoining land illustrated at 2-foot contours and including an area extending 100 feet from the parcel boundary.
5. Existing man-made features, including buildings, fences, landscaping, parking, screening and the locations, heights and footprint of each.
6. Illustration of all proposed improvements and buildings, fences, landscaping, parking and screening, including location, height, footprint of each.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 7
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
7. Setback lines and their dimensions.
8. Percentage of land covered by buildings and impervious surfaces and that reserved for open space.
9. Dwelling unit density where pertinent; including a density schedule demonstrating number of each dwelling type, if applicable.
10. Project phasing, if applicable.
11. Location of public and private rights-of-way and easements contiguous to and within the proposed development which are planned to be continued, created, relocated or abandoned, including grades and types of construction of those upon the site.
12. Curb-cuts, driving lanes, parking and loading areas, including the number of parking spaces and parking calculations; vehicular circulation patterns and features, location and size of all parking spaces and the identification of service lanes and parking.
13. Curb-cuts and driveways on adjacent properties.
14. Location and type of drainage, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other facilities, including surface and subsurface drainage for all impermeable surfaces on the site and all drainage calculations.
15. Existing and proposed water main, sanitary and storm sewer, natural gas, electric, telephone, cable television and other utilities, the proposed location of connections to existing utilities and any proposed extensions thereof.
16. Proposed changes to the topography of the site illustrated at no greater than two (2) foot contours.
17. Soil erosion and sediment control measures which shall include preventative soil erosion devices or measures, both during and after any site work related to the development.
18. Detail on proposed signage including an illustration of all proposed signs, their surface area, height and nature of illumination, in accordance with Article 21.
19. A lighting plan in conformance with Section 525.
20. A written and illustrated landscape plan prepared in accord with Section 531 of this Zoning Ordinance.
21. If the parcel is a result of a parcel division undertaken after the adoption of this Ordinance, the site plan shall illustrate all structures and buildings, drawn to scale located on the previously undivided property.
22. Any additional material information necessary to consider the impact of the project upon adjacent properties and the general public as may be requested by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 8
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
23. Any required approvals, permits, changes or modifications required by any applicable regulatory agency.
24. Special Groundwater Protection. Site Plans for facilities which use or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) per month or ninety five (95) liters (approximately twenty five (25) gallons) per month, whichever is less; or store greater than one hundred (100) kilograms (approximately two hundred twenty (220) pounds) or ninety five (95) liters (approximately twenty five (25) gallons), whichever is less; shall be subject to the following additional site plan submittal requirements:
a. Location and size of interior and exterior areas and structures to be used for storage, use, loading/unloading, recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances.
b. Location of all underground and aboveground storage tanks for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding tanks, chemical storage, hazardous waste storage, collection of contaminated stormwater or wash water, and all similar uses.
c. Location of exterior and interior drains, on-site sewage systems, dry wells, catch basins, retention/detention areas, sumps and other facilities designed to collect, store or transport stormwater or wastewater. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan.
d. Location of all water wells on the site and within one hundred fifty (150) feet surrounding the parcel's property boundaries.
e. Delineation of areas on the parcel which are known or suspected to be contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup.
f. Submission of the "Hazardous Substances Reporting Form for Site Plan Review."
g. Submission of the "State/County Environmental Permits Checklist."
h. If the area covered by the site plan includes territory within a Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone, submit a site plan review report prepared by a Manistee County Groundwater Staff Review Group (c/o Manistee County Planning Department). The site plan review report shall be a written document reporting on a county review of the same site plan prepared for this section. If the area covered by the site plan does not include territory within a Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone, a site plan review report prepared by the Manistee County Groundwater Staff Review Group may be submitted at the option of the applicant or may be required at the option of the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator.
E. Special Studies or Research. For complex site plans and/or for land uses that may generate significant impacts on surrounding land uses or public facilities, the Zoning Administrator or
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 9
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
Planning Commission may require any or all of the following reports or studies as a part of a complete site plan.
1. Environmental Assessment shall be a summary review of the environmental impacts of a project in accordance with the following standards:
a. The purpose of the Environmental Assessment shall be
1) to provide relevant information to the Planning Commission on the potential environmental impact of applications for special land use permits for substantial projects that may have an impact on the natural, social and economic environment of the City;
2) to inject into the developer’s planning process consideration of the characteristics of the land and the interests of the community at large, and
3) to facilitate participation of the citizens of the community in the review of substantial developments.
b. Guidelines. When required by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator pursuant to this Section, an applicant for a special use permit shall prepare an Environmental Assessment in accordance with these guidelines. An Environmental Assessment is not an Environmental Impact Statement, but rather a summary review of the site in question considering the past and present land uses and the proposed development. The analysis is intended to determine how the proposed development will meet the goals of the community as they are expressed in the Master Plan. The complexity of the Environmental Assessment will depend on the scope of the project and the magnitude of the potential impact. In preparing the Environmental Assessment, judgment should be exercised to keep the form and extent of responses in proportion to the scope of the project. Each answer is to be as brief as practicable, although the Planning Commission may request further elaboration. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may waive elements of these guidelines as either not applicable or previously addressed in other submittals, on a case-by-case basis. All information must be submitted in the following format and shall not merely reference a study or report completed previously, rather whenever possible, the Environmental Assessment report shall incorporate a summary of the findings of such study or report in addition to such cross-references. In addition, any cross-referenced study or report shall be submitted with the Environmental Assessment.
c. Content. The following material shall be included and/or addressed in the Environmental Assessment, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission as not applicable:
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 10
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
1) A description of the site in its current condition. This shall indicate any buildings to be preserved and those to be removed along with an indication of what will be done with the demolition debris. This must also include information on:
a) Flora and fauna (be sure to list any endangered species on-site)
b) General topography and drainage patterns including any regulated features such as wetlands, high risk erosion areas or other features
c) Adjacent waterways
d) Existing wells, approximate depth and use
2) A description of any asbestos abatement proposed for the site. If applicable, this shall include a description of the method to be sure this material does not get into the surrounding area.
3) A description of any existing contamination on-site. This should include a description of the nature of the contamination on-site and what will be done on this project to mitigate or contain it, including the proposed methodology and any state or federal regulatory agency reviews that may apply. If the project includes work that may disturb or displace existing contaminated soils or water, this should include a description of proposed methods to contain and/or dispose of the generated waste.
4) If the proposed project will impact any coastal areas or floodplain or involve riparian work along adjacent waterways, a description of the proposed work and the methodology proposed to protect waterways shall be provided.
5) A description of the existing soils on-site and as to the suitability of these soils for the proposed use.
6) A description of any historical or archeological significance associated with the site. If any such areas are present, this shall include a description of methods to protect and preserve any historic or archeological resources.
7) A description of any emissions from the proposed development as it relates to air quality. If any emissions are proposed, this shall include a description of each constituent and the effects of each constituent to nature and human life.
8) A description of any hazardous materials or waste to be stored on-site. This shall include a description of proposed methods to contain such materials and prevent any migration into adjoining soils or groundwater or into the atmosphere.
9) A description of any storm water or process water discharges from the site. This shall include a characterization of such discharge in terms of the quantity, quality
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 11
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
and chemical constituents and temperature and a description of the possible effects this discharge may have on the receiving waters.
10) If a Federal, State, or local regulatory authority has conducted an Environmental Assessment, Environmental Impact Statement, or a preliminary assessment/site inspection or environmental survey of the site, a brief description of the findings and provide a copy of the report or results.
11) A description of the anticipated noise levels to be generated at all property lines of the proposed use. This shall include a description of measures proposed to mitigate noise.
12) A description of the anticipated traffic to be generated by the proposed use.
13) A description of plans for site restoration after construction.
14) A description of methods to handle sanitary waste for the project both during construction and after completion.
15) A description of how potable water will be provided to the site. If any on-site wells are proposed or any lake-draw systems are proposed for the project, this shall include a description of the type of well or lake draw system, any regulatory requirements that may apply and the status of such regulatory approval.
16) A description of any additional items as needed to relay the potential environmental impacts of the proposed project.
d. The individual preparing the Environmental Assessment must sign and seal (if prepared by a registered engineer, land surveyor, community planner or landscape architect) the submitted document.
2. Traffic Impact Study. The Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may require that a traffic impact study completed by qualified professional be prepared as an attachment to a site plan submitted for any development in the City meeting the requirements of this section. The purpose of this section is to set forth the standards to be used by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission in requiring the submission of such a traffic impact study, the required minimum content of such a study and the standards and procedures for the review of its findings.
a. Description. A traffic impact study shall include an analysis of the existing traffic conditions on the roadway network in the vicinity of a proposed project, including any accident history, average speeds, average daily and peak hour traffic volumes and levels of service of all key roadway segments and intersections. The study shall further indicate the effect of a proposed development on adjacent roadways and intersections and indicate the anticipated points of origin, direction and volume of traffic flow to and from the proposed development. The study shall be prepared by
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 12
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
either a registered professional engineer (P.E.) or transportation planner with at least five (5) years of experience preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan. The study shall include a summary of the qualifications and documented experience of the author and specifically describing experience in preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan. If the traffic impact study involves geometric design recommendations, the study shall be prepared or supervised by a registered engineer with a strong background in traffic engineering.
b. Criteria for Requiring a Traffic Impact Study. The Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may require that a traffic impact study be prepared as an attachment to a site plan for any proposed commercial, industrial, residential or mixed use development which has the potential to significantly increase traffic volumes on the surrounding roadway network. In determining the level of potential impact, the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission shall consult appropriate planning and engineering texts including, but not limited to, Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers and may seek the counsel of other professionals with experience with developments similar to that proposed. A traffic impact study may be required under this section when, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission, the proposed development will result in an increase of either the average daily traffic or the peak hour traffic equal to or greater than ten percent (10%) of the current traffic volume on the adjoining roadway.
c. Required Study Content. In general, a required traffic impact study shall document existing conditions on the existing roadway network including all intersections within one (1) mile of the proposed development including average daily traffic and peak hour volumes in all directions, existing turning movements, levels of service, average traffic speeds and accident history. Existing pedestrian and non-motorized traffic volumes shall also be estimated. The traffic impact study shall project the impact of the proposed development on the roadway network including all intersections within one (1) mile of the proposed development including projected average daily traffic and peak hour volumes in all directions, anticipated turning movements and anticipated levels of service. Anticipated impacts on pedestrian and non-motorized traffic volumes shall also be projected. The following specific elements shall be addressed in a required traffic impact study, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission:
1) A narrative summary at the beginning of the report, including, but not limited to:
a) The applicant and project name.
b) A location map.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 13
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
c) The size and type of development.
d) Generated traffic volumes based on type and size of land use which are compatible with those listed in the Institute of Transportation Engineers – publication, Trip Generation (current edition).
2) Project phasing identifying the year of development activities per phase and proposed access plan for each phase.
3) A transportation system inventory, which describes the physical, functional and operational characteristics of the study area highway system and, where appropriate, locate transit services. The description should provide, where pertinent, data on:
a) peak-hour volumes (existing and projected)
b) number of lanes
c) cross-section
d) intersection traffic signals and configuration
e) traffic signal progression
f) percentage of heavy trucks
g) adjacent access point locations
h) jurisdiction
i) grades
4) Plan showing proposed roadway per phase for each access. Driveway design and roadway improvements shall meet Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) or City of Manistee standards and guides.
5) Capacity analysis shall be performed at each access point. The City’s preference is the use of Highway Capacity Software, (HCS 2000), or a later version thereof. Default values shall not be used when actual values are reasonably available or obtainable. The interaction of conflicting traffic movements shall be addressed in the traffic impact study. Any proposed signalized access within one (1) mile of an existing signalized intersection shall be analyzed in coordination with the existing signal timing. A time-space diagram should also be included.
6) A traffic impact study shall include an analysis of conditions with and without the proposed development on the existing system, and with the proposed development for both existing and projected traffic volumes. The traffic volumes for the development shall assume a total build out. The completed analysis shall be summarized in a table showing all the Measures of Effectiveness (MOE) for all of the above conditions.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 14
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
7) Required operational changes shall be part of the site plan review and any access permit approval process.
d. Evaluation and Criteria. As a general criteria, the existing roadway network and all access points to a proposed development shall be demonstrated to be fully capable of accommodating the increased average and peak hour traffic anticipated. In the event the anticipated level of service on any roadway segment or intersection is shown to decline, the traffic impact study shall present alternative approaches proposed to manage anticipated traffic without such decline.
e. The Zoning Administrator may be provided to the City Engineer, Planner and/or an independent traffic engineer or transportation planner to review and comment on any traffic impact study prepared pursuant to this Section. The cost of any such review shall be borne by the applicant.
3. Market Study. For unique development proposals, projects that may entail some financial expense or risk on the part of the City and/or projects that may, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, fundamentally alter the character of the community, the Planning Commission may require a market study to demonstrate a reasonable expectation that a market exists for a proposed development. Such a study shall be prepared in accord with this Section.
a. Description. A market study shall be a detailed and documented analysis of the existing and projected economic conditions in the community that may impact both the proposed demand for the products or services to be generated on a site and the impact on other potentially competing businesses and services in the community that may result from the proposed development.
b. Content. Unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission, a market study shall include the following elements:
1) An executive summary which outlines the key findings of the study.
2) The background for the study including both project background and the methodology and approach used.
3) An overview of the market area including area demographic information and a description of the transportation and service infrastructure that would serve the proposed development.
4) A trade area delineation describing the likely geographic area that may be influenced by the proposed development along with detail on the methodology used in defining the trade area.
5) A market feasibility analysis that defines the supply of competing facilities existing and planned in the marketplace, the inventory of alternative sources of
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 15
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
supply or services that may compete with the proposed development and the demand for the products and services to be provided by the proposed development. This shall include a supply/demand gap analysis and a description of the ways in which the proposed development may address the gap defined.
6) The credentials of the author(s) of the market study.
c. Evaluation. The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall review the market study to be satisfied that there is a reasonable expectation that the proposed development will meet with economic success without creating excessive dislocations within the existing marketplace.
SECTION 2204 ACTION ON APPLICATION AND SITE PLANS
A. Upon receipt of a submitted application and site plan, the Zoning Administrator shall review the plan to determine its completeness. If the submittal is incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with a list of items needed to make the submittal complete.
1. If a basic site plan is found to be complete, the Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan in accordance with Section 2205 and approve or deny the application accordingly.
2. If a medium site plan is found to be complete, the Zoning Administrator or Site Plan Review Committee who shall reserve the right to forward it to the Planning Commission for approval shall review the site plan in accordance with Section 2205 and approve or deny the application accordingly. [Annotation: Section 2204.A was amended to include language for medium site plans by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
B. If a detailed site plan submittal is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall record the date of receipt and transmit copies thereof to each of the Planning Commissioners; to the Fire Department when necessary; to other area review agencies, such as the City Engineer, County Health Department, Michigan Department of Transportation, retaining at least one (1) copy in the Zoning Administrator’s office.
C. A meeting shall be scheduled for a review of the application, plans, and of the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator with regard thereto. Members of the Planning Commission shall be delivered copies of the same prior to the meeting for their preliminary information and study. The meeting shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the date of the receipt of the plans and completed application.
D. The applicant shall be notified of the date, time and place of the meeting on the application not less than three (3) days prior to such date.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 16
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
E. After conducting a review of the site plan, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve conditionally or reject the site plan, as it pertains to requirements and standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance. Any conditions required by the Planning Commission shall be stated in writing and shown on the site plan, together with the reasons for such conditions, and delivered to the applicant. Decisions by the Planning Commission shall be made within one hundred (100) days of the receipt of the completed application. Any conditions imposed on the application and site plan shall:
1. Be designed to protect natural resources; the health, safety, welfare, and social and economic well being of users of the land use or activity under consideration, residents, and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity; and the community as a whole.
2. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
3. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, and be related to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards.
F. A site plan approved or conditionally approved by the Planning Commission which includes a landscape plan submitted under Section 531, may require a performance guarantee pursuant to subparagraph G hereof of this Section. [Annotation: “shall” changed to “may” by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
G. Two copies of the approved site plan, with any conditions shall be maintained as part of the City records for future review and enforcement. One (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant. Each copy shall be signed by the applicant and the Chair of the Planning Commission and dated with the date of approval for identification of the approved plans. If any variances from the Zoning Ordinance have been obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals, the minutes concerning the variances, duly signed, shall also be filed with the City records as a part of the site plan and delivered to the applicant for information and direction.
H. To insure compliance with the site plan, Zoning Ordinance, and any conditions, limitations or requirements imposed on the applicant, the Zoning Administrator, upon recommendation and consent of the Planning Commission, may require a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond in an amount and under conditions permitted by law. Such security shall be deposited with the City Treasurer at the time of permit issuance authorizing the commencement of such project. Where the project will take more than ninety (90) days to be completed, the Zoning Administrator may authorize a return of a portion of the deposit in reasonable proportion to the completion of the required improvements. Such security shall not exceed the estimated cost to fulfill the required conditions, limitations established for the site plan.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 17
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
SECTION 2205 REVIEW CRITERIA
In the process of reviewing a site plan, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall consider:
A. That there is a proper relationship between the existing streets and highways within the vicinity, and proposed deceleration lanes, service drives, entrance and exit driveways, and parking areas to assure the safety and convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and that the proposed streets and access plan conform to any street or access plan adopted by the City or the Michigan Department of Transportation.
B. That the buildings, structures, and entrances thereto proposed to be located upon the premises are so situated and so designed as to minimize adverse effects upon owners and occupants of adjacent properties and the neighborhood.
C. That as many natural features of the landscape shall be retained as possible, particularly, where they furnish a barrier or buffer between the project and adjoining properties used for dissimilar purposes and where they assist in preserving the general appearance of the neighborhood or help control erosion or the discharge of storm waters.
D. That any adverse effect of the proposed development and activities emanating therefrom upon adjoining residents or owners shall be minimized by appropriate screening, fencing or walls, or landscaping.
E. That all provisions of this Ordinance are complied with unless an appropriate variance therefrom has been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
F. That all buildings and structures are accessible to emergency vehicles.
G. That plans for erosion control and storm water discharge has been approved by the appropriate public agency.
H. The relationship to shore and river preservation principles where appropriate.
I. That the plan as approved is consistent with the intent and purpose of zoning to promote public health, safety and general welfare; to encourage the use of lands in accordance with their character and adaptability; to avoid the overcrowding of population; to lessen congestion on the public roads and streets; to reduce hazards to life and property; to facilitate adequate provisions for a system of transportation, sewage disposal, safe and adequate water supply, education, recreation and other public requirements; and to conserve the expenditure of funds for public improvements and services to conform with the most advantageous uses of land, resources and properties; to preserve property values and natural resources; and to give reasonable consideration to character of a particular area, its peculiar suitability for particular uses and the general appropriate trend and character of land, building, and population development.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 18
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
J. That all utility services shall be provided on site in a manner least harmful to surrounding properties, and that all utilities are located underground, as applicable, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or Zoning Board of Appeals.
K. That all applicable local, regional, state and federal statutes are complied with.
L. Projects proposed within three hundred (300) feet of Lake Michigan, Manistee Lake and/or the Manistee River Channel shall be arranged to preserve the maximum possible view corridor from public activity areas to said bodies of water. For the purpose of this Section public activity centers shall include pedestrian walkways, outdoor recreation areas, outdoor eating/drinking facilities, outdoor attractions or amenities (such as fountains, statues, monuments, public benches/seating, and other similar features) which are designed to attract and promote the gathering of the general public on-site.
SECTION 2206 CONFORMITY TO APPROVED SITE PLANS
Property which is the subject of site plan approval must be developed in strict compliance with the approved site plan and any amendments thereto which have received the approval of the Planning Commission. If construction and development does not conform with such approved plans, the approval shall be revoked by the Zoning Administrator by written notice of such revocation posted upon the premises involved and mailed to the applicant at the last known address. Upon revocation of such approval, all construction activities shall immediately cease upon the site, other than for the purpose of correcting the violation. However, the Planning Commission may, upon proper application, approve an amendment to the site plan pursuant to Section 2208.
SECTION 2207 TERM OF APPROVAL OF THE SITE PLAN
Approval of the site plan shall be valid for a period of one (1) year after the date of approval. The Planning Commission may grant extensions if applied for and granted in writing. The reasons for extensions may be the inability to complete the requirements, financial constraints, regulatory approvals or other proven hardship. If a zoning permit has not been obtained and the on-site development actually commenced within said one (1) year, the site plan approval shall become null and void and a site plan approval application shall be required and approved before any construction or earth change is commenced upon the site.
SECTION 2208 AMENDMENT TO THE SITE PLAN
No changes shall be made to an approved site plan prior to or during construction except upon application to the Zoning Administrator according to the following procedures:
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 19
Article Twenty Two Site Plan Review
A. Minor changes to a Basic Site Plan. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes to a basic site plan involving changes in the location of buildings and structures, adjustment of utilities, walkways traffic ways, and parking areas.
B. Minor changes to a Medium Site Plan. The entity that approved the original plan may approve minor changes involving changes in the location of buildings and structures, adjustment of utilities, walkways traffic ways, and parking areas to a medium site plan.
C. Minor Changes to a Detailed Site Plan. Minor changes involving changes in the location of buildings and structures, adjustment of utilities, walkways traffic ways, and parking areas and the construction of accessory buildings or additions to primary structures less than seven hundred (700) square feet in area to a Detailed Site Plan can be approved by the Site Plan Review Committee who shall reserve the right to forward it to the Planning Commission for approval.
D. Major Changes to a Basic Site Plan or Medium Site Plan. Major changes to a Basic Site Plan or Medium Site Plan involving change in the number and location of accesses to public streets and alleys, a reduction in the number of parking spaces, a major relocation of a building, increase in the gross floor area or heights of buildings, a reduction in open space and similar major changes will require a new application.
E. Major changes or Amendments to a Detailed Site Plan. Major changes or Amendments to a Detailed Site Plan involving change in the number and location of accesses to public streets and alleys, a reduction in the number of parking spaces, a major relocation of a building, increase in the gross floor area or heights of buildings, a reduction in open space and similar major changes, shall require approval of the Planning Commission, in the same manner as the original application was submitted, reviewed, and approved. [Annotation: Section 2208 was amended to address changes when Medium Site Plan language was added by Amendment Z10-04, effective 10/30/10]
SECTION 2209 APPEALS
With regard to site plan approval decisions, an appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals in the manner as other administration decisions. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of said Board shall be necessary to reverse any decision by the Planning Commission, or to decide in favor of the applicant. The appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City or State. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the grounds of each determination.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Three Reserved
ARTICLE TWENTY-THREE
RESERVED
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Four Administration
ARTICLE TWENTY-FOUR
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 2400 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
A. The City Manager shall designate an individual to serve as the Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may delegate duties to such other persons as the City Manager may assign to assist.
B. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature or the violation and ordering the action necessary for correction. He/she shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal addition, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; and shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance or general law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 2401 DUTIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE ZONING ADMINSTRATOR
A. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant Land Use Permits and to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful for the Zoning Administrator to approve any plans or issue a Land Use Permit for any excavation or construction or use until such plans have been reviewed in detail and are found to be in compliance with this Ordinance. To this end, the Zoning Administrator shall require that an application for a Land Use Permit for excavation, construction, moving, alteration, or change in type of use or type of occupancy, shall, where required by this Ordinance, be accompanied by a site plan, in accordance with Article 22 hereof.
C. If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration, or use of land as set forth in the application, and site plan, when required, is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Land Use Permit. If an application for such permit is not approved, the Zoning Administrator shall state in writing the cause for such disapproval.
D. The Zoning Administrator may, but shall not be required to, accept a preliminary application and an incomplete submittal where a basic clarification is desired prior to proceeding with further technical work; and the Zoning Administrator may on such preliminary submittal take the formal action of tentative denial or tentative approval. Provided, that the applicant shall be advised, in writing, that such tentative denial or approval may be overturned by the Planning Commission.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Twenty Four Administration
E. Issuance of a Land Use Permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator is under no circumstances permitted to grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order, or regulation contained in this Ordinance to any person making application to excavate, construct, move, alter, or use buildings, structures, or land. The Zoning Administrator is under no circumstance permitted to make changes to this Ordinance or to vary the terms of this Ordinance in carrying out his duties.
F. The Zoning Administrator shall not refuse to issue a Land Use Permit when the applicant has complied with all applicable conditions required by this Ordinance. Violations of contracts such as covenants or private agreements which may result upon the granting of said permit are not cause for refusal to issue a permit.
SECTION 2402 LAND USE PERMIT
A. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure, including an accessory building, or to commence the moving, or structural alteration, including an accessory building, costing more than one-hundred dollars ($100.00) or exceeding one-hundred (100) square feet in floor area, until the Zoning Administrator has issued for such work a Land Use Permit including a certification of his opinion that plans, specifications, and intended use of such structure do in all respects conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful to alter the contour of land, or to change the type of use or type of occupancy of any building, or to extend any use on any lot on which there is a nonconforming use, until the Zoning Administrator has issued for such intended use a Land Use Permit.
C. In all cases where a building permit is required, application for a Land Use Permit shall be made coincidentally with the application for a building permit and in all other cases shall be made not less than ten (10) days prior to the time when a new or enlarged use of a building or premises or part thereof is intended to begin. This application shall be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator and shall provide all relevant project information. A record of all such applications shall be kept on file by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Any Land Use Permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be valid only for a period of one (1) year following the date of issuance thereof. Any project which has not commenced within the one (1) year period will require the re-issuance of extension of the Land Use Permit.
E. When the Zoning Administrator receives an application for a Land Use Permit, which requires a special land use approval, variance, or other approval, he shall so inform the applicant.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Twenty Four Administration
F. Before any Land Use Permit shall be issued, an application and inspection fee and any required escrow fees shall be paid. The amount of such fees and escrows shall be fixed by a schedule established by resolution of the City Council.
G. No building or structure or use for which a Land Use Permit has been issued shall be used or occupied until after a final inspection has been performed which indicates that all the provisions of this Ordinance are met with and a Certificate or Occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. The issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2403 REAPPLICATION
No application for a special land use, Site Plan Review, Planned Unit Development, or variance which has been denied, in whole or in part, by either the Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals may be resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the denial, except on the grounds of newly discovered evidence.
SECTION 2404 REHEARING
A. The Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a rehearing under exceptional circumstances for any decision made by it. Exceptional circumstances shall mean any of the following:
1. The applicant who brought the matter before the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals made misrepresentations concerning a material issue which was relied upon by the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals in reaching its decision.
2. There has been a material change in circumstances regarding the Planning Commission’s or Zoning Board of Appeals’ findings of fact which occurred after the public hearing.
3. The City Attorney by written opinion states that in the Attorney’s professional opinion the decision made by the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals or the procedure used in the matter was clearly erroneous.
B. A rehearing may be requested by the applicant or by the Zoning Administrator, or a rehearing may be granted by the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals on its own motion, pursuant to the following procedure:
1. A request for a rehearing which is made by an applicant must be made within twenty-one (21) days from the date of approval of the Planning Commission’s or Zoning Board of Appeals’ minutes regarding the decision for which the rehearing is being requested.
2. A request for a rehearing made by the Zoning Administrator or a rehearing granted by the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals on its own motion may be granted at any time as long as the applicant has not been prejudiced by any delay.
3. Whenever the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals considers granting a rehearing, it shall provide written notice to the applicant that a rehearing will be
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Twenty Four Administration
considered. The notice may be served upon the applicant by first class mail at the applicant’s last known address, or may be served personally on the applicant. The notice must be served at least nine (9) days before the time set for the hearing if served by mail, or at least seven (7) days before the time set for the hearing if served by personal service. Service by mail shall be complete upon mailing. In addition to serving the above notice on the applicant, all other notice requirements for the type of decision being heard shall be completed before the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals holds a hearing at which it considers whether to grant a rehearing.
C. If the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals grants a rehearing, then the rehearing on the merits shall not be held until all notice requirements for the type of decision being reheard have been satisfied.
As Amended thru January 16, 2013
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Five Zoning Board of Appeals
ARTICLE TWENTY-FIVE
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION 2500 ESTABLISHMENT
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 601 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended). The Zoning Board of Appeals shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided by said Act, as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this Ordinance may be equitably achieved; that there shall be provided a means for competent interpretation and controlled flexibility in the application of this Ordinance; that the health, safety, and welfare of the public be secured; and that substantial justice be secured. [Annotation: This paragraph was changed to reflect the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act by Amendment 07-21, effective 5/29/07]
SECTION 2501 MEMBERSHIP, TERMS OF OFFICE
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the City Council. The first member of such board shall be a member of the Planning Commission, and the Commissioner’s term on the board shall be concurrent with his term on the Planning Commission. The Mayor of the City of Manistee with approval of the City Council shall appoint the remaining members of the Board. The members selected shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the City. One member may be a member of the City Council. An elected officer of the City shall not serve as Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The total amount allowed the Zoning Board of Appeals in any one (1) year as per diem or as expenses actually incurred in the discharge of their duties shall not exceed a reasonable sum, which sum may be appropriated annually in advance by the City Council A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the legislative body for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. [Annotation: this paragraph was changed to reflect the requirements for members in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act by Amendment 07-21, effective 5/29/07]
The term of each member shall be for three (3) years. A successor shall be appointed not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has expired. All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. The Mayor and City Council shall seek to stagger the expiration dates of members of the Zoning Board of Appeals so at least one
As Amended thru January 16, 2013
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Twenty Five Zoning Board of Appeals
member’s term expires each year and to achieve a reasonable degree of continuity of membership from one year to the next. Council, by a majority of the members serving, may appoint up to two (2) alternate members, who shall serve for three (3) years. [Annotation: The last sentence in this paragraph was changed by Amendment 12-09, effective 1/16/13]
SECTION 2502 MEETINGS
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times as the Board in its rules of procedure may specify. The Chair or in his absence, the acting Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The Board shall maintain a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. The Board shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members of the Board are present.
SECTION 2503 DUTIES, RULES, HEARING AND DECISIONS OF APPEALS, RIGHT TO AND GROUNDS OF APPEAL
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act upon all questions as they may arise in the administration of this Ordinance, including the interpretation of the zoning maps, and may fix rules and regulations to govern its procedures. It shall also hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the administrative official charged with enforcement of this Ordinance. It shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon which they are required to pass under this Ordinance. Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City, County, or State. The grounds of every determination shall be stated.
SECTION 2504 TIME TO AND NOTICE OF APPEAL: TRANSMISSION OF RECORD
Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals by general rule, by the filing with the City Clerk, the Zoning Administrator or other officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of Appeals of a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof together with a fee established by the City Council which shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time the notice of appeal is filed. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
As Amended thru January 16, 2013
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Twenty Five Zoning Board of Appeals
SECTION 2505 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS PENDING APPEAL
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, except as provided herein. Proceedings shall not be stayed in the event the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal is filed, that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. The Zoning Board of Appeals or the Circuit Court may issue a restraining order to re-institute a stay on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken with due cause shown.
SECTION 2506 HEARINGS AND NOTICES, RIGHT TO BE HEARD, DISPOSITION OF APPEALS, DECISION NOT FINAL
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this Ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, in passing upon appeals, to vary or modify any of its rules, regulations or provisions so that the spirit of the Ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be final, and any person having an interest affected by this Ordinance shall have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court.
SECTION 2507 DUTIES AND POWERS
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of intent of this Ordinance, but does have power to act on those matters where by statute or this Ordinance provision is made for an administrative review, interpretation, variance or exception as defined therein.
A. Review. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission or by any other official in administering or enforcing any provision of this Ordinance. The allegation shall be duly made within thirty (30) days of the date of decision being appealed. The date of decision is presumed to be five (5) days after the literal date of decision.
B. Interpretation. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to:
As Amended thru January 16, 2013
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Twenty Five Zoning Board of Appeals
1. Interpret, upon request, the provisions of this Ordinance in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the Ordinance.
2. Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts.
3. Classify a use which is not specifically mentioned as part of the use regulations of any zoning district, except as provided herein, so that it conforms to a comparable permitted or prohibited use, in accordance with the purpose and intent of each district.
C. Variances. The Board shall have the power to authorize, upon an appeal, specific variances from such requirements as lot area and width regulations, building height regulations, yard and depth regulations, and off-street parking and loading space requirements provided it finds that all of the Basic Conditions and any one (1) of the Specific Conditions set forth herein can be satisfied. The appellant shall submit, along with the established fee and other materials, a narrative demonstrating why a variance is sought.
1. Basic Conditions. The Board shall find that a variance request meets all of the following conditions.
a. The requested variance shall not be contrary to the public interest or to the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
b. The requested variance shall not permit the establishment within a district of any use which is not permitted by right within that zone district, or any use or dimensional variance for which a special land use permit is required.
c. The requested variance shall not cause a substantial adverse effect upon properties in the immediate vicinity or in the district in which the property of the applicant is located.
d. The conditions or situations which necessitate the requested variance is not so general or of such recurrent nature as to make the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions reasonably practical.
e. The requested variance shall relate only to property that is under control of the applicant.
f. The requested variance shall not be necessitated by any self-created condition or action taken by the applicant or property owner.
g. There is no reasonable alternative location on the parcel for the proposed improvements for which a variance is sought where such alternative location would eliminate the need for the requested variance or reduce the extent of the condition(s) necessitating the variance.
h. The requested variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land.
As Amended thru January 16, 2013
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Twenty Five Zoning Board of Appeals
2. Special Conditions. When all of the foregoing basic conditions can be satisfied, a variance may be granted when any one (1) of the following special conditions can be clearly demonstrated:
a. Where there are practical difficulties which prevent full compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. Such practical difficulties shall be evaluated in terms of the use of a particular parcel of land. Neither the fact that the appellant could: (a) incur additional costs to achieve full compliance, or (b) receive additional income with less than full compliance shall be determined a practical difficulty for the purposes of this paragraph.
b. Where there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or physical conditions such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, or topography of the property involved, or to the intended use of the property that do not generally apply to other property or uses in the same zoning district.
c. Where such variation is necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zoning district.
3. Rules. The following rules shall be applied in the granting of variances:
a. The Board may specify, in writing, such conditions regarding the character, location, and other features that will in its judgment, secure the objectives and purposes of this Ordinance. The breach of any such condition shall automatically invalidate the permit granted.
b. Each variance granted under the provisions of this Ordinance shall become null and void unless: The construction authorized by such variance has received a City zoning permit within one (1) year after the granting of the variance; and the occupancy of land, premises, or buildings authorized by the variance has taken place within one (1) year after the granting of the variance, unless an extension of time has been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
c. No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the Board shall be re-submitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the last denial, except on the grounds of newly discovered evidence of changed conditions found, upon inspection by the Board, to be valid. For such newly discovered evidence to be considered, an applicant shall submit a detailed description of such evidence to the Zoning Administrator who shall place it on the agenda of the Zoning Board of Appeals along with a report and recommendation on the nature of such newly discovered evidence and whether it may have been pertinent to the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the newly discovered evidence would have been pertinent to its decision, it shall direct the Zoning Administrator to accept a new application for the previously denied variance.
As Amended thru January 16, 2013
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Twenty Five Zoning Board of Appeals
An application considered under the terms of this subparagraph shall be considered a new application and shall be subject to all hearing, notice and fee requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2508 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE FOR COMPLIANCE
In authorizing any variance, or in granting any conditional, temporary or special approval permits, the City Zoning Board of Appeals may require that a performance guarantee be furnished to insure compliance with the requirements, specifications and conditions imposed with the grant of variance or permit and to insure the discontinuance of a temporary use by a stipulated time. Such performance guarantee may be in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit, at the discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Six Municipal Civil Infractions
ARTICLE TWENTY-SIX
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
SECTION 2600 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
Any person, corporation or firm who disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or any permit, license or exception granted hereunder, or any lawful order of the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or the City Council issued in pursuance of this Ordinance shall be in violation of this Ordinance. Any such violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance, per se. Whoever violates any provision of this Ordinance is guilty of a Civil Infraction in accordance with Section 202.99 of the City of Manistee Codified Ordinances.
SECTION 2601 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
The penalties provided herein shall not prohibit the City from seeking injunctive relief against a violator or such other appropriate relief as may be provided by law.
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Seven Fees, Charges & Escrow Accounts
ARTICLE TWENTY-SEVEN
FEES, CHARGES AND ESCROW ACCOUNTS
SECTION 2700 FEES
The City Council shall establish by resolution, fees for occupancy certificates, appeals, application for amendments or special uses, and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the Community Development Department and may be altered only by resolution of the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
SECTION 2701 APPLICANT ESCROW ACCOUNTS
If the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the basic fees provided under Section 2700 hereof, will not cover the actual costs of the application review or appeal, or if the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals determines that review of the application and/or participation in the review process or appeal by qualified professional planners, engineers, attorneys, or other professionals is necessary, then the applicant shall deposit with the City Treasurer such additional zoning fees in an amount determined by the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals equal to the estimated additional costs. The additional zoning fees shall be held in escrow in the applicant's name and shall be used solely to pay these additional costs. If the amount held in escrow becomes less than ten percent (10%) of the initial escrow deposit or less than ten percent (10%) of the latest additional escrow deposit and review of the application or decision on the appeal is not completed, then the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to deposit additional fees into escrow in an amount determined by the Zoning Administrator to be equal to the estimated costs to complete the review or decide the appeal. Failure of the applicant to make any escrow deposit required under this Ordinance shall be deemed to make the application incomplete or the appeal procedurally defective thereby justifying the denial of the application or the dismissal of the appeal. Any unexpended funds held in escrow shall be returned to the applicant following final action on the application or the final decision on the appeal. Any actual costs incurred by the City in excess of the amount held in escrow shall be billed to the applicant and shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit or the release of a final decision on an appeal.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
ARTICLE TWENTY-EIGHT
AMENDMENTS
SECTION 2800 AMENDMENTS
Any person affected by this Ordinance may submit a petition in writing to the secretary of the Planning Commission requesting that consideration be given to amendments to this Ordinance in the particulars set forth in the petition. The Planning Commission shall hold a meeting to consider said petition in accordance Section 202 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended). [Annotation: this paragraph was changed to reflect the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act by Amendment 07-22, effective 5/29/07]
SECTION 2801 REZONING AGREEMENTS
A. Any interested property owner may voluntarily offer in writing, and the City may approve, certain uses and/or development of the land or other activities as a condition to a rezoning of the land.
B. Application Procedure.
1. If the applicant wishes to submit an offer of conditions or restrictions along with a petition to rezone land, the applicant shall do so in writing. Proposed restrictions shall be stated clearly, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The offer of conditions or restrictions shall be received with the application to rezone the land, except as provided in subparagraph 4 hereof.
2. The applicant may request a pre-application meeting, in which the Zoning Administrator and other City officials may identify concerns reasonably related to the rezoning request. The City shall not require the applicant to offer conditions or restrictions as a prerequisite for rezoning or shall the presentation of an offer of conditions or restrictions create any obligation on the part of the City to rezone any land.
3. The City of Manistee shall not add to, alter, or augment the offer of conditions or restrictions.
4. The offer of conditions or restrictions shall be received in writing with the rezoning application, prior to the Planning Commission public hearing on the rezoning request. Provided, if an offer of conditions is proposed at a Planning Commission public hearing on the rezoning request, the public hearing may be adjourned or recessed to provide the City time to consider the offer; and if an offer of conditions is proposed at a City Council meeting, the rezoning request and such conditions shall be remanded back to the Planning Commission for consideration.
5. The Planning Commission or City Council may table a request to give residents of the City of Manistee more time to fully understand the offer of conditions.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 2
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
C. Standards for Approval.
1. When reviewing a rezoning request and an offer of conditions or restrictions, the City may consider, but shall not be limited to; future land use recommendations in the Master Plan; goals and objectives in the Master Plan; the availability and capacity of utilities; potential impact on neighboring land uses and the natural environment; and other concerns related to the general welfare, safety and health of area residents,
2. Offers of conditions or restrictions shall not be approved if such conditions or restrictions would have the effect of departing from the standards of the Zoning Ordinance or other regulations or ordinances promulgated by, or applicable in, the City of Manistee.
3. When considering an offer of conditions or restrictions, the City determine whether the conditions or restrictions offered would address or mitigate impacts that might otherwise be reasonably expected to result from the rezoning request.
D. Expiration of Agreement, Reversion and Extensions.
1. In approving the conditions, the City may establish a time period during which the conditions apply to the land. Except for an extension under subparagraph 3 hereof, if the conditions are not satisfied within the time specified, the land shall revert back to its former zoning classification, per subparagraph 4 hereof.
2. The City shall not add to or alter the approved conditions during the time period specified under subparagraph 1.
3. The time period specified under subparagraph 1 may be extended upon the application of the property owner and approval of the City.
a. The applicant shall submit in writing a request to the Zoning Administrator, who will forward the written request and his recommendation on the request to the Planning Commission. The written request shall include reasons why the extension is being solicited.
b. Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council may extend the time period specified under subparagraph 1. If the extension is approved, if the conditions are not satisfied within the time specified under the extension, the land shall revert back to its former zoning classification, per subparagraph 4.
4. If the conditions are not satisfied or the restrictions are not established within the specified time period, the Zoning Administrator shall initiate the reversion process, in which the land reverts back to its former zoning classification, in accordance with this paragraph. At a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall establish that the applicant has failed to satisfy the approved conditions, shall state what specific conditions were not met, shall note all comments and reports requested or the absence of such, and shall rezone the land back to its former zoning classification.
E. Coordination and Performance Bonds.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 3
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
1. Where proposed conditions or restrictions involve public improvements, the applicant shall submit the following to the Planning Commission prior to final approval of the rezoning and offer of conditions:
a. A construction schedule.
b. Costs and obligations.
c. Responsible parties for obtaining permits.
d. Proof, in writing, that applicable utility or regional agencies or reviewing bodies have reviewed and approved final design of said public improvements.
2. The City may require submission of performance bonds or similar tools as part of the agreement or approval.
F. Notices.
1. Rezoning of land for an individual property of 10 or fewer adjacent properties shall require notice of public hearing. The administrator shall notify the following persons, not less than 15 days before the date that the application will be considered:
a. The applicant.
b. The owner of the property, if different.
c. The owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
d. Occupants of any structures within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
e. The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the City of Manistee. The notice shall include:
1) The Nature of the Rezoning request and the offer of conditions.
2) The property(ies) for which the request has been made.
3) A listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is (are) subject of the Special Use. (Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exits within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used).
4) The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date the application will be considered.
5) The date, time and location of when the public hearing will take place.
6) The address where written comments will be directed prior to the consideration.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 4
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
2. Rezoning of land for 11 or more adjacent properties shall require notice of public hearing. The administrator shall notify the following persons not less than 15 days before the date that the application will be considered:
a. The applicant.
b. The owner of the property, if different.
c. The owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
d. Occupants of any structures within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the City of Manistee or not.
e. The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the City of Manistee. The notice shall include:
1) The Nature of the Rezoning request and the offer of conditions.
2) The property(ies) for which the request has been made.
3) The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date the application will be considered.
4) The date, time and location of when the public hearing will take place.
5 The address where written comments will be directed prior to the consideration.
[Annotation: This section was changed to meet the noticing requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act by Amendment 07-22, effective 5/29/07]
***
Amendments to the City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendments that took effect on May 29, 2007
ORD#
07-05 Provides a definition for “Ordinary High Water Mark” that is consistent throughout the ordinance.
07-06 Provides single family homes in the C-2 & C-3 Zoning District the rights of being a legal non-conformity. Without this language they could not put on an addition or have a home occupation.
07-07 Deleted Decks in the waterfront set-back. A developer interpreted this language as allowing an attached deck on a primary structure being able to encroach into the waterfront set-back. This eliminates the confusion.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 5
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
07-08 This appeared to be a clerical error that was not caught when the ordinance was adopted.
07-09 This re-instates language that was in the old ordinance requiring for new Dwelling, Single Units to have a minimum 4/12 roof pitch. This is similar to the language we had in the old ordinance but does not effect additions.
07-10 Deletes Mine, Sand and Gravel in the Light Industrial District.
07-11 Changes Wells, Extraction in the General Industrial District from a Special Use to a Use by right.
07-12 Developed to expedite the application process and meet the noticing requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act.
07-13 Corrects the number of Billboard faces from “10" to “19" and [annotate how number was established].
07-14 Allows a 4 square foot Sign for Minor Home Occupations.
07-15 Developed to expedite the application process and meet the noticing requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act.
07-16 Developed language for certification purposes. Adds the word “principal” to read...1.5 x principal building width (Cumulative Sign Area of Chart).
07-17 Is less restrictive by deleting Site Plan Review and replacing the language with Special Uses.
07-18 Adds Future Development Site Signs that have received zoning approval to the list of exempt signs. And deletes the size restriction language for political signs.
07-19 Moves Signs for Golf Courses and Nursing and Convalescent Homes to less restrictive table of uses (allows more signage that they originally were allowed).
07-20 Allows a surveyor to prepare a site plan. Removes a “Planner” from the list of people who can prepare a detailed site plan.
07-21 Amends Article 25 Zoning Board of Appeals to reflect changes under the new Michigan Zoning Enabling Act.
07-22 Amends Article 28 Amendments to reflect changes under the new Michigan Zoning Enabling Act.
07-23 Changes the language to give the Historic District Commission more flexibility for signage in the Historic District.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 6
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
07-24 Allows signage on water front side of properties with water frontage.
07-25 Deletes the size restrictions for wall signs.
07-27 Changes the Official Zoning Map to reflect that parcels #51-51-211-128-01, #51-51-211-200-01 and #51-51-268-701-01 are Re-zoned from R-2 Medium Density Residential to W-F Waterfront as part of an Order of the Manistee County Circuit Court
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendments that took effect on December 14, 2007 and Amendments that w took effect on February 29, 2008.
ORD#
07-29 Adds Medical or Dental Office as a Use by Right in the LI – Light Industrial District.
08-01 Changes the Definition of “Accessory Use” in Section 202 A and Section 1805 Accessory Uses, Related to Uses Permitted
08-02 Changes the Definition of “Parking Facility” in Section 217 P, Adds Parking Facility as a Special Use in the R-2, R-3, C-2 & G-I Zoning Districts and Amends Section 1865 Parking Facility
08-03 Changes the Definition of “Adaptive Reuse” in Section 202.A, Deletes Adaptive Reuse as a Special Use in the R-4 & G-I Zoning Districts and Amends Section 1807 Adaptive Reuse.
08-04 Amends Section 2018, Use Type 3 relating to Ground Mount Signs
08-05 Amends Article 12 Waterfront District, Section 1200 Purpose and Intent AMEND the language to read “...on or near the waterfront.” in the first sentence.
08-06 Amend Section 217 P to correct the Definition of “Place of Public Assembly Large” and “Place of Public Assembly, Small”.
The following is a brief synopsis of an Ordinance Amendment that took effect on December 11, 2008.
ORD#
08-08 Adds the Definition of “Windmill, Accessory” in Section 224 W in Article 2 Definitions.
Adds Section 515.G Windmill, Accessory, to Section 515 Accessory Buildings and Structures to Article 5 General Provisions.
Adds Windmill, Accessory to City of Manistee – Table of Uses; Table 7-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 7
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Adds Windmill, Accessory to Article 16 LI – Light Industrial, Section 1601 Uses Permitted by Right, Adding item S, changes were made to tables also.
Adds Windmill, Accessory to Article 17 GI – General Industrial, Section 1701 Uses Permitted by Right, Adding item P, changes were made to tables also.
The following is a brief synopsis of an Ordinance Amendment that took effect on October 30, 2010
ORD#
Z10-01 Changes Duplex from Permitted Use to Special Use in the R-2, R-3 and W-F Zoning Districts
Changes made to Section 7-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit Table
Changes Duplex from Permitted Use to Special Use in the Article 9: R-2 Medium Density Residential Section 900 Purpose and Intent; Deletes Duplex from Section 901 Uses Permitted by Right; Adds Duplex to Section 902 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit
Changes Duplex from Permitted Use to Special Use in the Article 10: R-3 High Density Residential Section 1000 Purpose and Intent; Deletes Duplex from Section 1001 Uses Permitted by Right; Adds Duplex to Section 1002 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit
Changes Duplex from Permitted Use to Special Use in the Article 12: W-F Waterfront District Section 1200 Purpose and Intent; Deletes Duplex from Section 1201 Uses Permitted by Right; Adds Duplex to Section 1202 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit
Z10-02 Adds Bed & Breakfast as a Special Use in the C-2 Neighborhood Commercial Zoning Districts
Change made to Section 7-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit Table
Adds Bed & Breakfast as a Special Use in Article 14: C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District Section 1400 Purpose and Intent; Adds Bed & Breakfast to Section 1402 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit
Article 18: Special Uses Section 1813 Bed and breakfast, Item B Purpose and Intent, Item h be amended by adding “Within the C-2, C-3 Districts – 6 sleeping rooms”
Z10-03 Language developed by Planner of Record – Williams and Works for Condominiums
Changes to Article 2 Definitions, Section 204 C: Add definition of Common Elements; add definition of Condominium Unit, add definition of Condominium Act; add definition of Condominium Conversion; add definition of Condominium Subdivision Plan; delete definition of Condominium
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 8
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Section 208 G – Add definition of General Common Elements
Section 213 L – Add definition of Limited Common Elements
Section 220 S – Add definition of Site Condominium; add definition of Site Condominium Unit
Article 4: Nonconformities, Section 401 Regulations add Item B “Nonconforming Condominium. A nonconforming developed or undeveloped parcel shall not be converted to a condominium, except in conformance with this Ordinance.”
Article 5: General Provisions, Section 514 Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Lighting, Item F be amended to read “For all permitted uses and special uses in the C-3 District, the parking provisions of this section shall not apply, except to hotels, motels, and residential use condominiums.”
Article 5: General Provisions, add Section 533 Condominiums
Z10-04 Language that provides for a Medium Site Plan Review
Article 5: General Provisions, Section 515 Accessory Buildings and Structures, Item G.6 amended to read: “A medium site plan shall be required and reviewed by the Site Plan Review Committee per section 2201.B.
Article 22 Site Plan Review, Section 2201 Scope, be amended, Basic Site Plan language amended, Medium Site Plan language added, Detailed Site Plan language amended.
Article 22: Site Plan Review, Section 2203 Application Procedure, be amended by adding “medium”.
Article 22: Site Plan Review, Section 2203 Application Procedure Item C, Basic Site Plan language changed to be the same as in Section 2201 Scope.
Article 22: Site Plan Review, Section 2203 Application Procedure Item D, add Medium Site Plan language
Article 22: Site Plan Review, Section 2203 Application Procedure Item E, Detailed Site Plan language changed to be the same as in Section 2201 Scope
Article 22: Site Plan Review, Section 2204 Action on Application and Site Plans, Item A, be amended to include medium site plan
Article 22: Site Plan Review, Section 2204 Action on Application and Site Plans, Item F, be amended change “shall” to “may”
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 9
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Article 22: Site Plan Review, Section 2208 Amendment to the Site plan, be amended to reflect the addition of a medium site plan.
Z10-06 Established G-C Golf Course District for the Golf Course Property and removed it from the R-1 Low Density Residential District
Article 2: Definitions, Section 208 G definition of Golf Course add banquet facility to definition
Article 2: Definitions, Section S add definition of “Sand Excavation”
MOVED Article 7: Districts, Dimensional Standards, Use Table and Zoning Map to Article 3 and amended as follows:
Changed G-C property from R-1 to G-C
Amended Table 3-1 - added G-C Golf Course to standards to table
Amended Table 3-2 – Added Sand Excavation to list of Uses; deleted G-C as a Special Use in the R-1 District, Added G-C to the list of Districts and added the following Uses: Accessory Bldg. < footprint principal structure - R (Use by Right); Accessory Bldg. > footprint principal structure - SLU (Use Permitted as Special Land Use); Accessory Uses, Related to uses permitted - R/SLU; Dwelling, Single Unit - R; Eating and Drinking Establishment - R; Golf Course - R; Home Occupation, Minor - R; Mixed-Use Development - SLU; Outdoor Recreation, Park - R; Planned Unit Development - SLU; Sand Excavation - R; Subdivision, Plat or Condo. (of permitted uses) - R; Uses similar to uses permitted by right or as Special Land Uses - R/SLU; Wells, Extraction - SLU
Changed Article 7 from: Dimensional Standards, Use Table and Zoning Map to G-C Golf Course District
Article 8: Low Density Residential Deleted Golf Course as a Special Use in Section 800 Purpose and Intent and Section 803 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use
Article 18: Special Uses, Section 1843 Golf Course Amend Definition of Golf Course to include “banquet facility”
Article 21: Signs - amend Section 2106, Use Type 1, Low Intensity Residential by adding G-C to Table of Uses; amend Section 2107, Use Type 2, Residential and Residential Commercial by adding G-C to Table of Uses; amend Section 2108, Use Type 3, Commercial and Office by adding G-C to Table of Uses, ADD Golf Course to Examples of Uses and providing new regulations for G-C District; amend Section 2109, Use Type 4, Institutional and Outdoor Recreation by deleting Golf Course from Examples of Uses; amend Section 2110, Use Type 5, Industrial by adding G-C to Table of Uses
Z10-07 Amend Article 21: Signs – changes include more signage, eliminates references, defines storefront
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 10
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Article 2 Definitions: amends Section 220 D by adding Definition for Storefront and Section 220 D SIGN amends Definition of Item G Electronic Sign
Article 21: Signs: amend Section 2101 Procedures, Item A; amend Section 2102 General Standards, Item A.7; amend Section 2102 General Standards, Item F, amend Section 2103 Exempt Signs, Item K; add Section 2103 Exempt Signs, Item M; amend Section2 104 Prohibited Signs, Item G.7; amend Section 2106, Use Type 1, Low Intensity and Residential; delete Section 2107, Use Type 2, Residential and Residential Commercial; amend Section 2108, Use Type 3 Commercial and Office; delete Section 2108, Use Type 4, Institutional and Outdoor Recreational; amend Section 2110 Use Type 5, Industrial; amend Section 2112 Temporary Portable Signs, Item A
The following is a brief synopsis of an Ordinance Amendment that took effect on September 25, 2011
Z11-06 Amended Ordinance to permit a Community Garden in all Zoning Districts.
Article 2: Definitions & Interpretation - ADD Section 204 C - Community Garden
Article 3: Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map - ADD Table 3-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit Community Garden – Use by Right in all Districts
Article 5: General Provisions - ADD - SECTION 534 Community Gardens
Article 7: G-C Golf Course District - Section 700 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 701Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 8: R-1 Low Density Residential - Section 800 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 801Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 9: R-2 Medium Density Residential - Section 900 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 901Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 10: High Density Residential - Section 1000 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1001Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 11: R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District - Section 1100 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1101Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 12: W-F Waterfront District - Section 1200 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1201Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 11
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Article 13: C-1 Regional Commercial District - Section 1300 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1301Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 14: C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District - Section 1400 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1401Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 15: C-3 Central Business District - Section 1500 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1501Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item C. Community Garden
Article 16: L-I Light Industrial District - Section 1600 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1601Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item E. Community Garden
Article 17: G-I General Industrial District - Section 1700 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Community Garden as a Permitted Use; Section 1701Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item D. Community Garden
Article 21 – Signs - ADD - Section 2103 Exempt Signs, Item N.
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendments Z11-08 that took effect on December 28, 2011.
Article 2: Definitions & Interpretation - AMEND Section 224 W – Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 3: Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map - Table 3-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit; Amend by CHANGING Windmill, Accessory to Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory and allowing it as a Use by Right in all Districts
Article 5: General Provisions - SECTION 515 Accessory Buildings and Structures - AMEND Item G; Amend by CHANGING Windmill, Accessory to Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 7: G-C Golf Course District - Section 700 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind energy conversion system, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 701 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item L. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 8: R-1 Low Density Residential - Section 800 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 801 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item I. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 9: R-2 Medium Density Residential - Section 900 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 901 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item I. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 10: High Density Residential - Section 1000 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 1001 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item J. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 12
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Article 11: R-4 Manufactured Housing Community District - Section 1100 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 1101 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item L. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 12: W-F Waterfront District - Section 1200 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 1201 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item P. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 13: C-1 Regional Commercial District - Section 1300 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 1301 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item Z. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 14: C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District - Section 1400 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 1401 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item S. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 15: C-3 Central Business District - Section 1500 Purpose and Intent Permitted Uses - ADD Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory as a Permitted Use; and Section 1501 Uses Permitted by Right - ADD Item V. Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 16: L-I Light Industrial District - Section 1600 Purpose and Intent – AMEND, Permitted Use by changing Windmill, Accessory to Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory; and Section 1601 Uses Permitted by Right – AMEND Item T. by changing Windmill, Accessory to Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
Article 17: G-I General Industrial District - Section 1700 Purpose and Intent – AMEND, Permitted Use by changing Windmill, Accessory to Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory; and Section 1701 Uses Permitted by Right – AMEND Item Q. by changing Windmill, Accessory to Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z11-09 that took effect on January 28, 2012.
As per Zoning Amendment Request from Faith Covenant Church Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses, Section B. Regulations and Conditions, Item 1. Large Places of Public Assembly, a. was amended to read:
a. A Large Place of Public Assembly shall front on and be accessed primarily from a key street segment, as defined herein, unless it is located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of five (5) acres.
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z12-01 that took effect on June 19, 2012.
Z12-01 Rezoned the W-F District south of the Manistee River Channel to P-D Peninsula District and amended the definition of Marina to include “Communication Towers” as follows:
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretation Amend Section 214 M – Marina and Article 18 Standards and Requirements for Special Uses Amend Section 1852.A to read:
MARINA: A facility, including three (3) or more waterfront boat slips, which provides for the servicing, storing, fueling, berthing, and securing of boats and that may include a communication tower, eating, sleeping, and retail facilities intended primarily for the owners, crews, and guests of boat owners using the marina.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 13
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Amend Article 3: Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map to include P-D Peninsula District as follows:
ADDED P-D Peninsula District to Section 300.B
AMENDED Official Zoning Map
Amended Table 3-1 – Added P-D Peninsula standards to table
Amended Table 3-2 – Added P-D to the list of Districts and added the following Uses: Accessory bldg. with a footprint less than the principal structure –R, Accessory Bldg. with a footprint greater than the principal structure –SLU, Accessory Uses, Related to uses permitted R/SLU, Adaptive Reuse – SLU, Bed & Breakfast – SLU, Community Garden – R, Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps SLU, Day Care, Commercial – SLU, Duplex – SLU, Dwelling – Multiple Unit – SLU, Dwelling – Single Unit – R, Eating and Drinking Establishment – SLU, Financial Institution SLU*, Gallery or Museum – R, Home Based Business – SLU, Home Occupation, Minor – R, Home Occupation, Major – SLU, Hotel – SLU, Marina – SLU, Mixed-Use Development – SLU, Motel – SLU*, Outdoor Recreation, Park – R, Parking Facility – SLU, Personal Service Establishment – R, Place of Public Assembly – Large SLU*, Place of Public Assembly – Small - SLU, Planned Unit Development – SLU, Professional Office – R, Professional Service Establishment – R, Retail Business - R, Studio for Performing & Graphic Arts – SLU, Subdivision, Plat or Condo. (of permitted uses) – R, Theater – SLU*, Uses similar to uses permitted by right or as special land uses – R/SLU, Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory Subject to Section 515.G - R
ADD Article 6: P-D Peninsula District
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z12-04 that took effect on October 27, 2012.
Amends Section 514 Vehicular Parking Space, Access, Bike Parking and Sidewalks. Changes include establishing a maximum number of parking spaces; reduces the number of parking spaces for multi-family units; changes the number of spaces for Hospitals, Nursing and Personal Care Facilities, Medical Clinics and Medical and Dental Offices, and Industrial and Warehouses; requires pedestrian walkways for parking lots with 10 or more spaces; establishes a 5 foot buffer (front property line); establishes Bike Parking for some uses; requires the installation of sidewalks in some districts for certain uses.
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z12-06 that took effect on October 27, 2012.
Amends 1813 Bed and Breakfast by deleting item B.1.h which established the number of sleeping rooms by Zoning District.
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z12-07 that took effect on October 27, 2012.
Amends Article 2 – Definitions and Interpretation, Section O – Add Definition for OUTDOOR PLAYSET
Amends Article 2 – Definitions and Interpretation, Section P – Add Definition for PORCH
Article 5 – General Provisions, Amend Section 502 Uses Spatial and Physical Requirements Item D. (proposed changes included allowing porches and decks to be constructed no closer than 3 feet from the front yard
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 14
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
property line while maintaining clear vision areas; Outdoor Playsets are allowed in the side and rear yard no closer than 3 feet to the property line and do not require a permit).
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z12-08 that took effect on October 27, 2012.
Staff discovered in August 2012 that an oversight had occurred that did not carry the PD standards to Sections of Article 5 General Provisions, Article 18 Standards and Requirements for Special Uses and Article 21 Signs in the previous amendment. Ordinance Amendment Z12-08 includes the omitted standards for properties in the PD that were omitted when the district was established.
Article 5: General Provisions, ADD P-D to Section 505 Water Protection, Item B
Article 5: General Provisions, ADD P-D to Section 511 Driveways and Curb Cuts, Item A
Article 5: General Provisions, ADD P-D to Section 515 Accessory Buildings and Structures, Item G.3.a
Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses, ADD P-D to Section 1807 Adaptive Reuse, Item C.2
Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses, ADD P-D to Section 1861 Motel, Item B.10
Article 21 – Signs, ADD – P-D to Section 2102.A.7.a
Article 21 – Signs, ADD – P-D to Section 2102.A.7.b
Article 21 – Signs, ADD – P-D to Section 2102.A.7.c
Article 21 – Signs, ADD – P-D to Section 2103.H
Article 21 – Signs, ADD – P-D to Section 2106 Use Type 1, Low Intensity and Residential
Article 21 – Signs, ADD – P-D to Section 2007 Use Type 2, Commercial and Office
Article 21 – Signs, ADD – P-D to Section 2018 Use Type 3, Industrial
Z12-09 –took effect on January 16, 2013 to Amended Article 25 Zoning Board of Appeals, Amended Section 2501 last sentence of Paragraph 3 which read: With approval of Council, the Mayor shall appoint at least two (2) alternate members, who shall serve for three (3) years. to read as follows: …Council, by a majority vote of the members serving, may appoint up to two (2) alternate members, who shall serve for three (3) years.
On May 9, 2013 the Zoning Board of Appeals interpreted the Zoning Ordinance and determined since a Large Place of Public Assembly which is located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of five (5) acres does not need to front on or be accessed primarily from a key street segment, if that Large Place of Public Assembly were to include an Eating and Drinking Establishment as an accessory use, and is located in the R-2 or R-3 districts, it would not need to front on or be accessed from a key street segment.
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z15-04 that took effect on July 14, 2015.
Article 3: Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map; amended Table 3-1 City of Manistee Schedule of Regulations- P-D Peninsula District (which removed larger requirements for Duplex or Commercial and Multi-Units) ; amended Table 3-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit – PD Peninsula District (Contractors Facility and Wholesale Facility were added as a permitted use, Eating and Drinking Establishment and Mixed Use Development were changed from a special use to permitted use, Animal Grooming and Greenhouse and Nursery were added as a special use, Financial Institution was changed from a special use requiring key street frontage to a special use, Motel, Places of Public Assembly Large and Theater were was deleted as uses in the district.)
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 15
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Article 5: General Provisions; amended Section 511 Driveways and Curb Cuts, Item B (added G-C); Add new item G to Section 514 Vehicular Parking Space, Access, Bike Parking and Sidewalks; Amended Section 514 Vehicular Parking Space, Access, Bike Parking and Sidewalks, Item I by adding P-D.
Article 6: Peninsula District; AMEND Section 600 Purpose and Intent added “mixed use”, amended Section 601 Uses Permitted by Right(Contractors Facility and Wholesale Facility were added as a permitted use, Eating and Drinking Establishment and Mixed Use Development were changed from a special use to permitted use); amended Section 602 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use (Animal Grooming and Greenhouse and Nursery were added as a special use, Financial Institution was changed from a special use requiring key street frontage to a special use); deleted Section 603 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use Permit, Requires Frontage on a Key Street Segment (Motel, Places of Public Assembly Large and Theater were was deleted as uses in the district); amended Section 604 Dimensional Standards (parcel area and parcel width requirements for duplex or commercial and multi-units were deleted); DELETE Section 605 Peninsula District Renaissance Zone Standards (the Renaissance Zone expired)
Article 12: Waterfront District; deleted Section 1205 Waterfront Renaissance Zone Standards (the Renaissance Zone expired)
Article 21: Signs; Table 2100-1 – Use Types and Sign Standards amended Section 2107 Use Type 2, Commercial and Office (PD was moved to C-1, C-2 & C-3 not fronting on US-31)
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z15-05 that took effect on July 14, 2015 that provides for green infrastructure standards.
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretation: added definition for pervious paving to Section 217 P; added definition for rain gardens to Section 219 R; added definition for swale biofiltration and swale, vegetated or rock to Section 220 S; added definition for vegetated roof to Section 223 V
Article 5: General Provisions; amended Section 503 Performance Standards, Item 3 (adding language for green infrastructure); amended Section 511 Driveway and Curb Cuts, Item D (changed word “unto” to “into”) and Item F (added pervious paving); amended Section 514 Vehicular Parking Space, Access, Bike Parking and Sidewalks, Item E by added pervious paving, moving parking areas with 10 spaces into item F with additional language; amended Section 531 Landscaping and Screening, Item A (changed “registered” to licensed”) and Item F (added rain gardens)
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z15-08 that took effect on August 19, 2015.
Article 5: General Provisions; added Section 535 Keeping of Chickens or Ducks
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z17-02 that took effect on June 16, 2017.
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretation: DELETE definition of Communication Tower, ADD definition for Wireless Communication Facility;, Article 3: Districts Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map
Table 3-2 be AMENDED by DELETING Communication Tower as a Use, Table 3-2 be AMENDED by ADDING Wireless Communication Facility as a Special Land Use In R-3, W-F, C-1 and L-I; Article 10: R-3 High Density Residential, AMEND Section 1000 Purpose and Intent by DELETING Communication Tower as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1000 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Wireless Communication Facility as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1002 Uses Permitted by Special Land Uses by DELETING Item F. Communication Tower, AMEND Section 1002 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item II. Wireless Communication Facilit;. Article 12: W-F Waterfront District -
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 16
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
AMEND Section 1200 Purpose and Intent by DELETING Communication Tower as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1200 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Wireless Communication Facility as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1202 Uses Permitted by Special Land Uses by DELETING Item E. Communication Tower, AMEND Section 1202 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item Z. Wireless Communication Facility; Article 13 C-1 Regional Commercial District - AMEND Section 1300 Purpose and Intent by DELETING Communication Tower as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1300 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Wireless Communication Facility as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1302 Uses Permitted by Special Land Uses by DELETING Item E. Communication Tower, AMEND Section 1302 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item Z. Wireless Communication Facility; Article 16: L-I Light Industrial - AMEND Section 1600 Purpose and Intent by DELETING Communication Tower as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1600 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Wireless Communication Facility as a Special Use, AMEND Section 1602 Uses Permitted by Special Land Uses by DELETING Item C. Communication Tower, AMEND Section 1602 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item R. Wireless Communication Facility; Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses - DELETE Section 1819 Communication Tower and ADD Section 1893 Wireless Communication Facility
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z17-03 that took effect on June 16, 2017.
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretation - ADD Definition to Section E for Electric Vehicle, ADD Definition to Section E for Electric Vehicle Charging Station, ADD Definition to Section E Electric Vehicle Parking Space; Article 5: General Provisions - AMEND Section 514 Vehicular Parking Space, Access and Bike Parking and Sidewalks by ADDING Item K. Vehicle Stacking, ADDING Item L. Deferred Parking, ADDING Item M. Electronic Vehicle Parking, AMENDING Item N. Bike Parking; Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses - AMEND Section 1828 Drive-Through Establishment, Item B.4
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z17-04 that took effect on June 16, 2017.
ARTICLE 2: Definitions and Interpretation - AMEND Section B, definition for Building Envelope, ADD to Section S, Definition for Solar Energy System, ADD to Section S, Definition for Solar Storage Battery, AMEND Section S, definition for State Licensed Residential Facilities; ARTICLE 3: Districts, Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map - AMEND Table 3-1 Schedule of Regulations Item P-D Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling, AMEND Table 3-2 Uses Permitted by Right and Special Land Use Permit, DELETE Convenience Store, w/fuel pumps as a Use, DELETE language “w/o fuel pumps from Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps, CHANGE Eating and Drinking Establishment from Special Use to Use by Right in W-F and C-2, ADD Gasoline Station as a Special Use in C-2; CHANGE Mixed-Use Development from Special Use to Use by Right in G-C, W-F, C-1, C-2 and C-3; DELETE Wind Energy Conversion System as a Special Land Use in R-3; ARTICLE 5: General Provisions - AMEND Section 508 Fences, AMEND Section 509 Height Item D and ADDING Item E, ADD Section 529 Solar Energy Systems; ARTICLE 7: Golf Course District - CHANGE Mixed Use Development from a Special Use to a Permitted Use or Use by Right; ARTICLE 8: R-1 High Density Residential n- DELETE Gallery or Museum as a Special Use (key street segment), DELETE Place of Public Assembly Small as a Special Use (key street segment); ARTICLE 10: R-3 High Density Residential - DELETE Wind Energy Conversion System as a Special Use; ARTICLE 12: W-F Waterfront District - CHANGE Eating and Drinking Establishment from a Special Use to a Permitted Use or Use by Right, CHANGE Mixed Use Development from a Special Use to a Permitted Use or Use by Right; ARTICLE 13: C-1 Regional Commercial District - DELETE Convenience Store w/fuel pumps as a Special Use, CHANGE Mixed Use Development from a Special Use to a Permitted Use or Use by Right; ARTICLE 14: C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District - CHANGE Eating and Drinking Establishment from a Special Use to a Permitted Use or Use by Right, DELETE Convenience Store w/fuel pumps as a Special Use, ADD Gasoline Station as a Special Use; CHANGE Mixed Use Development from a Special Use to a Permitted Use or Use by Right; ARTICLE 15: C-3 Central Business District - CHANGE Mixed Use Development from a Special Use to a Permitted Use or Use by Right; ARTICLE 16: L-I Light Industrial District - AMEND Section 1600 Purpose and Intent; ARTICLE 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses - DELETE
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 17
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
language “w/o fuel pumps from Section 1822 Convenience Store, w/o fuel pumps, AMEND Section 1841 Gasoline Station, ADD/AMEND Items B.2, and B.8
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z17-05 that took effect on June 16, 2017.
Article 5: General Provisions - ADD Section 506 Dumpsters and Enclosures, Article 13: C-1 Regional Commercial District, AMEND Section 1304 Site Standards, Item A.4; Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses - AMEND Section 1811 Automobile Repair Facility, Item B. 11, AMEND Section 1813 Bed and Breakfast, Item B.2.m, AMEND Section 1816 Car Wash, Item B.8, AMEND Section 1823 Convenience Store, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1825 Day Care, Commercial, Item B.3, AMEND Section 1828 Drive-Through Establishment, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1832 Dwelling, Multiple Unit, Item B.7, AMEND Section 1835 Eating and Drinking Establishment, Item B.4, AMEND Section 1841 Gasoline Station, Item B.7, AMEND Section 1843 Golf Course, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1844 Greenhouse and Nursery, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1849 Hotel, Item B.6, AMEND Section 1850 Laundry and Dry Cleaning Establishment, Item B.2, AMEND Section 1853 Medical or Dental Office, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1861 Motel, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1867 Personal Service Establishment, Item B.2, AMEND Section 1874 Professional Office, Item B.6, AMEND Section 1876 Professional Service Establishment, Item B.6, AMEND Section 1877 Retail Business, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1879 Sexually Oriented Business, Item B.5, AMEND Section 1880 Sports and Recreation Club, Item B.8, AMEND Section 1883 Tattoo Parlor, Item B.7
and AMEND Section 1885 Theater, Item B.2
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z17-06 that took effect on June 16, 2017.
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretation - AMEND Section B – Billboard, Section S – AMEND AMENDING Definition for Signs as follows: DELETE definitions for Animated Sign, Beacon, Commercial Message, Flag, Electronic Message Board, Electronic Sign, Freestanding Sign, Identification Sign, Incidental Sign, Nonconforming Sign, Pennant, Political Sign, and Temporary Sign and AMEND Definitions for Ground Sign, Marquee Sign, Off-Premise Sign, Pole Sign, Portable Sign, Projecting Sign, Suspended Sign, Wall Sign, and Window Sign; Article 5: General Provisions - AMEND Section 534 Community Gardens by DELETING Item B.5, Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses, AMEND Section 1814 Billboard, Item A, AMEND Section 1847 Home Occupation, Items B.1.c & B.2.c; and Article 21: Signs BE REPEALED and REPLACED
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z17-07 that took effect on July 28, 2017.
Article 5: General Provisions, Section 514 Vehicular Parking Space, Access, Bike Parking and Sidewalks, Item H be AMENDED and Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses, Section 1832 Dwelling, Multiple Unit, Item B.3 be AMENDED
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z18-03 that took effect on March 2, 2018
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretation - ADD definition for Grower to Section 208 G; ADD definition for Licensee to Section 231 L; ADD definitions for Marijuana or Marihuana and Marihuana Facility to Section 214 M; ADD definitions for Processor to Section 217 P; ADD definitions for Safety Compliance Facility and Secure Transport to Section 220 S
Article 3: Districts Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map - Table 3-2 be AMENDED by ADDING Marihuana Grower, Marihuana processer, Marihuana Secure Transporter and Marihuana Safety Compliance facility as a Special Land Use in P-D, C-1, L-I and G-I
Article 4: Non Conformities - ADD Section 409 Marihuana Facilities
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 18
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Article 6: P-D Peninsula District - AMEND Section 600 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Marihuana Grower as a component of a Mixed Use Development, Marihuana Processer as a component of a Mixed Use Development, Marihuana Secure Transporter and Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility as a component of a Mixed Use Development as a Special Use; AMEND Section 602 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item P. Marihuana Grower as a component of a Mixed Use Development, Item Q. Marihuana Processor as a component of a Mixed Use Development, R. Marihuana Secure Transporter, and Item S. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility as a component of a Mixed Use Development as a Special Use
Article 13: C-1 Regional Commercial District - AMEND Section 1000 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Marihuana Grower Marihuana Processer, Marihuana Secure Transporter and Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility as a Special Use; AMEND Section 1002 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item M. Marihuana Grower, Item N. Marihuana Processor, O. Marihuana Secure Transporter, and Item P. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility
Article 16: L-I Light Industrial District - AMEND Section 1600 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Marihuana Grower, Marihuana Processer, Marihuana Secure Transporter and Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility as a Special Use; AMEND Section 1602 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item I. Marihuana Grower, Item J. Marihuana Processor, K. Marihuana Secure Transporter, and Item L. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility
Article 17: G-I General Industrial District - AMEND Section 1700 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Marihuana Grower Marihuana Processer, Marihuana Secure Transporter and Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility as a Special Use; AMEND Section 1702 Uses Permitted by Special Land Use by ADDING Item F. Marihuana Grower, Item G. Marihuana Processor, H. Marihuana Secure Transporter, and Item I. Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility
Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Land Uses - ADD Section 1851 Marihuana Facilities
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z18-03 that took effect on March 2, 2018
Zoning Amendment Z18-TBD has been prepared at the request of the Downtown Development Authority to allow additional uses to encourage economic development in the C-3 Central Business District as follows:
Article 3: Districts Dimensional Standards Uses Table and Zoning Map
Table 3-2 be AMENDED by ADDING Animal Grooming, Day Care Commercial, Day Care Group, Dwelling Accessory, Educational Facility, Motel, Tattoo Parlor and Veterinary Clinic as a use by right in C-3
CHANGING Duplex, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Parking Facility from a Special Use to a use by right in C-3 CHANGING Sports and Recreation Club from a Special Use (on a key street segment) to a use by right in C-3
Article 15: C-3 Central Business District
AMEND Section 1500 Purpose and Intent by ADDING Animal Grooming, Day Care Commercial, Day Care Group, Dwelling Accessory, Educational Facility, Motel, Tattoo Parlor and Veterinary Clinic as a permitted use
CHANGING Duplex, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Parking Facility from a Special Use to a permitted use
CHANGING Sports and Recreation Club from a Special Use (on a key street segment) to a permitted use
AMEND Section 1501 by ADDING Animal Grooming, Day Care Commercial, Day Care Group, Duplex, Dwelling Accessory, Educational Facility, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Motel, Parking Facility, Sports and Recreation Club, Tattoo Parlor and Veterinary Clinic
AMEND Section 1502 by DELETEING Duplex, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning, Parking Facility and Sports and Recreation Club (requires key street frontage)
AMEND Section 514 (E) by REPLACING the word “painted” with “approved”.
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 19
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z19-13 that took effect on May 16, 2019.
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretations
AMEND Article 2 Definitions by Adding: Marihuana Provisioning Center, Marihuana Grower Establishment, Marihuana Safety Compliance Establishment, Marihuana Process Establishment, Marihuana Microbusiness Establishment, Marihuana Retailer, Marihuana Secure Transporter, Person (defined under MRTM Act)
Article 3: Districts, Dimensional Standards, Uses Tables, & Zoning Map
AMEND Section 300 D by Adding: Marihuana Sales Overlay District
AMEND Table 3-2 by Adding District: Marihuana Sales Overlay District
AMEND Table 3-2 by Adding Special Uses: Marihuana Provisioning Center, Marihuana Grower Establishment, Marihuana Safety Compliance Establishment, Marihuana Processor Establishment, Marihuana Microbusiness Establishment, Marihuana Retailor, Marihuana Secure Transporter
AMEND Section 301 Official Zoning Map by Adding the Marihuana Sales Overlay District
Article 18: Special Uses
AMEND Section 1851 A Definitions by Adding Marihuana Provisioning Center
AMEND Section 1851 sub-section 2 by adding language concerning the changing of filters
AMEND Section 1851 by Adding sub-section 5 Marihuana Provisioning Center
AMEND Section 1852 by changing to Marihuana Establishments
AMEND Section 1852 by Adding Definition and Regulations and Conditions pertaining to Marihuana Establishments
AMEND Section 1853 by changing to Marina and all following use regulations
AMEND Section 1854 by changing to Medical or Dental Office and all following use regulations
Article 20: Marihuana Sales Overlay District
AMEND by Adding Article 20: Marihuana Sales Overlay District
AMEND by Adding Section 2000 Purpose and Intent
AMEND by Adding Section 2001 Uses Permitted by Right
AMEND by Adding Section 2002 Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit
AMEND by Adding Section 2003 Dimensional Standards
AMEND by Adding Section 2004 Mixed Use and Dwellings
AMEND by Adding Section 2005 Sign Standards
AMEND by Adding Section 2006 Additional Standards
The following is a brief synopsis of Ordinance Amendment Z19-11.
Article 2: Definitions and Interpretations
AMEND Article 2 Definitions by Adding: Applicant, Authority, Authority Pole, Colocate, Communications Facility, Non-authority Pole, ROW, Small Cell Wireless Facility
Amend Article 2 Definitions by changing the defined height for a Wireless Communication Facility
Article 3: Districts, Dimensional Standards, Uses Tables & Zoning Map
AMEND the Use Table 3-2 by Adding Use: DAS/Small Cell Wireless Facilities (Public ROW)
Article 5: General Provisions
CREATION of a new Section: Section 536 DAS/Small Cell Wireless Facilities (Public ROW)
Add Section 1: Purpose and Intent
Add Section 2: License Requirements
Add Section 3: Design Parameters
As Amended thru August 12, 2019
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 20
Article Twenty Eight Amendments
Add Section 4: Compliance with Applicable Law
Add Section 5: Fees
Add Section 6: Other Approvals
Article 18: Standards and Requirements for Special Uses
AMEND Section 1893 A. and Section 1893. H.3 by changing the height allotment in the definition
Re-number lists as needed.
Reformatted January 2011
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Twenty Nine Reserved
ARTICLE TWENTY NINE
RESERVED
Reformatted January 2012
City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance Page 1
Article Thirty Validity, Severability, Repealer & Effective Date
ARTICLE THIRTY
VALIDITY, SEVERABILITY, REPEALER
AND EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 3000 SEPARABILITY
If any clause, sentence, sub-sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, sub sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered.
SECTION 3001 REPEALER AND SAVINGS
A. Repeal of Former Ordinance. The City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance of May 1, 1990, including amendments and additions thereto, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
B. Savings Clause. The repeal of the City of Manistee Zoning Ordinance originally adopted May 1, 1990, shall not release any penalty or liability incurred under said Ordinance, and such Ordinance shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action for the enforcement of such penalty or liability.
SECTION 3002 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days following publication of a notice of adoption in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.


City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 1
Chapter 1280 Historic District
Chapter 1280
Historic District
1280.01 Statement of Purpose 1280.13 Appeal of a Commission Decision
1280.02 Definitions 1280.14 Work Without a Permit
1280.03 Establishing Additional, Modifying,
or Eliminating Historic Districts
1280.15 Demolition by Neglect
1280.04 The Historic District Commission 1280.16 Review of Work in Proposed Districts
1280.05 Historic District Commission
Meetings, Record Keeping and
Rules of Procedure
1280.17 Emergency Moratorium
1280.06 Delegation of Minor Classes of
Work
1280.18 Penalties for Violations
1280.07 Ordinary Maintenance 1280.19 Acceptance of Gifts or Grants
1280.08 Review by the Commission 1280.20 Acquisition of Historic Resources
1280.09 Design Review Standards and
Guidelines
1280.21 Historic District Boundary
1280.10 Permit Applications 1280.22 Fees
1280.11 Denials 1280.99 Penalty
1280.12 Notice to Proceed
CROSS REFERENCES
Downtown Development Authority - See ADM. Ch. 282
Zoning Code - See P.&.Z. TITLE SIX
1280.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public purpose and the City Council of the City
of Manistee may hereby regulate the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving,
excavation, and demolition of resources in historic districts within the City limits. The purpose
of this Ordinance is to:
A. Safeguard the heritage of the City of Manistee by preserving the Manistee Commercial
Historic District, which reflect elements of its history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.
B. Foster civic beauty.
C. Strengthen the local economy.
D. Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens
of the City of Manistee and of the State of Michigan.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 2
Chapter 1280 Historic District
The City of Manistee may by Ordinance establish one or more historic districts. The historic
district shall be administered by the Historic District Commission and pursuant to this
Ordinance. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.02 DEFINITIONS
A. "Alteration" means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic
size or shape.
B. "Certificate of Appropriateness" means the written approval of a permit application for
work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a resource.
C. "Commission" means the Historic District Commission of the City of Manistee.
D. "Demolition" means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and
includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
E. "Demolition by Neglect" means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource
that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural
integrity of the resource.
F. “Denial" means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate
and that adversely affects a resource.
G. "Historic District" means an area, or group of areas, not necessarily having contiguous
boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.
H. "Historic Preservation" means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection
of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.
I. "Historic Resource" means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object,
feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture of the City of Manistee, state of Michigan, or the United States.
J. "Notice to Proceed" means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under Section
399.205(6) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.
K. "Open Space" means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade
landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer between other resources.
L. "Ordinary Maintenance" means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition
through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior
condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 3
Chapter 1280 Historic District
except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary
maintenance does not constitute work for the purposes of this Ordinance.
M. “Proposed Historic District” means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a
committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to
whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic
district.
N. "Repair" means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound condition by
any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work
for the purposes of this Ordinance.
O. "Resource" means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic
buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic
district.
P. "Work" means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition.
(Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.03 ESTABLISHING ADDITIONAL, MODIFYING, OR ELIMINATING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS
A. The City Council may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic districts,
including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of
an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing,
modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a historic district study committee appointed by
the City Council shall follow the procedures as stated in Section 399.203 (1-3) of Public Act
169 of 1970, as amended. To conduct these activities, the City Council may retain the initial
committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a committee to consider only
specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. The committee shall consider any
previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action.
B. In considering elimination of a historic district, a committee shall follow the procedures set
forth in Section 399.203 (1-3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended for the issuance of a
preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of
showing one or more of the following:
1. The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled the
establishment of the district.
2. The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined.
3. The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures.
(Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 4
Chapter 1280 Historic District
1280.04 THE HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
The City Council may establish by ordinance a commission to be called a historic district
commission. The Commission may be established at any time, but not later than the time the
first historic district is established. Each member of the Commission shall reside within the city
limits. Members shall be appointed by the City Council. The Commission shall consist of seven
(7) members. Two (2) members shall be appointed from a list submitted by duly organized
local historic preservation organizations. If such a person is available for appointment, one
member shall be an architect who has two years of architectural experience or who is duly
registered in the State of Michigan. A majority of the members shall have a clearly
demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Members shall be appointed
for a term of three (3) years, except the initial appointments of three (3) members for a term of
two (2) years and two (2) members for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be
for three-year terms. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event of a vacancy
on the Commission, interim appointments shall be made by the City Council within sixty (60)
calendar days to complete the unexpired term of such position.
The City Council may prescribe powers and duties of the Commission, in addition to those
prescribed in this Ordinance, that foster historic preservation activities, projects, and programs
in the local unit. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.05 HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION MEETINGS, RECORD KEEPING & RULES OF
PROCEDURE
A. The Historic District Commission shall meet at least quarterly or more frequently at the call
of the Commission.
B. The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held
in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Public
notice of the date, time, and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by
Public Act 267. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of
each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the Commission.
C. The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. A writing
prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the Commission in the
performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with
the Freedom of Information, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended.
D. The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt design review
standards and guidelines to carry out its duties under this act. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.06 DELEGATION OF MINOR CLASSES OF WORK
The Commission may delegate the issuance of Certificates of Appropriateness for specified
minor classes of work to its staff, or to another delegated authority. The Commission shall
provide to its delegated authority specific written standards for issuing Certificates of
Appropriateness under this subsection. The Commission shall review the Certificates of
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 5
Chapter 1280 Historic District
Appropriateness issued by the delegate on at least a quarterly basis to determine whether or
not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.07 ORDINARY MAINTENANCE
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a
resource within a historic district or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by
the inspector of buildings or other duly delegated authority before the Ordinance was enacted.
(Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.08 REVIEW BY THE COMMISSION
The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a resource and shall not
review and act upon interior arrangements unless specifically authorized to do so by the City
Council or unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The
Commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in
subsection 399.205 (3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.09 DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
A. In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part
67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of
historic districts administered by the Commission may be followed if they are equivalent in
guidance to the Secretary of Interior’s Standards and guidelines and are established or
approved by the State Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center.
B. In reviewing plans, the Commission shall also consider all of the following:
1. The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship
to the historic value of the surrounding area.
2. The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the
resource and to the surrounding area.
3. The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed
to be used.
4. Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds relevant.
(Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.10 PERMIT APPLICATIONS
A. A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource
is performed within a historic district. The person, individual, partnership, firm,
corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work
shall file an application for a permit with the building inspector. Upon receipt of a complete
application, the inspector of buildings shall immediately refer the application, along with all
required supporting materials that make the application complete to the Commission. A
permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the Commission has
acted on the application by issuing a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Notice to Proceed
as prescribed in this Ordinance.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 6
Chapter 1280 Historic District
B. The Commission shall file Certificates of Appropriateness, Notices to Proceed, and Denials
of applications for permits with the inspector of buildings. A permit shall not be issued until
the Commission has acted as prescribed by this Ordinance.
C. If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the
Commission considers valuable to the City of Manistee, the state of Michigan, or the nation,
and the Commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely
affect the public purpose of the city, state, or nation, the Commission shall attempt to
establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for the preservation
of the resource.
D. The failure of the Commission to act on an application within sixty (60) calendar days after
the date a complete application is filed with the Commission, unless an extension is agreed
upon in writing by the applicant and the Commission, shall be considered to constitute
approval.
E. The Commission may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit application. (Ord. 07-04
adopted 2-20-07)
1280.11 DENIALS
If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the building inspector. A
Denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation by the Commission of the reasons for
denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be re-submitted for Commission
review when the suggested changes have been made. The Denial shall also include the
notification of the applicant's right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board
and to the circuit court. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.12 NOTICE TO PROCEED
Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a Notice to Proceed by
the Commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be
demonstrated by a finding of the Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or
correct any of the following conditions:
A. The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants.
B. The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial
benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary
planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances.
C. Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a
governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the
hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include
offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site
within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 7
Chapter 1280 Historic District
D. Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. (Ord. 07-04
adopted 2-20-07)
1280.13 APPEAL OF A COMMISSION DECISION
A. An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning a permit application
may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation Review Board. The appeal shall be
filed within sixty (60) calendar days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The
appellant may submit all or part of the appellant’s evidence and arguments in written form.
The State Historic Preservation Review Board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly
scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision
of the State Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the circuit court
having jurisdiction over the historic district commission whose decision was appealed to the
State Historic Preservation Review Board.
B. Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the City of Manistee, as
well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic
district commission may appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit
applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under this Ordinance may not appeal to the
court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review
Board. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.14 WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT
When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the Commission finds that
the work does not qualify for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission may require an
owner to restore the resource to the condition that the resource was in before the
inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of
Appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification
requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek an order from the Circuit
Court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the
work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or
cannot comply with the order of the Court, the Commission or its agents may enter the
property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify
the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with the court's
order. The costs of the work done shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City
of Manistee as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of
the Circuit Court, the Commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this
section. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.15 DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a
proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with Demolition by
Neglect, the Commission may do either of the following:
A. Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by
neglect.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 8
Chapter 1280 Historic District
B. If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the Commission or its agents
may enter the property and make such repairs as necessary to prevent Demolition by
Neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City
of Manistee as a special assessment against the property. The Commission or its agents may
enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the Circuit
Court. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.16 REVIEW OF WORK IN PROPOSED DISTRICTS
Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural,
archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the City
Council may, at its discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits
within the proposed historic district be referred to the Historic District Commission as
prescribed in Section 11 of the Ordinance. The Historic District Commission shall review permit
applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an
established historic district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not
more than one year, or until such time as the City Council approves or rejects the establishment
of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.17 EMERGENCY MORATORIUM
If the City Council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources
located within an established or proposed historic district, the City Council may by resolution
declare an emergency moratorium on all such work for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
The City Council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed
six (6) months, upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any
pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be
summarily denied. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.18 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
A. Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a Civil Infraction in accordance
with Section 202.99.
B. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of
government that violates this act may be ordered by the Court to pay the costs to restore or
replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated
or demolished. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.19 ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRANTS
The City Council may accept state or federal grants for historic preservation purposes; may
participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation, and may accept
public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes. The City Council may appoint the
Historic District Commission to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program
responsibilities. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 9
Chapter 1280 Historic District
1280.20 ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES
If all efforts by the Commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the City
Council that public ownership is most suitable, the City Council, if considered to be the public
interest, may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds
from the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation
of the Commission. The Commission is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources
using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed
for that use by the City Council. Upon recommendation of the Commission, the City may sell
resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property
transfer documents, if appropriate. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.21 HISTORIC DISTRICT BOUNDARY
Manistee Commercial Historic District:
The District is in two sections separated by the Manistee River. The southern section boundary
follows the south bank of the Manistee River from Division Street on the East to the Municipal
Marina on the West, south along the eastern boundary of the Marina to the centerline of River
Street, west along the centerline of River Street to the centerline of Pine Street, south along the
centerline of Pine Street, to the centerline of Water Street; east along Water Street to the
centerline of Oak Street; south on Oak Street to the south property line of 427 Water Street;
east along the south property line to the east property line of 427 Water Street, north along the
east property line of 427 Water street across Water Street and north along the west property
line of 414 Water Street to the alley ½ block south of River Street; east along the alley to the
west property line of 70 Maple Street , south along the property line to the centerline of Water
Street, east along Water Street to the centerline of Maple Street, south along Maple Street to
the south property line of the Ramsdell Theater, east along that property line to the east
property line of the Ramsdell Theater, North along the east property line to the north line of
First Street , north along the mid-block line halfway between Maple and Poplar Streets, to the
rear line of River Street Buildings, east along the rear of River Street buildings to Greenbush
street, north along the Greenbush Street centerline to Filer Street, east along the centerline of
Filer Street to the east property line of 341 River Street, north to the south property line of 339
River Street, east along the south property line of 337 River Street to the alley, thence easterly
along the south line of the alley to the west property line 50 Filer Street, south along the west
property line of 50 Filer Street to the centerline of Filer Street, east along the centerline of Filer
Street to the centerline of Division Street and North to the south river bank. The northern
section boundary follows the west side of Washington Street, from the north bank of the
Manistee River to Second Avenue to a depth of ½ block west of the street centerline, and the
east side of Washington Street from the south property line of the properties at 129 – 133
Washington North to Lincoln Street, east to the rear property lines of the buildings fronting on
Washington Street. The north and south sections of the district are joined by the Maple Street
Bascule Bridge over the Manistee River. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Twelve Planning and Zoning Code Page 10
Chapter 1280 Historic District
1280.22 FEES
There shall be imposed pursuant to these sections various fees, as established from time to
time by the City Council by resolution which Fee Schedule is incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
1280.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with
Section 202.99. (Ord. 07-04 adopted 2-20-07)
Amended August 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1420 Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code
Chapter 1420
Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code
1420.01 Adoption by reference 1420.04 Conflicts of laws
1420.02 Purpose 1420.05 Enforcement by Code Official
1420.03 File and distribution copies 1420.06 Fees
1420.07 Appeals
CROSS REFERENCES
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2; B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
Building codes in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.3
Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs.
125.1501 et seq.
Code Official - see ADM. Ch. 230
Construction Board of Appeals - see ADM. Ch. 254
Obstruction of streets, alleys and sidewalks by building materials - see GEN.
OFF. 674.05
Storage of building materials - see GEN. OFF. 674.11
Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1480
.
1420.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE
Pursuant to Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended (M.C.L.A. 125.1501 et seq., as
amended), the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code (the “Act”) is hereby
adopted, by reference as the Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Code of the City of
Manistee.
1420.02 PURPOSE
The purpose of the Act, as adopted in Section 1420.01, is to prescribe construction and material
standards and specifications for all occupancies named in such Code.
1420.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES
Printed copies of the Act, as adopted in Section 1420.01, shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk, available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times.
1420.04 CONFLICTS OF LAWS
In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the Act, as adopted in Section
1420.01, and a provision of these Codified Ordinances or any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of the City, or between any of the provisions of such Code, the more restrictive
provision, or the stricter standard, shall control.
1420.05 ENFORCEMENT BY CODE OFFICIAL
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, the Code Official of the City of Manistee, Manistee
County, is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the
Amended August 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1420 Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code
City under the Act. The City hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the Act throughout its corporate limits. Violations of this Ordinance and the
Act shall be as set forth in the Act.
1420.06 FEES
There shall be imposed pursuant to these sections various fees, as established from time to
time by resolution of the City Council, which Fee Schedule is incorporated herein by reference.
Should the City Council not establish a Fee Schedule, the Fee Schedule shall be the Building
Permit Fee Schedule as established by the State of Michigan pursuant to the Act.
1420.07 Appeals
The then serving City of Manistee Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Construction Board
of Appeals under the Act and shall hear all appeals in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
including as provided in Section 14 of the Act.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1454 Dangerous, Unsightly or Unsanitary Conditions
Chapter 1454
Dangerous, Unsightly or Unsanitary Conditions
1454.01 Determination by Council
resolution
1454.04 Noncompliance; remedy of City;
employment of private contractors
1454.02 Determination on fire-damaged
premises by Council resolution
1454.05 Collection of costs
1454.03 Contents of Council resolutions;
notice to correct violations
1454.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2
Construction Board of Appeals - see ADM. Ch. 254
Sanitation of kennels - see GEN. OFF. 606.07
Nuisances generally - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Attractive nuisances - see GEN. OFF. 674.03
Accumulation of garbage and rubbish - see GEN. OFF. 674.11
Placement of hazardous waste for collection as garbage and rubbish - see S.U.
& P.S. 1060.09
Responsibility of occupants of rental properties re sanitation - see B. & H.
1482.05
1454.01 DETERMINATION BY COUNCIL RESOLUTION
It shall be the duty of the City Council to determine, by resolution, when a condition exists upon
any premises, lots or parcels of land within the City limits that is dangerous, unsightly or
unsanitary and constitutes a menace to the health and safety of any citizens or to any adjoining
property. (Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-60.)
1454.02 DETERMINATION ON FIRE-DAMAGED PREMISES BY COUNCIL RESOLUTION
It shall be the duty of the City Council to determine, by resolution, when a condition exists upon
premises, lots or parcels of land in the City, where a fire may have occurred that has resulted in
a complete or partial destruction of any buildings upon such premises, lots or parcels of land,
that a dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary condition results and remains. (Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-
60.)
1454.03 CONTENTS OF COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS; NOTICE TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS
The Council resolutions provided for in Sections 1454.01 and 1454.02 shall state the lot upon
which the condition exists and the name of the owner, if known, and shall direct such owner to
correct and remedy such condition and to remove any building, wreckage or condition that
tends to create any dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary condition. A copy of such resolution
shall be served upon the owner of such lot by any police officer of the City, or such resolution
shall be published at least once in a newspaper published within the City. Such resolution shall
also state the date upon which such building, wreckage or condition which constitutes the
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1454 Dangerous, Unsightly or Unsanitary Conditions
dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary condition shall be removed, which day shall not be less than
ten days nor more than sixty days after service or publication of such resolution, as shall be in
the discretion of the City Council. No person shall fail to comply with such resolution within the
period stated therein. (Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-60.)
1454.04 NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF CITY; EMPLOYMENT OF PRIVATE
CONTRACTORS
If, after service of the resolution or the publication thereof, and after the time stated in such
resolution for the removal of the dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary condition, the owner of
such lot shall fail, refuse or neglect to remove or remedy such condition, it shall become the
duty of the City Council, by resolution, to order any officer or employee of the City to enter
upon such premises and remove or remedy such dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions
that may exist. The City Council shall also have the authority, in its discretion, to order or
employ any private persons to enter upon such premises and perform such work as is necessary
to correct and remedy such conditions. (Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-60.)
1454.05 COLLECTION OF COSTS
A. After the completion of work necessary for the removal or remedy of any dangerous,
unsightly or unsanitary condition as provided in this chapter, the cost and expense thereof
shall be reported by the City Clerk to the City Council, and Council shall thereupon, by
resolution, declare the same to be and become a special assessment and lien upon the lot
where such condition existed in the manner provided in the City Charter for special
assessments. Such special assessment shall be reported to the City Assessor and shall be
placed upon the tax rolls of the City and collected in the manner provided in the City
Charter.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 4-5-60.)
B. The remedy provided for in Section 1454.04 and subsection (a) hereof shall be in addition to
the penalty provided in Section 1454.99.
1454.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1462 Moving of Buildings
Chapter 1462
Moving of Buildings
1462.01 Permit required 1462.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Moving of dwellings - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.406
Indemnity agreements - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 691.991
Code Official - see ADM. Ch. 230
Uniform Traffic Code - see TRAF. Ch. 410
Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1420
1462.01 PERMIT REQUIRED
No person shall remove a building, in whole or in part, from one part of the City to another
part, nor bring any building or any part thereof into the City, without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Code Official.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 7-21-53.)
1462.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1464 Numbering of Buildings
Chapter 1464
Numbering of Buildings
1464.01 Requirement for primary
structures or utility services; preexisting
numbers
1464.03 Display of numbers; specifications;
exceptions to be determined by
Street Address Administrator
1464.02 Compliance with address map and
index and with existing addresses
1464.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Code Official - see ADM. Ch. 230
Master Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1222
Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1420
Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1480
1464.01 REQUIREMENT FOR PRIMARY STRUCTURES OR UTILITY SERVICES; PREEXISTING
NUMBERS
All primary structures or utility services fronting on any street, lane or alley, or any other public
space within the City, shall be numbered in accordance with the plan hereinafter provided.
Address numbers existing prior to the effective date of this chapter which are clearly visible and
legible from the street shall be allowed to remain until replacement. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-4-92.)
1464.02 COMPLIANCE WITH ADDRESS MAP AND INDEX AND WITH EXISTING
ADDRESSES
The numbering on all primary structures or utility services shall be in accordance with the
address map and index entitled "Manistee, Michigan," and in accordance with existing
addresses. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-4-92.)
1464.03 DISPLAY OF NUMBERS; SPECIFICATIONS; EXCEPTIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY
STREET ADDRESS ADMINISTRATOR
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant of any primary structure or utility service to
display the address number on the side of the building or service facing the street to which the
address applies. If the number of the building cannot be seen from the road, the address
number shall be displayed on a post at the driveway entrance, clearly visible from the street.
All address numerals shall have three-inch high or larger block numerals. The color of the
numerals shall contrast with the background or structure surface. If a primary structure
contains more than one dwelling unit, each dwelling unit number shall be clearly designated
and visible.
Exceptions to the above paragraph may be made by the Street Address Administrator on a case
by case basis. (Ord. Unno. Passed 11-4-92.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1464 Numbering of Buildings
1464.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1468 Radar, Radio and Television Antennas
Chapter 1468
Radar, Radio and Television Antennas
1468.01 Installation 1468.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Code Official - see ADM. Ch. 230
Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1420
Interference with radio or television reception - see GEN. OFF. 658.03
Cable television systems - see B.R. & T. Ch. 816
Construction Board of Appeals - see ADM. Ch. 254
Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1480
1468.01 INSTALLATION
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or association shall erect or install a radio, radar or
television mast or antenna otherwise than in accordance with the following:
A. All installations shall conform to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code, as adopted
by reference in the Michigan Building Code, as adopted in Section 1420.01.
B. Metal structures on roofs shall be permanently and effectively grounded.
C. Grounding conductors shall be minimum fourteen gauge copper or twelve gauge aluminum,
and may be uninsulated. Grounding conductors may be attached directly to the building
surface and may be run either inside or outside to the grounding electrode. Grounding
conductors shall be securely bonded to water pipes when possible. Otherwise, a driven rod
may be used. This rod may be of three-quarter inch galvanized pipe or five-eighths inch
solid rod not less than eight feet in length.
D. All antenna masts ten feet in height, if mounted on the roof, shall be guyed four ways with
approved non-rust wire. Four additional guys shall be installed for each additional ten feet
in height. If the antenna is gable mounted and over ten feet in height, it shall be guyed
three ways with three additional guys for each ten feet of height. All roof guy anchors shall
be fastened to beams or rafters.
E. Antennas shall be installed not less than the height of the mast plus eight feet away from
high tension wires. However, should this be impossible, then masts shall be double guyed
or of the equivalent strength.
F. Lightning arresters of the approved type shall be installed on each lead-in. These may be
attached to the operating ground electrode.
G. An annual inspection shall be made by a qualified individual employee of the City
designated by the City Manager. He or she shall have the authority to order any changes
deemed necessary for a safe installation. (Ord. Unno. Passed 5-5-53; Ord. Unno. Passed 5-4-54.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1468 Radar, Radio and Television Antennas
1468.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1472 Free Standing Solid Fuel Burning Furnaces
Chapter 1472
Free Standing Solid Fuel Burning Furnaces
1472.01 Definitions 1472.04 Existing Uses
1472.02 Prohibition 1472.05 Violation; Declaration of Nuisance
1472.03 Conflicts 1472.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1420
Open Burning - see Gen. Off. Sec. 674.01
Fire Protection Code - see F.P. Ch. 1610
1472.01 DEFINITIONS
The term “free-standing solid fuel burning furnace” shall mean any device or structure that:
A. Is designed, intended, or used to provide heat and/or hot water to any residence or other
structure; and
B. Operates by the burning of wood or other solid fuel; and
C. Is not located within a residence or other structure for which it provides heat.
D. Excluded from the definition of a free-standing solid fuel burning furnace is any Industrial
Application which otherwise meets zoning or other land use regulations for the district
where located.
(Ord. 05-03 adopted 5-3-05)
1472.02 PROHIBITION
It shall be unlawful to install or operate a free-standing solid fuel burning furnace, and to cause
or permit the installation or operation of a free-standing solid fuel burning furnace, within the
City. (Ord. 05-03 adopted 5-3-05)
1472.03 CONFLICTS
This ordinance shall not be construed as an exemption or exception to any other provision of
these Codified Ordinances, including the Building Code, Property Maintenance Code, Fire
Prevention Code, Zoning Ordinance or any other Code or ordinance. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this section and any other ordinance or other provision of law, the
more restrictive provision shall apply.
(Ord. 05-03 adopted 5-3-05)
1472.04 EXISTING USES
This section shall not apply to any free-standing solid fuel burning furnace that was installed,
connected, and operating as of the effective date of this ordinance. However, this section shall
not be deemed as specific authorization for the use of any preexisting free-standing solid fuel
burning furnace and shall not be deemed to bar, limit, or otherwise affect the rights of any
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1472 Free Standing Solid Fuel Burning Furnaces
person to take private legal action regarding damage or nuisance caused by the use of a freestanding
solid fuel burning furnace. (Ord. 05-03 adopted 5-3-05)
1472.05 VIOLATIONS; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE
Any free-standing solid fuel burning furnace installed or operated in violation of this section is
hereby declared to be nuisance per se. (Ord. 05-03 adopted 5-3-05)
1472.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with
Section 202.99. (Ord. 05-03 adopted 5-3-05)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1478 Wharf and Dock Construction
Chapter 1478
Wharf and Dock Construction
1478.01 Limitations within which docks can
be built on Manistee River
1478.04 Liability of United States Government
for harbor modification
1478.02 Construction specifications;
inspections by Code Official
1478.99 Penalty
1478.03 Maintenance and repair; duties of
Code Official
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal navigational facilities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.541 et seq.
Marine Safety Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.1002 et seq.
Harbor Development Act - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 281.1251 et seq.
Construction Board of Appeals - see ADM. Ch. 254
Board of Harbor Commissioners - see ADM. Ch. 266
Watercraft operation - see TRAF. Ch. 450
River, lake and harbor regulations - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 670
Marina operation - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.05
Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1420
1478.01 LIMITATIONS WITHIN WHICH DOCKS CAN BE BUILT ON MANISTEE RIVER
No person shall maintain, build, construct or extend any dock or wharf on the Manistee River
within the limits of the City, beyond the lines or limits established by the City.
1478.02 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS; INSPECTIONS BY CODE OFFICIAL
All docks, wharfs or landings along the Manistee River and Manistee Lake, and within the limits
of the City, shall be constructed in a substantial and workmanlike manner, and according to the
following minimum standards:
A. Light Construction. Light construction shall be as follows: light post, steel -wood five inches
and over (steel, four inches, wood, five inches), light piling.
1. Wood girders, nailed or bolted, two inches.
2. Two-inch decking.
B. Medium Construction. Medium construction shall be as follows: average piling, wood, fourinch
steel and over.
1. Wood girders, bolted two inches by six inches.
2. Three inch to four-inch decking.
C. Stairways. Stairways located on river banks leading down to docks and the river front shall
be constructed of two-inch wood with attached handrails.
D. Inspections. All construction of docks and stairways shall be inspected during and after
construction by the Code Official. (Ord. Unno. Passed 1-25-1892.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1478 Wharf and Dock Construction
1478.03 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; DUTIES OF CODE OFFICIAL
All docks, wharfs and landings upon the Manistee River, within the limits of the City, shall be
kept in good repair by the owner, agent or occupant of the premises upon which the same are
situated, and whenever any such dock, wharf or landing shall be out of repair or does not
conform to the foregoing provisions of this chapter or to other applicable provisions of this
Building and Housing Code, it shall be the duty of the Code Official to notify such owner, agent
or occupant, by written notice, to repair the same within ten days after service of such notice,
and the Code Official is hereby given supervisory control of the building, constructing and
repairing of all docks, wharfs, landings and seawalls within the limits of the City.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 1-25-1892.)
1478.04 LIABILITY OF UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT FOR HARBOR MODIFICATION.
The City hereby holds and saves the United States and its agents free from all claims from
damages resulting from the improvement of the mouth of Manistee River in carrying out the
modification for Manistee Harbor, Michigan, in accordance with House Document No. 380-77th
Congress, 1st session, adopted by the River and Harbor Act, approved March 2, 1945.
(Ord. Unno. Passed 2-19-45.)
1478.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1480 Property Maintenance Code
Chapter 1480
Property Maintenance Code
1480.01 1998 edition adopted 1480.04 Amendments
1480.02 Purpose 1480.05 Conflicts of laws
1480.03 File and distribution copies 1480.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2; B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
Municipal Housing Code - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.651 et seq.
Board of Tenant Affairs - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.699 et seq.
Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.731 et
seq.
Hotels, boarding and lodging houses - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 427.1 et seq.
Housing Commission - see ADM. Ch. 270
Nuisances generally - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Nuisance trees on private property - see S.U. & P.S. 1026.09
Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1420
Numbering of buildings - see B. & H. Ch. 1464
Rental properties - see B. & H. Ch. 1482
Fire Prevention Code - see F.P. Ch. 1610
1480.01 1998 EDITION ADOPTED
The International Property Maintenance Code, First Edition, 1998 and any subsequent
amendments, as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.,
the International Conference of Building Officials, and the Southern Building Code Congress
International Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Manistee, in the State of Michigan; for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section 1480.04 of this ordinance. (Ord. 00-04 adopted 2-15-00, Effective 3-7-00)
1480.02 PURPOSE
The purpose of the Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in Section 1480.01, is to provide
minimum standards for maintenance, lighting, ventilation, heating, sanitation, fire prevention
and protection, space, location, egress, rehabilitation, use and re-use of residential and
nonresidential structures. (Ord. 00-04 adopted 2-15-00, Effective 3-7-00)
1480.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES
Printed copies of the Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in Section 1480.01, shall be kept
in the office of the City Clerk, available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all
times. (Ord. 00-04 adopted 2-15-00, Effective 3-7-00)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1480 Property Maintenance Code
1480.04 AMENDMENTS
The Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in Section 1480.01, is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: (Insert) City of Manistee
Section 103.6 Fees: (Insert) There shall be imposed pursuant to these sections various
Fees, as established from time to time by the City Council by resolution which Fee Schedule
is incorporated herein by reference.
Section 106.4 Violation Penalties: (Deleted)
Section 111.2 Membership of board: (Amended) The Board of Appeals is the Zoning Board
of Appeals of the City of Manistee.
Section 111.2.1 Alternate members: (Deleted)
Section 111.2.2 Chairman: (Deleted)
Section 111.2.3 Disqualification of member: (Deleted)
Section 111.2.4 Secretary: (Deleted)
Section 111.2.5 Compensation of members: (Deleted)
Section 111.3 Notice of meeting: (Deleted)
Section 111.4 Open meeting: (Deleted)
Section 111.4.1 Procedure: (Deleted)
Section 111.5 Postponed hearing: (Deleted)
Section 111.6 Board decision: (Deleted)
Section 111.6.1 Records and copies: (Deleted)
Section 111.6.2 Administration: (Deleted)
Section 111.7 Court Review: (Deleted)
Section 303.15 Insect Screens: (Insert) May 15th to September 15th.
Section 602.3 Heat supply: (Insert) September 15th to May 15th
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces: (Insert) September 15th to May 15th
Section 8 Referenced Standards. Codes: (Insert) Michigan Building Code BNFPC-96 BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code
(Ord. 00-04 adopted 2-15-00, Effective 3-7-00)
1480.05 CONFLICT OF LAWS
A. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code,
as adopted in Section 1480.01, and a provision of these Codified Ordinances or any
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of the City, or between any of the provisions of
such Code, the more restrictive provision, or the stricter standard, shall control.
B. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such Code and any provision of
State law, the State law shall control.
1480.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with
Section 202.99. (Ord. 00-04 adopted 2-15-00, Effective 3-7-00)
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1482 Residential Rental Properties
Chapter 1482
Residential Rental Properties
1482.01 Purposes 1482.05 Inspections by Designated City
Official prior to issuing certificate of
compliance
1482.02 Definitions 1482.06 Fees
1482.03 Minimum Standards for rental
property
1482.99 Penalty
1482.04 Registration of rental dwellings
CROSS REFERENCES
Abatement of dangerous, unsightly or unsanitary conditions - see CHTR. Ch. 13,
Sec. 13-2; B. & H. 1454.01 et seq.
Board of Tenant Affairs - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.699 et seq.
Hotels, boarding and lodging houses - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 427.1 et seq.
Housing Commission - see ADM. Ch. 270
Nuisances generally - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 654
Accumulation of garbage and rubbish - see GEN. OFF. 674.11
Nuisance trees on private property - see S.U. & P.S. 1026.09
Michigan Building Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1420
Numbering of buildings - see B. & H. Ch. 1464
Rental properties - see B. & H. Ch. 1482
Fire Prevention Code - see F.P. Ch. 1610
1482.01 PURPOSES
The purposes of this Chapter are to establish minimum standards for dwellings offered for rent
or lease, to authorize inspections of such dwellings, to fix certain responsibilities and duties of
owners and occupants essential to make such dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for human
habitation, to provide for registration with the Inspector, to require a Certificate of Compliance
issued by the Inspector and to fix penalties for violations of this Chapter. (Ord. 00-03 adopted 3-7-
00) (Ord. 15-03, Effective 3-31-15) (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
1482.02 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
A. “Certificate of Compliance” means a document issued by the Inspector stating the dwelling
has passed inspection and complies with local codes and requirements. (Ord. 15-03, Effective 3-
31-15) (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
B. "Dwelling" means any house, room or apartment, including those offered as short-term
rentals (i.e. Airbnb, Bed & Breakfast, etc.), which is wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. Hotels, motels or overnight rooms designed
and marketed for transient use shall are not dwellings for purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 19-
07, adopted 3-19-19)
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 2
Chapter 1482 Residential Rental Properties
C. "Fee" means a fee determined from time to time by Council resolution that shall be charged
each time the Inspector makes an on-site inspection of any dwelling that comes within the
meaning of this chapter. (Ord. 15-03, Effective 3-31-15) (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
D. “Inspector” means the individual or entity retained by the City to inspect rental units
pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
E. "Owner" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind offering for rent or lease any dwelling within the City. Owner is the
individual or entity identified as the owner on the City tax roll. (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
F. “Registration Certificate” means the document issued by the Inspector which is required for
every dwelling within the City offered for rent or lease. (Ord. 00-03 adopted 3-7-00) (Ord. 15-03,
Effective 3-31-15) (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
1482.03 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR RENTAL PROPERTY
The minimum standards for rental property maintenance shall be those contained in the
Property Maintenance Code as adopted in Chapter 1480 of Codified Ordinance of the City of
Manistee. (Ord. 00-03 adopted 3-7-00)
1482.04 REGISTRATION OF RENTAL DWELLINGS
A. All rental dwellings shall be registered with the City by the owner.
B. A new owner of a rental dwelling or of any dwelling newly converted to a rental dwelling
shall register the rental dwelling prior to allowing occupancy of any unit. (Ord. 19-07, adopted
3-19-19)
C. The owner of rental dwellings already registered with the City shall re-register within sixty
(60) days after any change occurs in registration information. A new owner of a registered
dwelling shall re-register the dwelling within sixty (60) days of assuming ownership.
D. Failure of the owner to register his or her rented or leased dwelling is a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 00-03 adopted 3-7-00) (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
1482.05 INSPECTIONS BY RENTAL UNIT INSPECTOR PRIOR TO PERMIT ISSUANCE
A. The Inspector or his or her agent, shall make the necessary inspections required for the
purpose of enforcing this chapter. The Inspector shall determine if the dwelling meets the
minimum standards set forth in Chapter 1480. If, after inspection, the Inspector finds that
the dwelling cannot meet the minimum standards, such Inspector shall so advise the owner
or landlord, in writing, of what corrections must be made before a Certificate of Compliance
can be issued. (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
B. Inspections will be conducted on a three year cycle with the City being divided into three
geographical areas. Each area will have rental dwellings inspected for compliance every
Amended March 2019
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 3
Chapter 1482 Residential Rental Properties
third year. It shall be the owner’s responsibility to arrange for and maintain a valid
Certificate of Compliance. (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
C. The Inspector shall establish an Inspection Schedule. Notice shall be mailed to each rental
dwelling owner at least 14 days prior to scheduled inspection. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner to notify and make arrangements with the tenant. If the inspection as
scheduled creates undo hardship, the inspection can be rescheduled by notifying the
building inspector at least 48 hour prior to scheduled inspection. (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
D. A Certificate of Compliance, once issued, shall extend for a period of three years at which
time it shall terminate, unless renewed prior to termination. If a property is transferred, the
new owner, after registering, shall assume the Certificate of Compliance issued to the
previous owner. (Ord. 19-07, adopted 3-19-19)
1482.06 FEES
There shall be imposed pursuant to these sections various Fees, as established from time to
time by the City Council by resolution which Fee Schedule is incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 00-03 adopted 3-7-00)
1482.99 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a municipal civil infraction in
accordance with Chapter 203. (Ord. 00-03 adopted 3-7-00) (Ord. 15-03, Effective 3-31-15) (Ord. 19-07,
adopted 3-19-19)
Repealed 2017
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Fourteen Building and Housing Code Page 1
Chapter 1489 Low or Moderate Income Housing
Chapter 1489
Low or Moderate Income Housing
EDITOR’S NOTE: On April 18, 2017 Ordinance 17-01, an ordinance to amend the Codified
Ordinances Repeal in full Chapter 1489 Low or Moderate Income Housing was adopted at the
regular Council meeting of April 18, 2017 and shall take effect ten days thereafter.
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Sixteen Fire Prevention Code Page 1
Chapter 1610 International Fire Code
Chapter 1610
International Fire Code
1610.01 2003 edition adopted 1610.04 Amendments, Changes Deletions,
and Additions
1610.02 Application of Code 1610.05 Conflicts of laws
1610.03 File and distribution copies 1610.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Fires and fire protection generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 29.1 et seq.
Construction or possession of explosive devices - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 750.211a
Arson - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 750.71 et seq.
Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 236
Fireworks - see GEN. OFF. 662.01
Open burning - see GEN. OFF. 674.01
Burning of garbage - see GEN. OFF. 674.02
Fire hydrants and fire protection systems - see S.U. & P.S. 1040.06, 1040.10
1610.01 2003 EDITION ADOPTED
For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing fire and explosion hazards, that certain
document marked and designated as the 2003 Edition of the International Fire Code, and any
subsequent amendments, published by the International Codes Council (ICC), is hereby adopted
as the Fire Prevention Code of the City, save and except for such portions thereof as may be
amended or repealed in this chapter. (Ord. 05-02, Adopted 5-3-05)
1610.02 APPLICATION OF CODE
For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing fire and explosion hazards, that certain
document marked and designated as the 2003 Edition of the International Fire Code, and any
subsequent amendments, published by the International Codes Council (ICC), is hereby adopted
as the Fire Prevention Code of the City, save and except for such portions thereof as may be
amended or repealed in this chapter. (Ord. 05-02, Adopted 5-3-05)
1610.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES
Printed copies of the International Fire Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01, shall be kept in
the office of the City Clerk, available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times.
1610.04 AMENDMENTS, CHANGES, DELETIONS, AND ADDITIONS
A. Definitions and Interpretations
1. Wherever the phrase name of jurisdiction
2. Wherever the term
is used in this code, it shall be held to mean
the City of Manistee.
legal counsel is used in this code, it shall be held to mean the
attorney for the City of Manistee
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Sixteen Fire Prevention Code Page 2
Chapter 1610 International Fire Code
3. Wherever the term Fire Code Official
is used in this code, it shall be held to mean the
Fire Chief of the City of Manistee.
B. The International Fire Code as adopted in Section 1610.01, is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Title Insert: [ City of Manistee ]
Section 108.3 Qualifications. (Amended) The Board of Appeals shall be the Zoning Board of
Appeals of the City of Manistee. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Code
Official by a concurring vote of three (3) members.
Section 105.6.33 Open flames and candles. (Amended) A person shall not use or allow to
be used, without direct adult supervision, any open flame, burning candle or candles in
connection with any public meeting or gathering for purposes of deliberation, worship,
entertainment, amusement, instruction, education, recreation, awaiting transportation or
similar purpose in places of assembly or education, such as churches, schools, restaurants,
eating establishments, cocktail lounges, or bars, without first obtaining approval from the
Code Official.
Section 105.1.2 Types of Permits (Amended) There shall be permits as follows:
Construction Permit. A construction permit allows the applicant to install or modify
systems and equipment for which a permit is required by Section 105.7
Section 105.2.2 (Deleted)
Section 105.3.1 Expiration (Amended) Construction permits shall automatically become
invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period
of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Before such work recommences, a new
permit shall be first obtained and the fee to recommence work, if any, shall be one-half the
amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or
will be made in the original construction documents for such work, and provided further
that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. Permits are not
transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require
that a new permit be issued.
Sections 105.6 thru 105.6.47 (Deleted)
Section 109.3 Violation penalties (Deleted)
Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads (Adopt)
Appendix E Hazard Categories (Adopt)
Appendix F Hazard Ranking (Adopt)
Appendix G Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents (Adopt)
(Ord. 05-02, Adopted 5-3-05)
1610.05 CONFLICTS OF LAWS
A. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the International Fire Code, as
adopted in Section 1610.01, and a provision of these Codified Ordinances or any ordinance,
resolution, rule, or regulation of the City, or between any of the provisions of such Code,
the more restrictive provision, or the stricter standard, shall control.
B. In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such Code and any
provision of State law, the State law shall control. (Ord. 05-02, Adopted 5-3-05)
Reformatted 2011
City of Manistee Codified Ordinances – Sixteen Fire Prevention Code Page 3
Chapter 1610 International Fire Code
1610.99 PENALTY
(EDITOR’S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)