
Mount Pleasant, Michigan City Code


MOUNT PLEASANT, MICHIGAN
CITY CODE




2019 S-37 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 1042, passed 4-8-19




 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 802



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF MOUNT PLEASANT,
MICHIGAN, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF MT. PLEASANT:



   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of
Mount Pleasant are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient
in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper
conduct of its affairs; and



   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Michigan empower
and authorize the City of Mount Pleasant to revise, amend, restate, codify
and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore
adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in
book form; and



   WHEREAS, the City Commission of Mount Pleasant has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Mount
Pleasant in a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance
in book form; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date.



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF
MOUNT PLEASANT, MOUNT PLEASANT, MICHIGAN:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Mount Pleasant,
Michigan, as revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form
are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mount Pleasant, Mount Pleasant, Michigan.”



Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:




Mount Pleasant, Michigan




Table of Contents



   Charter



   Chapter




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS




   10.   General Provisions




TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION





   30.   Commission




   31.   Administrative Divisions and City Officials



   32.   Commissions and Authorities



   33.   Taxation



   34.   Recovered Stolen Property



   35.   Emergency Management



   36.   Municipal Civil Infractions




   37.   Retired Public Safety Employees Health Care Benefits





TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS





   50.   Solid Wastes




   51.   Sewers



      Appendix:  Table of Unit Factors



   52.   Water



   53.   Drainage Districts




TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE





   70.   General Provisions




   71.   Parking Regulations



   72.   Bicycles




TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS




   90.   Alarm Systems



   91.   Animals



   92.   Cemetery Regulations



   93.   Fire Prevention



   94.   Library



   95.   Municipal Airport



   96.   Nuisances



   97.   Parks and Recreation



   98.   Streets and Sidewalks



   100.   Trees, Shrubs and Plants




TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS




   110.   General Licensing



   111.   Cable Communications Systems



   112.   Taxicabs



   113.   Public Use of Right-of-Way by Telecommunications Providers




TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES




   130.   General Provisions



   131.   Offenses Against Public Peace, Safety and Property



   132.   Controlled Substances




TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE




   150.   Building Regulations



   151.   Floodplain Management



   152.   Housing Licensing Code



   153.   Subdivision Regulations



   154.   Zoning Ordinance




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




   Table



      I.   Franchises



      II.   Tax Exemptions



      III.   Zoning Map Changes




PARALLEL REFERENCES





   References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated





   References to Ordinances





INDEX




   with the following corrections:



      1)   deletion of Chapter 30.08 subsection (D)



      2)   addition of § 71.27-§ 71.31



      3)   substitution of § 71.45



      4)   addition of § 131.09



Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed  repealed from and after the
effective date of this ordinance except as they  are  included and
reordained in whole or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not
affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect
the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to
certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of
bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or
personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other
public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or
covered by the Code.



Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Commission and the Clerk of the City of
Mount Pleasant is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code
of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.



Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



      Introduced and read the 23rd day of June, 1997.



      PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Commission of Mount Pleasant,
Michigan on this 14th day of July, 1997.



Yeas:   Commissioners Cassel, Kaufmann, Pittsley, Ross, Scalise, Sowle and
Tilmann



Nays:   None



The Mayor declared the Ordinance adopted and effective
immediately:      Date:  July 14, 1997



            Gerald D. Cassel, Mayor



            Mary Ann Kornexl, Acting City Clerk



CHARTER




TABLE OF CONTENTS




Section



Article I
Establishment of City Government



1.   Establishment of city



2.   Legislative and governing authority



3.   General powers - particular powers



4.   Provide for public peace, health, safety



5.   Definition of qualified elector and registered elector



Article II
Form of Government



1.   Commission - Manager - powers



2.   Members; non-partisan



3.   Qualified electors



4.   Terms of office



5.   Reasons for creating vacancy



6.   Elective office - filling vacancies



7.   City Commission judge of election



8.   Oath of office



9.   Mayor, election, term; Vice Mayor



10.   Duties of Mayor - Vice Mayor



11.   Commissioners; compensation



12.   Commissioners, expenses; statement required



13.   Commissioners, returns all city property



14.   Commissioners: recall by voters



15.   Organization meeting, time, place, special meetings, notices,
quorum, minutes




16.   Commissioners: employment other offices, appointments by City
Manager, rules dealing with other employees; conflict of interest, disposal
of park property or river frontage




Article III
Administrative Officials



1.   Administrative officials



2.   Appointments; promotion on merit



3.   City Manager; appointment; qualifications



4.   City Manager; removal from office; procedure



5.   Appointment of Acting City Manager during vacancy



6.   Assistant City Manager; appointment; duties



7.   City Manager - duties



8.   City Clerk - appointment, duties; journal of proceedings, ordinances



9.   City Attorney - appointment, duties



10.   City Treasurer - appointment, duties; City Assessor - appointment,
duties



Article IV
Nominations and Elections



1.   Holding city elections; time, registration, state law



2.   Nominating petition, form, filing



3.   Challengers at polling places



4.   Votes for Commission



5.   Special election; resolution by Commission



Article V
Ordinances



1.   Commission; legislature



2.   Legislation by ordinance, resolution



3.   Resolution, official action of Commission



4.   Ordinance, form, publication of summary, public hearing, publication,
effective date



5.   Emergency ordinance - definition, form, votes required; repeal



6.   Same; penalties



7.   Record of ordinances, signatures



8.   Codification of ordinances, time required, copies required



Article VI
Initiative and Referendum



1.   Initiative; referendum; elector's power to reconsider adopted
ordinance



2.   Petition; Clerk to provide form



3.   Petition - signatures required, form, filing time



4.   Certification by Clerk, presentation to City Commission, final
determination



5.   Referendum petition; procedure



6.   Consideration by Commission, submission to voters



7.   Adoption by electors; repeal



8.   Amendments by Commission; time required



Article VII
General Finances



1.   Fiscal year



2.   Capital budget; date required, estimates; methods for financing



3.   Review previous budget



4.   Publication; copies available, time, place



5.   Adoption; date required



6.   Annual operating budget, submission to Commission



7.   Annual operating budget; contents



8.   Public hearing required, notice, copies available



9.   Adoption, date, appropriation for current expenses



10.   Budget; adjustments during year



11.   Balances not encumbered revert to general fund



12.   Emergency appropriations by City Commission



13.   Provide by resolution appropriate methods and safeguards for
expenditure of funds



14.   Designate depositories - provide security for deposits



15.   Audit required



16.   Accounting system conform to laws of state



17.   Prescribe methods for financial - contractual dealings, bidding



Article VIII
Taxation



1.   Power to assess taxes, methods



2.   Subjects of taxation



3.   City taxes collected according to state law



4.   Power of taxation not surrendered



5.   Assessment roll; prepared by City Assessor



6.   Board of Review; authority and duties



7. - 12.   Deleted



13.   Endorse statement confirming assessment roll



14.   Adoption of budget; Clerk certifies



15.   Assessment roll; Assessor certifies



16.   Tax roll, collection, Treasurer's powers



17.   Lien on property



18.   Unpaid taxes; sale of lands



19.   Taxes, due date, penalties



20.   Notice to taxpayers; publication; statement to taxpayers



21.   Unpaid taxes; return to County Treasurer



22.   Tax or public sale; power



23.   Assessing and collecting taxes; state law



24.   Enforcement of tax laws, City Commission



Article IX
Special Assessments



1.   Public improvements; resolution required



2.   Adopt ordinance, assessment procedure



3.   Petition objecting, percentage required by owners, vote required to
confirm



4.   Excess roll; method of refund



5.   Lien on property



6.   Ordinance; necessary procedure



Article X
Borrowing Power



1.   Bonds, issuance, ordinance or resolution required



2.   Borrowing in anticipation of special assessment



3.   Notice required, contents



4.   Bonded indebtedness



5.   Bond; require statement of purchase, Mayor and Clerk signatures,
record by Clerk



6.   Unissued bonds; limit number of years for selling



Article XI
Franchises



1.   Franchises; authority to grant



2.   Franchises; ordinance required, exclusive franchise prohibited,
duration



3.   Franchise ordinance, renewal, conditions for same, subject to change
by City Commission



4.   Franchise ordinance, renewal, conditions for same, not subject to
change by City Commission



5.   Enumeration not limitation: Commission authority



6.   Public utility franchise, restrictions



7.   Public utility, franchise, rate adjustments



8.   Grantee to pay cost of improvement, maintenance of streets, etc.



9.   Ordinance, terms, fees



10.   Use of streets, etc., compensation



Article XII
Municipal Utilities



 



1.   Municipal utilities; right to acquire; operate



2.   Utility disposal; vote required



3.   Rates and charges; Commission to fix



4.   Ordinance required; collection of rates and charges; lien on
property; collection



5.   City Manager; power to appoint employees



6.   Financial accounting; publish report



7.   Municipal utility services outside city



Article XIII
Planning



1.   Creation



2.   Planning Commission; composition; members; terms



3.   Powers; provided by Act 285 Public Acts 1931



4.   Ordinance; authorizing granting building permits



5.   Zoning ordinance; City Commission prescribes



6.   Hazardous property; weed control; procedures; notice to owner



Article XIV
Miscellaneous



1.   Acquiring property for public use; city authority



2.   Condemnation; procedure



3.   Records; available to public



4.   Official representations or recitals in city agreement prohibited



5.   Members of various boards; qualifications; notices



6.   Campaign financing; restrictions, adopt ordinance



7.   Marihuana



Article XV
Transition



1.   Purpose



2.   Proposed Charter; submission to electors



3.   Ballots; form; content



4.   Effective date



5.   First Commission; election; term



6.   Vacancy



7.   Officers and employees continued; exceptions



8.   Claims; orders; contents, etc.; continued



9.   Ordinances; resolutions, etc., continued; exception



10.   Boards; committees; etc., continued



11.   Taxes; assessments; no change; exception



12.   City Commission to adopt procedures for transition



13.   Charter amendment; number votes required for conflicting provisions



14.   Severability



ARTICLE I
ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY GOVERNMENT



Sec. 1.  ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY.



   The municipal corporation heretobefore established and now existing and
known as “The City of Mount Pleasant” shall continue as a municipal
corporation under the same name, and the boundaries of the City existing when
this Charter takes effect shall continue in force until changed in accordance
with law.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  LEGISLATIVE AND GOVERNING AUTHORITY.



   The City has the comprehensive home rule power conferred upon it by the
Michigan Constitution, subject only to the limitations on the exercise of
that power contained in the Constitution and laws of this State or this
Charter. The City has all other powers which a city may possess under the
Constitution and laws of this State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  GENERAL POWERS - PARTICULAR POWERS.



   The specific mention of particular powers in this Charter shall not be
construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the City stated in
this Article.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  PROVIDE FOR PUBLIC PEACE,  HEALTH, SAFETY.



   The City shall provide for the public peace and health and for the
safety of persons of property within the City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



SEC. 5.  DEFINITION OF QUALIFIED ELECTOR AND REGISTERED ELECTOR.



   As used in this Charter, the terms "qualified elector" and "registered
elector" are used interchangeably to mean all persons qualified by the
Constitution and the laws of this State to vote in the City who have also
registered to vote in the City as provided by applicable laws and regulations.



(Amendment effective 8-5-08)



ARTICLE II
FORM OF GOVERNMENT



Sec. 1.  COMMISSION - MANAGER - POWERS.



   The form of government provided for in this Charter shall be known as
the “Commission-Manager Plan.” Except as otherwise provided by law and
this Charter, the Commission shall have full authority to exercise all powers
conferred upon the City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  MEMBERS; NON-PARTISAN.



   The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members elected from the City
at-large on a non-partisan basis.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  QUALIFIED ELECTORS.



   Members of the Commission shall be qualified electors of the City of
Mount Pleasant.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The seven (7) Commissioners shall be elected in three (3) groups, one
group of three (3) and two (2) groups of two (2). The term of each
Commissioner shall commence on the first day of January following election
and shall last for three (3) years, except as provided for in Article XV,
Section 5.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  REASONS FOR CREATING VACANCY.



   The office of any Commissioner shall become vacant upon the occurrence
of one or more of the following events:



   (A)   For any reason specified by law creating a vacancy.



   (B)   The Commissioner's death.



   (C)   The Commissioner's resignation tendered to the Commission and
accepted by the Commission.



   (D)   The Commissioner's termination of his residency in the City.



   (E)   The Commissioner's absence from five (5) consecutive regular
meetings of the Commission, of fifty percent (50 percent) of the meetings in
any fiscal year, unless the absences are excused by the Commission and the
reasons entered in the proceedings of the Commission.



   (F)   The Commissioner's conviction of any crime involving moral
turpitude in the Courts of any state or the United States.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  ELECTIVE OFFICE - FILLING VACANCIES.



   Whenever a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be filled as follows:



   (A)   If twelve (12) months or fewer remain in an unexpired term,
within thirty (30) days the Commission shall appoint a qualified elector to
fill the remainder of the term, except as provided in subsection (C).



   (B)   If more than twelve (12) months remain in an unexpired term,
within thirty (30) days the Commission shall appoint a qualified elector to
fill this office and shall schedule a special election as soon as
practicable. The person appointed by the Commission shall serve until the
special election is held and a candidate is certified as elected and takes
office.



   (C)   In the event that three (3) or more vacancies in the
Commission exist simultaneously, or in the event that four (4) or more
positions on the Commission are either vacant or filled by appointment under
this section, there shall be held, as soon as practicable, a special election
and all vacancies and all positions held by appointed Commissioners shall be
filled thereby for the remainder of the respective terms.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  CITY COMMISSION JUDGE OF ELECTION.



   The Commission shall be the judge of the election, the continuing
qualifications of its members, and the grounds causing a vacancy in office.
Decisions by the Commission under this section shall be subject to review by
a Court of competent jurisdiction.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 8.  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Every elected and appointed Commissioner, before commencing official
duties, shall take and subscribe to the following oath:



   “I do solemnly swear (affirm) that I will support the constitutions
of the United States of America and the State of Michigan and the Charter of
the City of Mount Pleasant, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties
of this office on behalf of all the citizens of the City to the best of my
ability.”



   The commissioner shall file the oath, duly certified by the official
before whom it was taken, in the office of the City Clerk.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 9.  MAYOR, ELECTION, TERM; VICE MAYOR.



   At the first meeting in January of each year the Commission shall elect
one of its members to serve as Mayor and one of its members to serve as Vice
Mayor. The Mayor and Vice Mayor shall serve until the first day of January of
the next year, or until their successors take office.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 10.  DUTIES OF MAYOR - VICE MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be recognized as executive head of the City for all
ceremonial purposes, for the purposes of military law, and for all purposes
required by law and shall have such other duties as prescribed by this
Charter. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall
have an equal voice and vote in the proceedings of the Commission, but shall
have no veto power. The Mayor shall authenticate by signature such
instruments as the Commission, this Charter, or the laws of the State or the
United States require. The Vice Mayor shall act as Mayor during the absence
or disability of the Mayor or, if a vacancy occurs, shall become Mayor for
the balance of the term.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 11.  COMMISSIONERS;  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Each Commissioner shall receive as payment for his-her service
on the Commission a sum of $1,500 per year, the Mayor shall receive $2,000
per year, except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this section..
Such compensation shall be payable quarterly and, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter, shall constitute the only remuneration which may be
paid for services performed by the Mayor, Vice Mayor, or any Commissioner for
the discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the City during a term
of office.



   (B)   A Local Officers Compensation Commission (herein "LOC
Commission") is created which shall determine the salary of each elected City
official. The LOC Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. The members
shall be registered electors of the City, appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by the majority of the members of the City Commission. The terms
of office shall be seven (7)  years, except that of the members first
appointed, one (1) each shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2),
three (3), four (4), five (5), six (6) and seven (7) years. The first members
shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
provision. Members other than the first members shall be appointed before
October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term. A member or employee of the legislative,
judicial or executive branch of government or a member of the immediate
family of a member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive
branch of government shall not be a member of the LOC Commission.



   (C)   The LOC Commission shall recommend the salary of each elected
City official. The recommendation shall be the salary if the City Commission,
by resolution adopted by at least a majority of the members elected to and
serving on the City Commission, approve it. If the recommendation is not
approved, the existing salary shall prevail. The recommendation, if approved,
shall take effect at the start of the next fiscal year after the date of
approval by the City Commission. The expense allowance or reimbursement paid
to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in
the course of City business and accounted for to the City Commission, or its
designee.



   (D)   The LOC Commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15)
session days every fifth year and make its recommendation within forty-five
(45) calendar days after its first meeting. A majority of the members of the
LOC Commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the LOC
Commission. The LOC Commission shall not take action or make a recommendation
without a concurrence of the majority of the members appointed and serving on
the LOC Commission. The LOC Commission shall elect a chairperson from among
its members. As used in this section, "SESSION DAY" means a calendar day on
which the LOC Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the
LOC Commission shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to
actual and necessary expenses incurred in performance of their official
duties.



   (E)   The LOC Commission shall comply with the Michigan's Open
Meetings Act (MCL 15.261) and the Michigan Freedom of Information Act (MCL
15.231).



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-5-02; Amendment effective
1-1-04)



Sec. 12.  COMMISSIONERS, EXPENSES;  STATEMENT REQUIRED.



   The Commission may reimburse a Commissioner for reasonable expenses
incurred on behalf of the City. Written verification of the expenses must be
submitted to the Commission.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 13.  COMMISSIONERS, RETURNS ALL CITY PROPERTY.



   Whenever any Commissioner leaves office, he-she shall deliver to
his-her successor in office, all City property of every kind, name, and
nature in his-her custody, which in any way pertains to his-her office.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 14.  COMMISSIONERS: RECALL BY VOTERS.



   Any elected officer provided for in this Charter may be recalled by the
voters of the City in the manner provided by law.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 15.  ORGANIZATION MEETING, TIME,  PLACE, SPECIAL MEETINGS, NOTICES, 
QUORUM, MINUTES.



   (A)   The first meeting of the Commission shall be held for the
purpose of organization at the usual place for holding the meetings of the
legislative body of the City, during January of each year. The City Clerk
shall preside at the first meeting until the Mayor has been selected.



   (B)   The regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at least
twice each month. These meetings shall be held at the Municipal building
unless otherwise provided for by ordinance.



   (C)   Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the City
Clerk on a request of the Mayor, Vice Mayor, or any three (3) Commissioners.
The City Clerk shall notify all Commissioners of any special meeting and the
business to be transacted at that meeting. This notice shall be given to all
Commissioners in writing at least twelve (12) hours before the time of the
special meeting. Notice shall be served personally or delivered to the
Commissioners' residences. However, any special meeting of the Commission at
which all members of the Commission are present or have, in writing, waived
the notice requirement of this subsection and at which a quorum of the
Commission is present, shall be a legal meeting so long as the other
provisions of this section regarding public notice have been properly
completed.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall post a notice of the times established
for regular scheduled meetings of the Commission in a conspicuous public area
of the Municipal Building at such times so as to comply with the laws of the
State, and in no event fewer than three (3) days prior to the first regular
scheduled meeting of the Commission. The City Clerk also shall post a notice
of all special meetings and their purposes in a conspicuous public area of
the Municipal Building at such time so as to comply with the laws of the
State, but in no event fewer than eighteen (18) hours prior to the time of
the meeting. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting of the
Commission except as set forth in the notice of the special meeting.



   (E)   Four (4) Commissioners shall be a quorum for the holding of
all meetings of the Commission, but, in the absence of a quorum, two (2)
commissioners may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a later date.
When reconvening an adjourned meeting, notice of the time and place of that
meeting shall be given in the manner required of a special meeting, as set
out in subsection (D), except that in the case of an adjourned regular
meeting no statement of the business to be transacted need be included in the
notice.



   (F)   The Commission may adopt rules and bylaws for its procedure
that are not inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State. The
Commission shall keep a journal of its proceedings in English.



   (G)   The proceedings of the Commission shall be published in a
local newspaper of general circulation in the City within ten (10) days after
each meeting of the Commission. The publication of a synopsis of these
proceedings, prepared by the City Clerk, showing the substance of each
separate action of the Commission, shall comply with the requirements of this
provision.



   (H)   All regular and special meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-6-12)



Sec. 16.  COMMISSIONERS: EMPLOYMENT OTHER OFFICES, APPOINTMENTS BY CITY
MANAGER, RULES DEALING WITH OTHER EMPLOYEES; CONFLICT OF INTEREST,  DISPOSAL
OF PARK PROPERTY OR RIVER FRONTAGE.



   (A)   Except where authorized by this Charter, no Commissioner shall
hold any other City office or City employment during the term for which
he-she was elected to the Commission, and no former Commissioner shall hold
any compensated City office or City employment until one (1) year after the
expiration of his term.



   (B)   Neither the Commission nor any of its members, individually,
shall dictate the appointment or removal of any City official or employee
whom the City Manager or any of his-her subordinates are empowered to
appoint. The Commission may express its views and may fully and freely
discuss with the City Manger anything pertaining to the appointment and
removal of any official or employee.



   (C)   The Commission and its members shall deal solely through the
City Manager with officials and employees who are subject to the direction
and supervision of the City Manager. Neither the Commission nor its members,
individually, shall give orders to any official or employee, publicly or
privately.



   (D)   Any Commissioner, City official or employee, when engaging in
official business, shall be guided in his or her action by the appropriate
conflict of interest laws of the State.



   (E)   The Commission shall not have the power to sell, divide,
lease, partition, plat, subdivide, or dispose of any City park, or any part
thereof, unless specifically approved by a majority of the electors voting
thereon at any general or special election.



   (F)   The Commission shall not have the power to sell, divide,
lease, partition, plat, subdivide, or dispose of any City owned interest in
real property which lies within one hundred (100) feet of the edge of the
Chippewa River or its tributaries, as they may exist in their natural state,
unless specifically approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at
any general or special election. This subsection shall not apply to the
normal operation of a cemetery.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS



Sec. 1.  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS.



   The administrative officials of the City shall be the City Manager,
City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, and City Assessor. The Commission
may create additional administrative offices or combine administrative
offices in any manner not inconsistent with law or this Charter, and shall
prescribe the duties thereof in order to insure the proper operation of the
City government. No creation of any administrative office or combination of
any administrative offices shall abolish the office of City Manager, nor
diminish any of the duties of that office as set forth in this Charter.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  APPOINTMENTS; PROMOTION ON MERIT.



   All appointments, promotions, and compensation of administrative
officials shall be made solely on evidence of merit and fitness.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  CITY MANAGER; APPOINTMENT;  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The City Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire
Commission for an indefinite term. The appointment shall be solely on the
basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The Commission shall
fix his compensation. The City Manager, once appointed, shall become a
resident of the City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  CITY MANAGER; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; PROCEDURE.



   The Commission may remove the City Manager from office in accordance
with the following procedures:



   (A)   The Commission shall adopt by a majority vote of the entire
Commission a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal.
The resolution shall suspend the City Manager from duty for a period not to
exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered
promptly to the City Manager.



   (B)   Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is
delivered to the City Manager, the City Manager may file with the Commission
a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a
Commission meeting not earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than thirty
(30) days after the request is filed. The City Manager shall receive at least
ten (10) days notice of this hearing. The City Manager may file with the
Commission a written reply not later than (5) days before the hearing.



   (C)   If the City Manager has not requested a public hearing, the
Commission may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made
effective immediately, by a majority vote of the entire Commission at any
time after five (5) days from the date when a copy of the preliminary
resolution was delivered to the City Manager. If the City Manager has
requested a public hearing, the final resolution of removal may be adopted at
any time after the hearing.



   (D)   The City Manager shall continue to receive his salary until
the effective date of the final resolution of removal or for thirty (30) days
after the date of adoption of the preliminary resolution, whichever occurs
later. The action of the Commission in suspending or removing the City
Manager shall not be subject to review by any Court.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  APPOINTMENT OF ACTING CITY MANAGER DURING VACANCY.



   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of City Manager, or upon
his suspension pursuant to Section 4, the Commission, while it is attempting
to fill the office, may appoint an Acting City Manager. This appointment
shall not exceed six (6) months. During this term, the Acting City Manager
shall serve at the will of the Commission and may be immediately removed by a
majority vote of the entire Commission without the necessity of compliance
with Section 4.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER;  APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.



   When the City Manager is absent from the City or disabled, a qualified
City administrative official shall be designated by the City Manager to
exercise the powers and perform the duties of the City Manager during this
absence or disability. The City Manager shall file with the City Clerk a
list, by name and title, of three (3) qualified City administrative officials
to exercise such powers and perform such duties. The City administrative
officials shall be listed in the order by which each shall be designated to
temporarily assume the City Manger's duties. During this absence or
disability, the Commission may revoke such designation at any time and
appoint another City administrative official to serve until the City Manager
shall return or his disability shall cease.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  CITY MANAGER - DUTIES.



   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative official of the
City, and shall be responsible to the Commission for the administration of
all City affairs placed in his charge by this Charter. The City Manager shall
have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   He-she shall appoint and, when he-she deems it necessary for
the good of the City, suspend or remove all City employees and appointive
administrative officials provided for by this Charter, except as otherwise
provided by law, this charter, or personnel rules. He-she may authorize any
administrative official who is subject to his-her direction and supervision
to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that official's
department, office, or agency.



   (B)   He-she shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices, and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided
by law or this Charter.



   (C)   He-she shall attend all Commission meetings and shall have the
right to take part in discussion, but may not vote.



   (D)   He-she shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter,
and acts of the Commission, subject to enforcement by him-her or by officials
subject to his-her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.



   (E)   He-she shall prepare and submit the Annual Operating Budget
and Capital Program to the Commission.



   (F)   He-she shall submit to the Commission and make available to
the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the City and make such recommendations to the Commission concerning the
affairs of the City as of the end of each fiscal year.



   (G)   He-she shall make such other reports as the Commission may
require concerning the operations of City departments, offices, and agencies.



   (H)   He-she shall keep the Commission fully advised as to the
financial condition and future needs of the City as he-she deems desirable.



   (I)   He-she shall perform such other duties as are specified by
law, this Charter, or the Commission.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 8.  CITY CLERK - APPOINTMENT,  DUTIES; JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS, 
ORDINANCES.



   The City Clerk shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire
Commission for an indefinite term. He-she shall be Clerk of the Commission
and shall, with the Mayor, sign all ordinances. He-she shall keep a permanent
journal of all Commission proceedings and ordinances. In addition, the City
Clerk shall perform all other duties prescribed by law, this Charter, and the
Commission. He-she may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Commission.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 9.  CITY ATTORNEY - APPOINTMENT,  DUTIES.



   The City Attorney shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire
Commission for an indefinite term. He-she shall be the legal advisor for the
city and for all City officials and departments in all matters relating to
their official duties, and shall perform such other duties as the Commission
may require. He-she may be removed by a majority vote of the entire
Commission.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 10.  CITY TREASURER - APPOINTMENT,  DUTIES; CITY ASSESSOR -
APPOINTMENT,  DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall be appointed by a majority vote of
the entire Commission for an indefinite term. The Treasurer shall have
custody of all monies of the City and shall perform all other duties
prescribed by law, this Charter, or the Commission. He-she may be removed by
a majority vote of the entire Commission.



   (B)   The City Assessor shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
entire Commission for an indefinite term. He-she shall possess all powers
vested in, and shall be charged with all duties imposed upon, assessing
officers by law, this Charter, or the Commission. He-she may be removed by a
majority vote of the entire Commission.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE IV
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS



Sec. 1.  HOLDING CITY ELECTIONS; TIME, REGISTRATION, STATE LAW.



   (A)   The regular City election shall be held on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November in those years in which an election is
required.



   (B)   The City Clerk may register electors at places outside of the
City Clerk's offices so as to facilitate the registration of all electors of
the City.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the Constitution
and laws of the State shall apply to the conduct of elections held under this
Charter and the registration of electors in the City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 8-5-08)



Sec. 2.  NOMINATING PETITION, FORM,  FILING.



   (A)   Candidates for election to the City Commission shall be
nominated by petition. Any qualified elector of the City may be nominated for
election by a petition signed by qualified electors of the City not fewer in
number than fifty (50) nor more in number than eighty (80). The form, size,
and contents of all nominating petitions shall be as provided by the laws of
the State. The City Clerk shall provide nominating petitions for all elected
offices. An individual may circulate his own petition.



   (B)   All separate papers comprising the nominating petition shall
be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one instrument within the time
limitation set for filing petitions as provided by the laws of the State,
except that no nominating petition may be filed sooner than thirty (30) days
before the last day set for filing petitions. The City Clerk shall make a
record of the exact time when each petition is filed. No nominating petition
shall be accepted for filing by the City Clerk unless accompanied by a signed
acceptance of the nomination.



   (C)   Within five (5) days after the filing of the nominating
petition, excluding weekends and holidays, the City Clerk shall notify the
candidate and the person who filed the petition whether it satisfies the
requirements prescribed by this Article. If the petition is found
insufficient, the City Clerk shall return it immediately to the person who
filed it with a statement certifying wherein it is insufficient. Within the
regular time limit for filing petitions, the original petition may be amended
and filed again as a new petition, or another petition may be filed for the
same candidate. The City Clerk shall keep on file all petitions found
sufficient at least until the expiration of the term for which the candidates
are nominated in those petitions.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  CHALLENGERS AT POLLING PLACES.



   A regularly nominated candidate shall be entitled, upon written
application to the City Clerk at least ten (10) days before the election, to
appoint individuals to represent the candidate as challengers at each polling
place where voters may cast their ballots for him-her, but at no time shall
more than one (1) challenger per candidate be at each polling place. A person
so appointed shall have all the rights and privileges prescribed for
challengers under the general election laws of the State. The challengers may
exercise their rights through the voting and until the ballots have been
counted.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  VOTES FOR COMMISSION.



   Every voter shall be entitled to vote for as many candidates for the
Commission as there are Commissioners to be elected.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  SPECIAL ELECTION; RESOLUTION BY COMMISSION.



   Special elections shall be held when called by resolution of the
Commission, setting forth the purpose of this election. At least forty-five
(45) days notice must be given of a special election.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE V
ORDINANCES



Sec. 1.  COMMISSION; LEGISLATURE.



   The legislative power of the City is vested exclusively in the
Commission, except as otherwise provided by law.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  LEGISLATION BY ORDINANCE,  RESOLUTION.



   (A)   All legislation of the City shall be by ordinance or by
resolution.



   (B)   The power of the Commission to act by resolution is limited to
matters required or permitted by law or this Charter, and to matters
pertaining to the internal concerns of the City.



   (C)   The Commission shall act by ordinance when establishing a rule
or regulation which provides for a penalty, when amending or repealing an
ordinance previously adopted, or when required by law or this Charter.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  RESOLUTION, OFFICIAL ACTION OF COMMISSION.



   A resolution is the official action of the Commission in the form of a
motion adopted by a majority vote of the entire Commission.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  ORDINANCE, FORM, PUBLICATION OF SUMMARY, PUBLIC HEARING, 
PUBLICATION, EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing. No
ordinance shall contain more than one (1) subject, and the ordinance title
must clearly express that subject. The enacting clause shall be “It is
Hereby Ordained by the People of the City of Mount Pleasant . . .”



   (B)   Following introduction of any ordinance, the City Clerk shall
publish a summary of the proposed ordinance in a local newspaper of general
circulation in the City together with a notice setting out the time and place
for a public hearing on the proposed ordinance. The public hearing may not be
held sooner than five (5) days after the publication. Copies of the ordinance
shall be distributed without charge at the office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   After the public hearing, the Commission may consider enacting
the proposed ordinance. The enactment of an ordinance shall require a
majority vote of the entire Commission.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided by law and this Charter, each
ordinance, including emergency ordinances, shall be published in full,
together with a summary, in a local newspaper of general circulation in the
City at least one (1) time within ten (10) days after its adoption by the
Commission. The publication of an ordinance in full as a part of the a
published proceedings of the Commission shall not constitute publication of
such ordinance as required herein.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided by law and this Charter, every
ordinance shall become effective on the thirtieth (30th) day after enactment
or at any later date specified therein.



   (F)   An Ordinance which repeals or amends any existing ordinance or
part of the City Code shall identify, by title and number, the ordinance,
sections, or subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall clearly
indicate the matter to be omitted and the new matter to be added.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  EMERGENCY ORDINANCE - DEFINITION, FORM, VOTES REQUIRED;  REPEAL.



   (A)   To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, or
property, one or more emergency ordinances may be enacted. However, an
emergency ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise,
or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its service.



   (B)   An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and
manner required for ordinances generally, except that it shall contain after
the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and
describing the emergency in clear, specific terms.



   (C)   An emergency ordinance may be enacted on the date of
introduction and given immediate effect by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the
Commissioners present at the time of enactment.



   (D)   Every emergency ordinance is automatically repealed on the
sixty-first (61st) day after its enactment, unless re-enacted pursuant to
Section 4.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  SAME; PENALTIES.



   An ordinance may provide a penalty for the violation of its provisions.
The penalty shall not exceed the limits provided by law.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  RECORD OF ORDINANCES,  SIGNATURES.



   All ordinances shall be recorded in an index book marked “City
Ordinances,” and a record of each ordinance shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Mayor and Clerk. Such record and authentication shall be
done within thirty (30) days after the final passage of any ordinance. If any
ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, is not so authenticated and
recorded within thirty (30) days after final passage, the ordinance shall not
take effect until seven (7) days after notice, that the ordinance has been
properly authenticated and recorded, has been published in a local newspaper
of general circulation in the City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 8.  CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES,  TIME REQUIRED, COPIES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Within three (3) years after the effective date of this
Charter, and at least every ten (10) years thereafter, the Commission shall
provide for the preparation of a general codification of all City ordinances
and resolutions having the effect of law.



   (B)   The general codification shall be enacted by ordinance and be
known as the Mount Pleasant City Code. Copies of the Code shall be furnished
to City officials, placed in libraries and public offices for free public
reference, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable
price to be fixed by the Commission. Except as required by law, the enactment
of this ordinance need not comply with the requirements of Section 4.



   (C)   After publication of the first Mount Pleasant City Code, new
ordinances and resolutions shall be printed annually in a form for
integration with the Code currently in effect.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE VI
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM



Sec. 1.  INITIATIVE; REFERENDUM;  ELECTOR'S POWER TO RECONSIDER ADOPTED
ORDINANCE.



   (A)   INITIATIVE: The qualified electors of the City shall have
power to propose ordinances to the Commission. If the Commission fails to
adopt the proposed ordinance or adopts the ordinance, but changes its
substance, the proposed ordinance shall be submitted to the electors for
adoption or rejection at a City election, provided that such power shall not
extend to the Annual Operating Budget or Capital Program or any ordinance
relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes.



   (B)   REFERENDUM: The qualified electors of the City shall have
power to required the Commission to reconsider any adopted ordinance. If the
Commission fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the ordinance shall
be submitted to the electors for approval or rejection at a City Election,
provided that such power shall not extend to the Annual Budget or Capital
Program, any emergency ordinance, or any ordinance relating to the
appropriation of money or levy of taxes.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  PETITION; CLERK TO PROVIDE FORM.



   (A)   Any five (5) qualified electors may commence initiative or
referendum proceedings by filing an affidavit with the City Clerk stating
they will constitute the petitioner's committee and will be responsible for
circulating the petition and filing it in proper form. The affidavit shall
state their names and addresses, shall specify the address to which all
notices to the committee are to be sent, and shall set forth in full the
proposed initiative ordinance or cite the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.



   (B)   The Clerk shall issue blank forms for petitions upon request.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  PETITION - SIGNATURES REQUIRED, FORM, FILING TIME.



   (A)   Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by
qualified, registered electors of the City equal to not less than 18% of the
number of votes cast for candidates for the office of governor at the last
preceding general election in the City.



   (B)   All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style
and shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil, followed by the address of
the person signing. Throughout their circulation, the petitions shall contain
or have attached the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be
reconsidered.



   (C)   Each paper of a petition shall have attached, when filed, an
affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that the circulator
personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all
the were affixed in the circulator's presence, that the circulator believes
them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to
be, and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full
text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.



   (D)   Referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days
after the Commission adopts the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Initiative petitions must be filed within one hundred and eighty (180) days
after filing of the affidavit of the petitioner's committee.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 8-5-08)



Sec. 4.  CERTIFICATION BY CLERK,  PRESENTATION TO CITY COMMISSION,  FINAL
DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Within 20 days after the petition is filed, the City Clerk
shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying if it is
insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send
a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by certified mail. A
petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid
signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice
of intention to amend the petition with the City Clerk within two (2) days
after receiving the copy of the City Clerk's certificate, excluding weekends
and holidays. The amended petition must be filed within ten (10) days after
receiving the copy of the certificate. The amended petition shall comply with
the requirements of subsection (B) and (C) of Section 3. Within five (5) days
after it is filed, excluding weekends and holidays, the City Clerk shall
complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition, as amended, and
promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by
certified mail. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or
if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request Commission review
under subsection (B) of this Section within the time required, the City Clerk
shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.



   (B)   If a petition has been certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an
amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee, within two
(2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, excluding weekends and
holidays, may file a request that it be reviewed by the Commission. The
Commission shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the
filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the Commission's
determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of
the petition.



   (C)   A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition
shall be subject to review by a Court of competent jurisdiction. A final
determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall
not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  REFERENDUM PETITION;  PROCEDURE.



   When a referendum petition is timely filed with the City Clerk, the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect.
Such suspension shall terminate when:



   (A)   There is final determination of insufficiency of the petition,
or



   (B)   Thirty (30) days have elapsed after an affirmative vote by the
electors on the ordinance.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  CONSIDERATION BY COMMISSION,  SUBMISSION TO VOTERS.



   (A)   When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally
determined sufficient, the Commission shall promptly consider the proposed
initiative ordinance or reconsider the referred ordinance in the manner
provided in Article V. If the Commission fails to adopt a proposed initiative
ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to
repeal the referred ordinance within forty-five (45) days after the date of
the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed
or referred ordinance to the electors of the City.



   (B)   The vote of the City on a proposed or referred ordinance shall
be held not sooner than thirty (30) days and not later than one (1) year from
the date of the final Commission determination. If no regular City election
is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the Commission
shall provide for a special election. Otherwise, the vote shall be held at
the same time as the next regular election, except that the Commission may in
its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the
prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made
available at the polls.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  ADOPTION BY ELECTORS; REPEAL.



   (A)   If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in
the same manner as ordinances adopted by the Commission. If conflicting
ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest
number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of conflict.



   (B)   If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred
ordinance vote against it, the ordinance shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 8.  AMENDMENTS BY COMMISSION;  TIME REQUIRED.



   The Commission shall have no authority to adopt an amendment or to
repeal an initiative ordinance or referred ordinance that has been approved
by a majority vote of the qualified electors until twenty-four (24) months
after its approval.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE VII
GENERAL FINANCES



Sec. 1.  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year for the City shall begin on January 1st and end
December 31st of each year.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  CAPITAL BUDGET; DATE REQUIRED, ESTIMATES; METHODS FOR FINANCING.



   On or before the first Commission meeting in April, the City Manager
shall submit to the Commission a proposed Capital Budget for the next five
(5) fiscal years. The Budget shall state:



   (A)   A clear general summary of its contents.



   (B)   A list of all major capital improvements which are proposed to
be undertaken during the five (5) years next ensuing, with appropriate
supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements.



   (C)   Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended tax
schedules for each such improvement.



   (D)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-6-90)



Sec. 3.  REVIEW PREVIOUS BUDGET.



   Previously adopted Capital Budgets may be revised and extended each
year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of
construction or acquisition.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  PUBLICATION; COPIES AVAILABLE,  TIME, PLACE.



   The Commission shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City a general summary of the Capital Budget and a notice stating:



   (A)   The times and places where copies of the Capital budget are
available for inspection by the public, and



   (B)   The time and place, not sooner than two (2) weeks after the
publication, for a public hearing on the Capital Budget.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  ADOPTION; DATE REQUIRED.



   The Commission shall adopt by resolution the Capital Budget with or
without amendments after the public hearing and on or before the first
Commission meeting in June.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-6-90)



Sec. 6.  ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET,  SUBMISSION TO COMMISSION.



   On or before the first Commission meeting in September, the City
Manager shall submit to the Commission a proposed Annual Operating Budget for
the next fiscal year.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-6-90)



Sec. 7.  ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET;  CONTENTS.



   The Proposed Annual Operating Budget shall provide a complete financing
plan for the next fiscal year of all City funds and activities including
capital expenditures, and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall
be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the Commission may
require. The proposed Annual Operating Budget shall begin with a clear
summary of its contents, shall show in detail all estimated income,
indicating the proposed property tax levy and all proposed expenditures,
including debts for the next fiscal year, and shall be so arranged as to show
comparative figures or estimated income and expenditures for the preceding
fiscal year, and shall provide such other information as may be required by
the Commission.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 8.  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED,  NOTICE, COPIES AVAILABLE.



   Before the final adoption of the Annual Operating Budget, a public
hearing shall be held at which the proposed Annual Operating Budget shall be
presented. The time and place of the hearing shall be determined by the
Commission and notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City at least two (2) weeks before the hearing. At
the hearing all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard
for or against any item in the proposed Annual Operating Budget. A copy of
the proposed Annual Operating Budget shall be on file and available to the
public for inspection during office hours at the office of the City Clerk for
a period of not fewer than ten (10) days prior to this hearing.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 9.  ADOPTION, DATE, APPROPRIATION FOR CURRENT EXPENSES.



   (A)   The Commission shall review the proposed Annual Operating
Budget and shall make modifications as it deems advisable. Not later than the
last Commission meeting in December, the Commission shall adopt by resolution
the Annual Operating Budget for the next fiscal year, and shall provide in
such resolution for a levy, if necessary, to be raised by a tax upon real and
personal property.



   (B)   [Deleted by amendment effective November 6, 1990.]



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-6-90)



Sec. 10.  BUDGET; ADJUSTMENTS DURING YEAR.



   (A)   If the City Manager certifies during the fiscal year that
there are available revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the
Commission by resolution may make supplemental appropriations up to the
amount of such excess revenues.



   (B)   If it appears probable to the City Manager during the fiscal
year that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount
appropriated, the City Manager shall report to the Commission without delay,
indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken and
recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Commission shall then
take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent any deficit, and
for that purpose it may reduce by resolution one or more appropriations.



   (C)   At any time during the fiscal year, the City Manager may
transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs
within a department office, or agency. Upon written request by the City
Manager, the Commission may transfer by resolution part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, or agency to
another.



   (D)   No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or
transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by
law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance
thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and the reduction or
transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective
immediately upon adoption.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-6-90)



Sec. 11.  BALANCES NOT ENCUMBERED REVERT TO GENERAL FUND.



   Except as provided by law, the balance in any General Fund
appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year,
other than that of or pertaining to any municipal utility, shall revert to
the general fund.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 12.  EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS BY CITY COMMISSION.



   To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, or property the
Commission may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made
by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Article V. To the
extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such
appropriations, the Commission may authorize by such emergency ordinance the
issuance of emergency notes in accordance with Article X.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 13.  PROVIDE BY RESOLUTION APPROPRIATE METHODS AND SAFEGUARDS FOR
EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.



   The Commission shall provide by resolution appropriate methods and
safeguards for the expenditure of funds and the payment of obligations so as
to insure that no payment shall be made or obligation incurred without an
appropriation having first been approved by the Commission, without a
sufficient unencumbered balance in the appropriation, and without insuring
that sufficient funds are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the
obligation when it becomes due and payable. However, except when prohibited
by law, nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent the making or
authorizing of payments or the making of contracts for capital improvements
to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, or to prevent the
making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the
fiscal year. Any such action must be approved by ordinance.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-8-77)



Sec. 14.  DESIGNATE DEPOSITORIES - PROVIDE SECURITY FOR DEPOSITS.



   The Commission shall designate the depository or depositories for the
City funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City monies. The
Commission shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized
or permitted by law, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed
proper security.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 15.  AUDIT REQUIRED.



   An independent audit of all accounts and financial records of the City
shall be made annually. Such audit shall be made by a certified public
accountant experienced in municipal accounting within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the close of the fiscal year. The Commission may secure
additional audits at any time. Each audit, in its entirety, shall be made
available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk and at the
Public Library.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 16.  ACCOUNTING SYSTEM CONFORM TO LAWS OF STATE.



   The accounting system of the City shall conform to any uniform system
of municipal accounting that may be provided by the laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 17.  PRESCRIBE METHODS FOR FINANCIAL - CONTRACTUAL DEALINGS,  BIDDING.



   The Commission shall prescribe by resolution a general framework of
necessary procedures governing financial and contractual dealings with the
City. Such resolution shall include a maximum consideration below which
purchases may be made by the city officials and employees either without
specific authorization from the Commission, or without the necessity of
competitive bidding, or both. In addition, such resolution shall include a
requirement that in all cases of contract by competitive bidding, the
Commission shall reserve the right to reject any and all bids submitted, and
provisions for such rejection and notices of such right of rejection shall be
incorporated in all requests for bids.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE VIII
TAXATION



Sec. 1.  POWER TO ASSESS TAXES,  METHODS.



   (A)   In order to carry out the purposes, powers, and duties of the
City Government established by this Charter, the City shall have the power to
assess taxes and to lay and collect rents, tolls, and excises. The annual
general ad valorem tax levy for municipal purposes shall not exceed two
percent (2 percent) of the State equalized value of all real and personal
property in the City.



   (B)   If the method of calculating the State equalized value of real
and personal property is changed from its present method of fifty percent (50
percent) of the fair market value, the amount of the annual general ad
valorem tax levy for municipal purposes that the City is permitted to collect
shall be adjusted inversely, in a proportional amount, but in no event shall
the amount permitted to be taxed under this provision exceed the amount
permitted to be taxed by the laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  SUBJECTS OF TAXATION.



   The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as
for State, County, and school purposes under the general tax laws of the
State, and the City shall have the rights, liens, powers, and remedies
accorded by law to any political subdivision of the State in connection with
the collection of taxes.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  CITY TAXES COLLECTED ACCORDING TO STATE LAW.



   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the City taxes shall be
levied and collected in the manner provided by the general tax laws of the
State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  POWER OF TAXATION NOT SURRENDERED.



   The power of taxation shall never be surrendered nor suspended by any
grant or contract to which the City shall be a party. No exemptions from
taxation shall be allowed except as are expressly required or permitted by
law.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  ASSESSMENT ROLL; PREPARED BY CITY ASSESSOR.



   The City Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll in the
manner and form provided in the general tax laws of the State and at the time
required by the general tax laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  BOARD OF REVIEW; AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.



   The authority and duties of the Board of Review, except as otherwise
provided by this Charter, shall be performed in the same manner provided in
the General Property Tax Laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-8-83)



SECS. 7 - 12.



   [Deleted by amendment approved November 8, 1983.]



Sec. 13.  ENDORSE STATEMENT CONFIRMING ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   After the Board of Review completes its review of the assessment roll,
the majority of its members shall immediately endorse thereon and sign a
statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the City for
the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of this endorsement
shall not affect the validity of this roll. Upon completion, the roll shall
be the assessment roll of the city for County, school, and City taxes and for
any other taxes on real or personal property that may be authorized by law.
The assessment roll shall be conclusively presumed by all Courts and
tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes set forth
in this general tax laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 14.  ADOPTION OF BUDGET; CLERK CERTIFIES.



   After the Commission has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the
City Clerk shall certify to the City Assessor the total amount which the
Commission determines shall be raised by general taxes, all amounts of
special assessments which the Commission requires to be assessed or
reassessed upon any property or against any person, and all other amounts
which the Commission may determine shall be charged, assessed or reassessed
against any person or property.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 15.  ASSESSMENT ROLL, ASSESSOR CERTIFIES.



   After the confirmation of the assessment roll, the City Assessor shall
certify a copy of the assessment roll to the City Treasurer. The assessment
roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer before May 1st each year.
Thereafter, the City Treasurer shall spread the several taxes to be raised
upon this certified copy of the assessment roll and this shall constitute the
City tax roll for the current year. To avoid fractions and computations on
any tax roll, the City Treasurer may add to the amount of the several taxes
to be raised an amount prescribed by statute. This added amount, when
collected, shall belong to the City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 16.  TAX ROLL, COLLECTION,  TREASURER'S POWER.



   After spreading the taxes, the City Treasurer shall collect from the
persons named in the tax roll the various sums stated. The City Treasurer is
granted, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on
the tax roll, all the powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers
for the collection of taxes under the general tax laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 17.  LIEN ON PROPERTY.



   The City taxes assessed shall become due on July 1st of each year, and
the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien
upon such property at the time provided by the general tax laws of the State,
and the lien for these amounts and for all interest and other charges shall
continue until these sums are paid. All personal property taxes shall be a
first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal property of the
persons assessed at the time provided by the general tax laws of the State
and shall remain so until paid. These tax liens shall have precedence over
all other claims, encumbrances, and liens upon the property, whether created
by a security agreement, levy, judgement, or otherwise, and whether arising
before or after the assessment of the personal property taxes. No transfer of
personal property assessed for taxes shall operate to divest or destroy this
lien except when such personal property is actually sold in the regular court
of retail trade.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-5-85)



Sec. 18.  UNPAID TAXES; SALE OF LANDS.



   The City Treasurer shall have the same power and authority as conferred
by law upon township treasurers for collecting taxes by suit, by distraint,
or by the sale of goods and chattels. All proceedings for the return and
collection of unpaid taxes, the sale of lands for payment of taxes, and all
other proceedings necessary in the enforcement of these taxes, shall be in
all respects, so far as applicable, the same as are set by the general tax
laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 19.  TAXES, DUE DATE, PENALTIES.



   City taxes shall be due on July 1st of the year when levied. All taxes
paid on or before July 31st shall be collected by the City Treasurer without
penalty. An additional charge of one percent (1%) shall be added to all
unpaid City taxes on August 1st and an additional charge of one percent (1%)
shall be added to all delinquent unpaid taxes on the first day of each month
thereafter until the taxes are paid. This added penalty shall belong to the
City and shall constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property
to which the taxes themselves apply, collectable in the same manner as the
taxes to which they are added. If July 31st falls on a Sunday or a legal
holiday, taxes shall be collected without penalty on the next business day.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-5-85; Amendment effective
11-5-02)



Sec. 20.  NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS;  PUBLICATION; STATEMENT TO TAXPAYERS.



   The City Treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayers of the City not
later than June 1st of each year by publication in a local newspaper of
general circulation in the City, of the time when the City taxes will be due
and when they can be paid without penalty, and that one percent (1 percent)
penalty per month will be charged upon all taxes remaining unpaid after
August 1st. As soon as practical after the completion of the tax roll, and in
no event later than July 1st, the City Treasurer shall forward a statement of
the taxes due, by first class mail addressed to the owners of the property
upon which taxes are assessed, as indicated by the tax roll.



   Failure on the part of the City Treasurer to mail this statement shall
not invalidate the taxes on the tax roll or relieve the personal property
assessed from the penalties provided by this Article or by the general tax
laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-5-85)



Sec. 21.  UNPAID TAXES; RETURN TO COUNTY TREASURER.



   Any taxes on the City tax roll which remain unpaid on March 1st
following the date when the roll was received by the City Treasurer shall be
returned to the County Treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as
returns by township treasurers of Township, school and County taxes. These
returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the City
Treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and fees hereinbefore
provided. These charges and fees shall, in these returns be added to the
amount assessed on the tax roll against each description. The taxes thus
returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the
County Treasurer, and shall remain a lien upon the assessed lands until paid.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 22.  TAX OR PUBLIC SALE; POWER.



   The City shall have power to purchase any property within the City at
any tax or other public sale, or to purchase the property directly from the
State or the fee owner, when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien
of the City for taxes or special assessments. The City may hold, lease or
sell this property. Any such procedure exercised by the City in the
protection of its lien shall be deemed to be for public purpose.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 23.  ASSESSING AND COLLECTING TAXES; STATE LAW.



   For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes in the City for
State, County and School purposes, the City shall be considered the same as a
Township and shall collect and account for these taxes, penalties and
interest in the method provided by the general tax laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 24.  ENFORCEMENT OF TAX LAWS,  CITY COMMISSION.



   In all matters where this Charter does not fully or adequately provide
for the levy and collection of the City, State, County, School and other
taxes, the City Commission shall have the power and authority to adopt
additional ordinances necessary to carry out and enforce the general tax laws
of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE IX
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



Sec. 1.  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS;  RESOLUTION REQUIRED.



   The Commission shall have the power to determine the necessity of any
local or public improvement, including public parking facilities and
boulevard lighting systems, and to determine that the whole or any part of
the costs thereof shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property
especially benefited, and shall so declare by resolution, provided that all
special assessments levied shall be based upon or be in proportion to the
benefits derived or to be derived. Such resolution shall state the estimated
cost of the improvement, what proportion of the costs shall be paid by
special assessment, what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the
City, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, the
interest rate on any unpaid assessment, if any, the date on which any such
interest shall commence, and shall designate the districts or land and
property on which special assessments shall be levied.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  ADOPT ORDINANCE, ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE.



   The commission shall prescribe by general ordinance the complete
special assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and
specifications, estimates of cost, notice of hearings, making and confirming
assessment rolls in advance of starting the improvement, the correction of
errors in the assessment rolls, collection of special assessments, the
assessment of single lots or parcels, and any other matters concerning the
making of improvements by the special assessment method, subject to the
provisions of this Charter and the laws of the State. The ordinance shall
authorize additional assessments, if the prior assessment proves insufficient
to pay for the improvement or is determined to be invalid, in whole or in
part.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  PETITION OBJECTING,  PERCENTAGE REQUIRED BY OWNERS,  VOTE
REQUIRED TO CONFIRM.



   If, before final confirmation of any special assessment, more than
fifty percent (50 percent) of the owners to be assessed in a special
assessment district or the owner or owners who will bear more than fifty
percent (50 percent) of the total cost of the proposed improvement, including
that portion of the project to be borne by the City, shall object in writing
to the proposed improvement, the proposed improvement shall not be made by
the proceedings authorized in this Charter without an affirmative vote of
five (5) of the Commissioners, provided that this section shall not apply to
sidewalk improvement.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  EXCESS ROLL; METHOD OF REFUND.



   The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the
actual cost of expenses incidental thereto shall be refunded on a pro-rata
basis to the owners of the property assessed. This refund shall be made by
credit against future unpaid installments to the extent that installments are
still owing, and the balance of the refund shall be in cash. No refunds may
be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of
indebtedness secured in whole or in part by the special assessment.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  LIEN ON PROPERTY.



   From the date of confirmation of any roll levying any special
assessment, the full amount of any special assessment and any interest
thereon shall be a lien upon the property subject thereto and shall be a debt
of the person to whom assessed until paid. This lien shall be of the same
character and effect as the lien created by this Charter for City taxes. The
assessment shall be levied upon the respective lots and premises to which
they are specially assessed, and against the persons chargeable therewith, as
a tax in the next City tax roll in a column for special assessments. The
amount so levied shall be enforced and collected in the same manner as other
taxes and when collected shall be paid into the City Treasury.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  ORDINANCE; NECESSARY PROCEDURE.



   In any case where the provisions of this Charter, either expressed or
incorporated herein, may prove to be insufficient to carry in to full effect
the making of any special assessment, the Commission shall provide by general
ordinance any additional steps or procedures required to effect the
improvement by special assessment.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE X
BORROWING POWER



Sec. 1.  BONDS, ISSUANCE, ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION REQUIRED.



   Subject to the laws of this State and this Charter, the Commission, by
ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose
within the scope of the powers of the City, including parking facilities,
boulevard lighting, and the City's share of the cost of any local
improvement, and may issue bonds of the City or other evidence of
indebtedness therefore, and may pledge the full faith, credit and resources
of the City for payment of the obligation created thereby.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  BORROWING IN ANTICIPATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.



   Subject to the laws of the State, the Commission shall have
authorization to borrow money in anticipation of the payment of special
assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any local
improvements, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such
special assessments, and to issue bonds therefor. Such special assessment
bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts or
may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and
a general obligation of the City. All collections of each special assessment
roll or combination of rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund for the
payment of the principal and interest of the bond issued in anticipation of
such special assessment and shall be used for no other purpose.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  NOTICE REQUIRED, CONTENTS.



   The issuance of any bonds not requiring the approval of the electors
shall be subject to applicable requirements of the laws of the State and with
regard to public notice in advance of the authorization of these bonds,
filing of petitions for a referendum on these bonds, holding of a referendum,
and other applicable procedures.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  BONDED INDEBTEDNESS.



   The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not
at any time exceed the limit permitted by the Constitution and laws of the
State, provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be
excluded those bonds permitted to be so excluded by the Constitution and laws
of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  BOND; REQUIRE STATEMENT OF PURCHASE, MAYOR AND CLERK SIGNATURES,
RECORD BY CLERK.



   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which it is issued, and it shall be
unlawful for any official of the City to use the proceeds of the bond for any
other purpose. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the
City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk under
the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile
signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all
bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by
the City Clerk. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of
indebtedness, the same shall be marked “Cancelled.”



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  UNISSUED BONDS; LIMIT NUMBER OF YEARS FOR SELLING.



   No unissued bonds of the City shall be issued or sold to secure funds
for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized,
and if such bonds are not sold within three (3) years after authorization,
such authorization shall be null and void.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE XI
FRANCHISES



Sec. 1.  FRANCHISES; AUTHORITY TO GRANT.



   The City may grant a franchise or license to any person for the use of
the streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places of the City for the
furnishing of any public utility service to the City and its inhabitants.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  FRANCHISES; ORDINANCE REQUIRED, EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE PROHIBITED,
DURATION.



   Public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions, and amendments
shall be only granted by ordinance. No exclusive franchise shall ever be
granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty (30)
years.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  FRANCHISE ORDINANCE,  RENEWAL, CONDITIONS FOR SAME,  SUBJECT TO
CHANGE BY CITY COMMISSION.



   A franchise ordinance, renewal, extension, or amendment which is
subject to revocation at the will of the Commission may be enacted by the
Commission without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless
the following has occurred:



   (A)   Thirty (30) days have elapsed since the application has been
made.



   (B)   A public hearing has been held on the proposed ordinance.



   (C)   The grantee has filed with the City Clerk an unconditional
acceptance of all terms of such franchise.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  FRANCHISE ORDINANCE,  RENEWAL, CONDITIONS FOR SAME, NOT SUBJECT TO
CHANGE BY CITY COMMISSION.



   A franchise ordinance, renewal, extension, or amendment which is not
subject to revocation at the will of the Commission shall not be enacted or
become operative, unless the proposition shall first have been approved by
three-fifths (3/5ths) of the electors voting thereon.



   (A)   The commission may approve franchise ordinance for referral to
the electorate, only after the following has occurred:



      (1)   Thirty (30) days have elapsed since the application has
been made.



      (2)   A public hearing has been held on the proposed ordinance.



      (3)   The grantee has filed with the City Clerk an
unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise.



   (B)   No special election for approval of a franchise ordinance
shall be ordered by the Commission unless the expense of holding the
election, as determined by the Commission, shall have first been paid to the
City Treasurer by the proposed grantee.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  ENUMERATION NOT LIMITATION;  COMMISSION AUTHORITY.



   Any public utility franchise granted after adoption of this Charter,
whether or not provided in the granting ordinance, shall be subject to the
following rights of the City. Enumeration of these rights shall not exclude
nor impair the right of the Commission to assert in the franchise any
additional provision within the power of the City to impose or require:



   (A)   To repeal the franchise for misuse, non use, or failure to
comply with the provisions thereof.



   (B)   To require proper and adequate extension and maintenance of
plant facilities at the highest practicable standard of efficiency.



   (C)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products and to prevent unjust discrimination in service and rates.



   (D)   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public
in accordance with the terms of the franchise.



   (E)   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the
Commission to be conducive to the health, safety, welfare and convenience of
the public.



   (F)   To require the public utility to permit joint use by the City
and other utilities of its property and equipment located in the streets and
public places of the City, insofar as joint use may be reasonable and
practicable and in the absence of agreement, to provide for binding
arbitration of the terms and conditions of their joint use.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISE,  RESTRICTIONS.



   No public utility franchise granted by the City shall be sold or
transferred in any manner, nor may a party other than the grantee use the
franchise unless the City gives its consent by ordinance, as required by this
Article.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  PUBLIC UTILITY, FRANCHISE, RATE ADJUSTMENTS.



   Except as provided by law, all public utility franchises shall make
provision for fixing rates, fares, and charges and may provide for
readjustments at periodic intervals.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 8.  GRANTEE TO PAY COST OF IMPROVEMENT, MAINTENANCE OF STREETS, ETC.



   Every grantee of a public utility franchise shall pay such part of the
cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and public
places as shall arise from its use and shall protect and save the City
harmless from all damage arising from this use.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 9.  ORDINANCE, TERMS, FEES.



   The Commission shall prescribe by ordinance the terms, reasonable fees,
and conditions upon which licenses in the City may be granted, suspended, or
revoked. In no event shall an exclusive license be granted or shall the term
of a license exceed one (1) year.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 10.  USE OF STREETS, ETC., COMPENSATION.



   No franchise, license, lease, or right to use the streets, public
places, or property of the City shall be granted by the City without
receiving fair compensation. No compensation by any grantee shall ever be in
lieu of any lawful taxation upon its property.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE XII
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES



Sec. 1.  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES; RIGHT TO ACQUIRE; OPERATE.



   The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers
granted to cities by the Constitution and general laws of the State to
acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and
maintain either within or without its corporate limits, public utilities,
including but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supply water,
light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities
for City residents and also to sell and deliver such services outside its
corporate limits in any amount not to exceed the limitations set by the
Constitution and laws of the State and this Charter.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  UTILITY DISPOSAL; VOTE REQUIRED.



   Unless approved by an affirmative vote of three-fifths (3/5ths) of the
electors voting thereon at a regular or special City election, the City shall
not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way dispose of property, easement,
equipment, privilege, or asset needed to continue the operation of any
municipal public utility. All contracts, grants, leases, or other forms of
transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as
against the City. Restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or
exchange of articles of machinery or equipment which are no longer useful or
which are replaced by new machinery or equipment, or to the leasing of
property not necessary for the operation of a utility, or to the exchange of
property or easements for other needed property or easements.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  RATES AND CHARGES;  COMMISSION TO FIX.



   The Commission shall fix just and reasonable rates and such other
charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying municipal utility services
to inhabitants of the City and others.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  ORDINANCE REQUIRED;  COLLECTION OF RATES AND CHARGES;  LIEN ON
PROPERTY; COLLECTION.



   (A)   The Commission shall provide by ordinance for the collection
of rates and charges for public utility services furnished by the City.
Except as provided by law, when any person fails or refuses to pay the City
any sums due on utility bills, the service for which the delinquency exists
may be discontinued and a suit may be brought for the collection of the sums
due.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, the City shall have a
lien upon the property to which utility services were supplied as a security
for the collection of all charges for utility services furnished by the City.
The lien shall become effective immediately on the distribution or supplying
of utilities to such property.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by law, all unpaid charges for
utility services to any such property, which on March 1st of each year have
been unpaid for a period of three (3) months or more, shall be reported to
the Commission by the City Manager at the first meeting in March. The
Commission thereupon shall order the publication in a local newspaper of
general circulation in the City of a notice that all unpaid utility charges
not paid by April 15th will be assessed upon the City tax roll against the
property to which the utility services were supplied or furnished. 
Thereafter, if these charges remain unpaid by April 15th, they shall be
spread upon the City tax roll and shall be collected in the same manner as
the summer taxes. In other words, unpaid charges for utility services
provided by the City, if they remain unpaid, will become a lien on the
property until paid, even if title to the property is transferred.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-5-02)



Sec. 5.  CITY MANAGER; POWER TO APPOINT EMPLOYEES.



   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of each City
owned and operated utility or utility department and shall have the power to
appoint and remove any superintendent, official or employee.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING; PUBLISH REPORT.



   Accounts for each public utility owned or operated by the City, shall
be kept in a manner which shows the true and complete financial result of
City ownership or operation. The City Manager shall annually cause to be made
and published for public distribution a report showing the financial results
of City ownership or operation.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY.



   The Commission may, by ordinance, provide for furnishing municipal
utility services outside of the City. The Commission may charge higher rates
for services provided outside the City limits.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 8-5-86)



ARTICLE XIII
PLANNING



Sec. 1.  CREATION.



   A City Planning Commission is hereby created.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  PLANNING COMMISSION;  COMPOSITION; MEMBERS; TERMS.



   The Planning Commission shall be composed of nine (9) members appointed
by the City Commission. The members of the Planning Commission shall be
qualified electors of the City and shall, insofar as is possible, be
representative of the entire City. The terms of each member shall be for
three (3) years, or until a successor takes office, except that the terms of
three (3) of the members first appointed shall be for one (1) year and the
terms of three (3) of the members first appointed shall be for two (2) years.
All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  POWERS; PROVIDED BY ACT 285 PUBLIC ACTS 1931.



   The Planning Commission shall have the powers and authority provided by
Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, and such other powers granted
it by law, this Charter, or ordinance.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Editor's note:



   The provisions of Public Act 285 of 1931, as amended, can be located at
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 et seq.



Sec. 4.  ORDINANCE; AUTHORIZING GRANTING BUILDING PERMITS.



   Except as otherwise prohibited by law, the City Commission may provide
by ordinance that the Planning Commission, or some other body, may grant
building permits or temporary occupancy permits conditioned upon the
performance of specific acts or upon the payment of a cash or performance
bond to insure compliance.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  ZONING ORDINANCE; CITY COMMISSION PRESCRIBES.



   The City Commission shall prescribe by ordinance zoning laws for the
City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  HAZARDOUS PROPERTY; WEED CONTROL; PROCEDURES; NOTICE TO OWNER.



   When any lot, building, or structure within the City because of the
accumulation of refuse or debris, uncontrolled growing of weeds,
dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the
opinion of the Commission, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to
the health or safety of the inhabitants of the City, the Commission shall
give notice to the owner of the land, building, or structure, specifying the
nature of the hazard or nuisance, and requiring such owner to alter, repair,
tear down, or remove the same promptly and within a time to be specified by
the Commission, which shall be commensurate with the nature of the hazard or
nuisance. If, at the expiration of the time limit in this notice, the owner
has not complied with its requirements or in any case where the owner of the
land, building, or structure is not known, the Commission may direct the City
Attorney to seek an order from a Court of competent jurisdiction abating said
hazard or nuisance or permitting the City to abate said hazard or nuisance.
The City may assess the costs of such abatement against said lot or property
upon which said hazard or nuisance was located.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



ARTICLE XIV
MISCELLANEOUS



Sec. 1.  ACQUIRING PROPERTY FOR PUBLIC USE; CITY AUTHORITY.



   The City shall have the power to take private property for any public
use or public purpose only as authorized by the laws of the State. All
proceedings for the taking of private property by the City shall be governed
by the laws of the State.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  CONDEMNATION PROCEDURE.



   When the Commission shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or
abolish any street, alley, or public ground, or any part thereof, it shall so
declare by resolution and in the same resolution appoint a time not sooner
than four (4) weeks thereafter when it shall meet to hear objections. Notice
of this meeting, with a copy of the resolution, shall be published at least
once each week for four (4) weeks prior to the time appointed for this
meeting in a local newspaper of general circulation in the City. In addition,
the City Clerk shall mail a notice of the meeting, including a copy of the
resolution, to the respective owners of all property abutting upon any land
directly affected by this proposed action. This notice shall be sent by first
class mail to the addresses of the owners as shown on the last assessment
roll, at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the date set for the hearing.
Objections to the proposed action of the Commission may be filed by a
resident or real property owner of the City in writing with the City Clerk.
If any objections are filed, the street, alley, or public ground, or any part
thereof, shall not be vacated or discontinued except by an affirmative vote
of no fewer than five (5) Commissioners.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  RECORDS; AVAILABLE TO PUBLIC.



   All records of the City shall be public, shall be available for
inspection by the public at all reasonable times, and shall be kept in City
offices, except when required to be elsewhere for official reasons or for
safekeeping.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  OFFICIAL REPRESENTATIONS OR RECITALS IN CITY AGREEMENT PROHIBITED.



   No official of the City shall have the power to make representations or
recitals of fact in any contract, franchise, document, or agreement contrary
to the public record of the City. Any such representation or recital shall be
void and of no affect against the City.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  MEMBERS OF VARIOUS BOARDS;  QUALIFICATIONS; NOTICES.



   The appointed members of any City agency, board, or committee, other
than the Principal Shopping District Board (also known as the "Downtown
Development Board"), shall be qualified electors of the City and shall,
insofar as is possible, be representative of the entire City. The appointed
members of the Principal Shopping District Board (also known as the "Downtown
Development Board") shall meet the requirements of the applicable state law
including that one member of the board shall be from the adjacent residential
area, one member shall be a representative of the local governmental unit,
and a majority of the members shall be nominees of individual businesses
located within the principal shopping district. Before an appointed position
is filled, notice of the vacancy shall be published at least two (2) times in
a local newspaper of general circulation in the City. This notice shall state
the nature of the vacancy, the term of office, the function of the agency,
board, or committee for which the vacancy exists, and that any qualified
elector of the City may submit names, including his or her own name, for
consideration in the filling of the vacancy. No appointed member of any City
agency, board or committee shall serve on the same body for more than four
(4) consecutive terms.



(Charter effective 1-1-77; Amendment effective 11-2-10; Amendment effective
11-3-15)



Sec. 6.  CAMPAIGN FINANCING;  RESTRICTIONS, ADOPT ORDINANCE.



   Within six (6) months after the effective date of this Charter, the
Commission shall provide by ordinance for restrictions and practices
concerning campaign financing, which shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the establishment of spending and contribution limits.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  MARIHUANA.



   Nothing in the Code of Ordinances shall apply to the use, possession or
transfer of less than 1 ounce of marihuana, on private property, or
transportation of  less than 1 ounce of marihuana, by a person who has
attained the age of 21 years.



(Amendment effective 11-10-14)



ARTICLE XV
TRANSITION



Sec. 1.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Article is to assist the transition from the
existing Charter to this Charter and it shall constitute a part of this
Charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish this end.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 2.  PROPOSED CHARTER; SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS.



   This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of
the City of Mount Pleasant at a regular municipal election to be held on
November 4, 1975. This election shall be conducted by the officers charged
with the conduct and supervision of elections under the existing Charter, and
shall follow the election procedure established by law.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 3.  BALLOTS; FORM; CONTENT.



   The form of the ballot for the submission of this Charter shall be as
follows:



   Shall the proposed Charter drafted by the Charter commission elected on
November 6, 1973, be adopted:



   Yes          



   No           



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 4.  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, this Charter shall take effect and
become law on January 1, 1977, at 12:01 a.m.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 5.  FIRST COMMISSION; ELECTION;  TERM.



   (A)   The first election of Commissioners under this Charter shall
take place on November 2, 1976. Four (4) Commissioners shall be elected at
this election. They shall take office on January 1, 1977. The nomination and
election of these commissioners shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this Charter.



      (1)   The three (3) Commissioners receiving the highest vote
total shall hold office for three (3) years until December 31, 1979.



      (2)   The Commissioner receiving the fourth highest vote total
shall hold office for two (2) years until December 31, 1978.



   (B)   The two (2) Commissioners whose terms under the existing
Charter end on December 31, 1977, shall continue in office as commissioners
under this Charter, and their terms shall end on that date. The first
election for these two (2) Commission seats under this Charter shall take
place on November 8, 1977.



   (C)   The Commissioner whose term under the existing Charter ends on
December 31, 1978, shall continue in office as a Commissioner under this
Charter and this term shall end on that date. The first election for this
Commission seat under this Charter shall take place on November 7, 1978.



   (D)   After the initial terms of office provided for in this Section
have expired, the terms of the Commissioners shall be as provided in Article
II, Section 4.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 6.  VACANCY.



   Should a vacancy occur in any office of the City after the adoption of
this Charter and prior to January 1, 1977, such vacancy shall be filled in
the manner provided in the existing Charter of the City and the person so
appointed or elected shall serve until the time that the term of office to
which he-she was appointed or elected expires under the provisions of the
existing Charter, except as modified by this Charter.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 7.  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES CONTINUED; EXCEPTIONS.



   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all appointed officials
and employees of the City shall continue in their respective City offices and
employments which they held prior to the effective date of this Charter, as
though they had been appointed or employed int he manner herein provided.
They shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter,
except that any officials or employees who hold an office or employment which
is provided for in this Charter shall continue in their office or employment
at the pleasure of the appointing official or body, regardless of the term
for which originally appointed.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 8.  CLAIMS; ORDERS; CONTENTS,  ETC.; CONTINUED.



   All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or
administrative proceedings of the City shall continue except as modified
pursuant to the provisions of this Charter, and in each case shall be
maintained, carried on, or dealt with by the City department, office, or
agency appropriate under this Charter.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 9.  ORDINANCES; RESOLUTIONS, ETC., CONTINUED; EXCEPTION.



   All laws, ordinances, resolutions, orders, rules, or regulations in
force in the City at the time this Charter takes effect, to the extent they
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in
full force until repealed or amended.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 10.  BOARDS; COMMITTEES; ETC., CONTINUED.



   All boards, committees, agencies, or commissions of the City in
existence at the time this Charter takes effect, to the extent they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue to function
until abolished or modified by the Commission in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 11.  TAXES; ASSESSMENTS; NO CHANGE; EXCEPTION.



   All taxes and assessments levied or assessed and all charges thereon
and all fines and penalties imposed, which are uncollected at the time this
Charter becomes effective, shall be collected as if such change had not been
made. If a different remedy is provided by this Charter, or by any ordinance
or resolution, the remedy shall be deemed cumulative to the remedies under
the existing Charter.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 12.  CITY COMMISSION TO ADOPT PROCEDURES FOR TRANSITION.



   In all cases not covered by this Charter, the Commission shall supply
necessary details and procedures for the transition from the government of
the City under the existing Charter to that under this Charter, and may adopt
such rules, resolutions, and ordinances as may be required therefor.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 13.  CHARTER AMENDMENT; NUMBER VOTES REQUIRED FOR CONFLICTING
PROVISIONS.



   This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law.
Should two (2) or more amendments adopted at the same election have
conflicting provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote
shall prevail as to those provisions.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



Sec. 14.  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any provision, section, or clause of this Charter be declared
void, illegal, or unconstitutional, this invalidity shall not affect the
remainder of this Charter, and to this end, this Charter is declared to be
severable.



(Charter effective 1-1-77)



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



Cross-reference:



   Ordinances, see Charter Art. V



   Initiative and referendum, see Charter Art. VI



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Mount Pleasant
shall be designated as the Mount Pleasant City Code and may be so cited.



Cross-reference:



   Codification of ordinances, time required, copies required, see Charter
Art. V, § 8



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Mount
Pleasant, Michigan.



   CODE,THIS CODE,THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY CODE, or MT. PLEASANT CITY
CODE.  This municipal code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption
of new titles, chapters, or sections.



   COUNTY.  Isabella County, Michigan.



   COURT or COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION.  Generally, the trial and
appellate courts of the State of Michigan, except when otherwise required by
the Zoning and Land Use Agreement, the Law Enforcement Agreement, or the
Local Regulation Agreement between the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of
Michigan and the city, entered by the United States District Court for the
Eastern District of Michigan, Northern Division, Case No. 05-10296-BC, on
December 17, 2010, in which case COURT or COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION
shall mean the appropriate tribal court of the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe
of Michigan.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, including in appropriate circumstances a
law enforcement, code enforcement or ordinance enforcement officer of the
Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan upon whom the City Manager has
conferred authority.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members of the entity,
and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents of the corporation.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of Michigan.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-24-2011)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)    ANDorOR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state or federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
ordinance repealing or modifying it takes effect.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



Cross-reference:



   Ordinance, form, publication of summary, public hearing, publication,
effective date, see Charter Art. V, § 4



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.



Example:  (M.C.L.A. § 15.231) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-85).



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      For provisions concerning the inspection of



        public records, seePublic Act 442 of 1976,



        being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or any ordinance of the city any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever
in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such
provision by any person shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
except whenever a specific penalty is otherwise provided.



   (B)   Any minor who violates any provision of this code or any
ordinance of the city shall be dealt with by a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (C)   Unless a violation of this code or any ordinance of the city
is specifically designated in the code or ordinance as a municipal civil
infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this code or any ordinance shall be deemed a new and separate offense for
each day that such condition continues to exist.



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-24-11)



Cross-reference:



   Penalties authorized, see Charter Art. V, § 6



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



Statutory reference:



   Maximum penalty established, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(k)



   Jurisdiction of probate court, see M.C.L.A. §§ 712A.1 et seq.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



   30.   COMMISSION



   31.   ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS AND CITY OFFICIALS



   32.   COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES



   33.   TAXATION



   34.   RECOVERED STOLEN PROPERTY



   35.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



   36.   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS



   37.   RETIRED PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEES HEALTH CARE BENEFITS



   38.   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES OR CONDITIONS

   39.   HUMAN RIGHTS



CHAPTER 30:  COMMISSION



Section




Commission Meetings




   30.01   Regular meetings



   30.02   Presiding officer



   30.03   Sergeant-at-arms



   30.04   Agenda



   30.05   Call to order



   30.06   Roll call



   30.07   Rules of debate



   30.08   Addressing the Commission



   30.09   Voting upon questions



   30.10   Decorum



   30.11   Special and standing committees



   30.12   Protests filed on Commission actions



   30.13   Ordinances, resolutions and contracts



   30.14   Motion to adjourn



   30.15   Other rules to govern



   30.16   Ethics policy



Cross-reference:



   For further provisions concerning the City Commission, see Charter Art.
II



COMMISSION MEETINGS



§ 30.01  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall establish by resolution the day and time of its
regular meetings to be held in the Commission Chambers at the City Hall;
provided, however, that when the day fixed for any regular meeting falls upon
a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, such meeting shall be
held at the same hour on a mutually agreeable day.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76)



§ 30.02  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Commission. He/she
shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings
of the Commission. He/she shall state every question coming before the
Commission, announce the decision of the Commission on all matters, and
decide all questions of order; provided, however, that upon an appeal to the
Commission, a majority vote of the Commission shall conclusively determine
such question of order. He/she shall vote on all questions, his/her name
being called last.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76)



§ 30.03  SERGEANT-AT-ARMS.



   The Director of Public Safety or his/her representative shall execute
the commands of the Commission from time to time, and shall, under the order
of the chair, keep order in the Commission Chambers.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76)



§ 30.04  AGENDA.



   (A)   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract
documents or other matters to be submitted to the Commission as part of the
agenda shall be delivered to the City Manager five working days preceding the
Commission meeting. The City Manager, after consultation with the Mayor
and/or Vice Mayor, shall prepare the agenda. The City Manager shall furnish
Commissioner, the Mayor, the City Clerk and the City Attorney with a copy of
the agenda prior to the Commission meeting and as far in advance of the
Commission meeting as time for preparation will permit. None of the foregoing
matters shall be presented to the Commission by administrative officials
except those of an urgent nature, and the same, when so presented, shall have
the written approval of the City Manager before presentation. During the
Commission meeting, items may be added to the agenda or removed from the
agenda with a two-thirds vote of the entire Commission then serving.



   (B)   On a periodic basis, the Commission shall, by resolution,
approve the form of the agenda for Commission meetings.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 890, passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord. 941, passed
2-25-08; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.05  CALL TO ORDER.



   The presiding officer shall take the chair precisely at the hour
appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the Commission to
order. In the absence of the Mayor and the Vice Mayor, the City Clerk shall
call the Commission to order, whereupon a temporary chairperson shall be
elected by the Commissioners present. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Vice
Mayor, the temporary chairperson shall immediately relinquish the chair upon
the conclusion of the business immediately before the Commission.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.06  ROLL CALL.



   Before proceeding with the business of the Commission, the City Clerk
shall call the roll of the Commissioners, and the names of those present
shall be entered in the minutes.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.07  RULES OF DEBATE.



   (A)   The presiding officer may move, second and debate from the
chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are herein imposed on
all Commissioners, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and
privileges of a Commissioner by reason of his/her acting as the presiding
officer.



   (B)   Every Commissioner desiring to speak shall address the chair
and, upon recognition of the presiding officer, shall confine himself/herself
to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous
language.



   (C)   A Commissioner, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when
speaking unless it be to call him/her to order, or as herein otherwise
provided. If a Commissioner, while speaking, be called to order, he/she shall
cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and, if in order,
he/she shall be permitted to proceed.



   (D)   The Commissioner moving the adoption of an ordinance or
resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.



   (E)   A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Commission may
be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either
immediately during the same session or at a recessed or adjourned session
thereof. Such motion shall be made by one of the prevailing side, but may be
seconded by any Commissioner, and may be made at any time and have precedence
over all other motions or while a Commissioner has the floor. The question
may then be debated, if applicable.



   (F)   A motion to rescind any action taken by the Commission may be
made by any Commissioner if the original motion has not been acted up on or
the action or parts of the action can be undone. If the motion to rescind is
added to the agenda during the Commission meeting (no prior notice given),
such motion shall require a 2/3 vote of the entire Commission to pass.



   (G)   A Commissioner may request, through the presiding officer, the
privilege of having an abstract of his/her statement on any subject under
consideration by the Commission entered in the minutes. If the Commission
consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.08  ADDRESSING THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   Prior permission not required. Any person may address the
Commission during a Commission meeting without securing the prior permission
of the Commission or the presiding officer, subject to the following:



      (1)   Interested parties or their authorized representatives
may address the Commission by written communication with respect to any
matter by delivering the City Manager a copy of the written communication
before the end of the regular business day on the day of the Commission
meeting.



      (2)   Interested persons or their authorized representatives
may address the Commission during a Commission meeting by oral
communications. The Commission, by resolution, shall designate the time
during each meeting when the public shall have an opportunity to speak.



   (B)   Addressing the Commission after motion made. After a motion is
made by the Commission, no person shall address the Commission without first
securing the permission of the Commission to do so.



   (C)   Manner of addressing the Commission; time limit. Each person
addressing the Commission shall stand, give his/her name and address in an
audible tone of voice for the record, and unless further time is granted by
the Commission, shall limit his/her address to five minutes during each
public opportunity to speak, with the exception that such individual may also
address the Commission a second time for an additional three minutes during
each public opportunity to speak. In addition, the Commission may, by motion,
grant an individual the right to address the Commission for a longer period
of time. All remarks shall be addressed to the Commission as a body and not
to any individual Commissioner thereof. No person, other than the Commission
and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any
discussion, either directly or through a Commissioner, without the permission
of the presiding officer. No questions shall be asked a Commissioner except
through the presiding officer.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 890, passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord. 1041,
passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.09  VOTING UPON QUESTIONS.



   All votes shall be taken by “yeas” and “nays” except for
nominations to fill the Mayor and the Vice Mayor positions. The vote shall be
so entered upon the journal as to show the names of those voting in the
affirmative and in the negative. If the vote is unanimous, the record need
merely so state. The failure or refusal of any Commissioner to vote shall be
considered an affirmative vote. When voting on nominations to fill the Mayor
and Vice Mayor positions, the vote shall be cast by naming one of the persons
nominated for the position. The position shall be filled by the nominee who
receives at least a majority of the votes of the full Commission.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.10  DECORUM.



   (A)   While the Commission is in session the Commissioners shall
preserve order and decorum, and a Commissioner shall neither by conversation
or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the
Commission nor disturb any Commissioner while speaking or refuse to obey the
orders of the Commission or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein
provided.



   (B)   Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks,
or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Commission, shall be
forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the
Commission, unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of
the Commission.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.11  SPECIAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Standing committees. The Commission may create one or more
standing committees of its members. Each standing committee shall perform
such duties, investigate, have charge of and report upon such matters as may
be properly referred to the standing committee.



   (B)   Special committees. The Commission may create such special
committees as the Commission may determine from time to time. Each special
committee shall perform such duties, investigate, have charge of and report
upon such matters as may be properly referred to it.



   (C)   Appointments. The Mayor shall appoint the members of each
standing committee and/or special committee.



   (D)   Any reports of standing or special committees must be
supported by a majority of the committee.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 890, passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord. 1041,
passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.12  PROTESTS FILED ON COMMISSION ACTIONS.



   Any Commissioner shall have the right to have the reasons for his/her
dissent from, or protest against, any action of the Commission entered on the
minutes.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.13  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS.



   (A)   No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the
Commission unless ordered by a majority vote of the Commission or prepared on
request of the City Manager.



   (B)   All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall,
before presentation to the Commission, have been approved as to form and
legality by the City Attorney and shall have been examined and approved for
administration by the City Manager where there are substantive matters of
administration involved.



   (C)   Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects
requiring action by the Commission shall be introduced and sponsored by a
Commissioner; otherwise, they shall not be considered.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter the
procedures established for initiative and referendum as set forth in the City
Charter, Article VI.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



Cross-reference:



   Ordinances, see Charter Art. V



   Initiative and referendum, see Charter Art. VI



§ 30.14  MOTION TO ADJOURN.



   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76)



§ 30.15  OTHER RULES TO GOVERN.



   The rules of parliamentary practice, comprised in Robert's Rules of
Order (latest edition), shall govern the meetings of the Commission in all
cases to which they are applicable, provided they are not in conflict with
the Charter, this chapter or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 890, passed 6-9-03; Am. Ord. 1041,
passed 10-8-18)



§ 30.16 ETHICS POLICY.



   (A)   The city's leaders are to advance common interests rather than
their own interests and are to be wholly accountable to the people. This
section does not comprehensively define ethical behavior but instead defines
minimal, enforceable ethical standards for city leaders.



   (B)   This section applies to Commissioners and to members of
boards, commissions, and other bodies appointed by the Mayor or the
Commission  and the Housing Commission.



   (C)   The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this
section.



      (1)   Anyone means any person or entity.



      (2)   Confidential information means information in whatever
form obtained by an official during the course of his or her service to the
city that is not available to or may be exempted from disclosure to members
of the general public under the FOIA or another applicable law, rule,
regulation, or court order. (An official may disclose to anyone how to make a
FOIA request or how to challenge a denial of a FOIA request.)



      (3)   Conflict of interest means one or more of the following
situations:



         (a)   A decision to be made by the city body on which
the official serves or, in the case of a Commissioner, a decision to be made
by any city body, could result in private gain for the official, a member of
the official's household, or a member of the official's immediate family
residing outside the official's household.



         (b)   A decision to be made by the city body on which
the official serves could result in private gain for;



            1.   Anyone the official represents as an
attorney, accountant, or other professional;



            2.   An entity for which the official serves as an
officer, director or, for a limited liability company or partnership, as a
member; or



            3.   Unless the interest is held in a manner so
that the official does not directly control the number of shares, portion of
the ownership interest, or its value, an entity in which the official either
owns more than 10% of the total stock or other ownership interest in the
entity, or has an interest totaling $50,000 or more in value.  Division 1.
does not apply to an attorney, accountant, or other professional whose client
is only a lender on a project.



      (4)   Entity means an association, business corporation,
general partnership, governmental agency or unit, limited liability company,
limited partnership, non-profit corporation, individual's assumed name, or
any other legal person or identity other than an individual.



      (5)   FOIA means Michigan's Freedom of Information Act, 1976
PA 442, as amended, MCL 15.231 et seq.



      (6)   Official means a person to whom this section applies as
stated in division (B).



      (7)   Official's household means those persons residing in the
same dwelling unit as the official.



      (8)   Official's immediate family means the spouse, children,
siblings or parents of the official.



      (9)   Private gain means any direct financial benefit that is
different than any financial benefit members of the general public or a
significant group of the general public would gain in similar circumstances.



      (10)   Sole proprietor means:



         (a)   The sole owner of a business that is not formed as
an entity; or



         (b)   The sole holder of any equity or ownership
interest in a business entity.



   (D)   The following standards shall apply to all officials in their
service to the city.



      (1)   An official shall comply with all charter provisions,
this Code, laws, rules, regulations, articles of incorporation, bylaws,
procedures and policies applicable to:



         (a)   The official's office;



         (b)   The body on which the official serves; or



         (c)   The meetings the official attends.



      (2)   An official shall not:



         (a)   Disclose to anyone any confidential information
before it is authorized for release to the general public; or



         (b)   Use confidential information for private gain.



      (3)   Representation.



         (a)   An official shall not represent his or her
personal views as those of the city or the body on which the official serves.



         (b)   An official shall not make any statements or
answer any questions on behalf of the city or the body on which the official
serves unless expressly authorized by the body on which the official serves,
the Commission, or, for officials other than a Commissioner, the City Manager.



         (c)   An official shall not represent that he or she has
any authority separate from that of the body on which he or she serves.



         (d)   An official shall act within the authority granted
to the body on which he or she serves and shall respect the roles of other
officials and bodies.



         (e)   An official shall not interfere with the city's
administrative functions or the duties of city staff and shall not impair the
city staff's ability to implement policy decisions made by any official body.



      (4)   Except to the extent they would be available to others
in similar circumstances,  an official shall not use or attempt to use city
personnel resources, property, funds, or information for private gain.



      (5)   An official shall not solicit or accept a gift or a loan
of money, goods, services, or other things of value which may tend or may
reasonably appear to be intended to influence the manner in which the
official performs his or her duties.



      (6)   Private Gain.



         (a)   An official shall not vote, act upon, participate
in any discussion or, except as provided below, engage in any communications
regarding any matter from which he or she knowingly may realize any private
gain or regarding which he or she has a conflict of interest.



         (b)   An official shall not represent any individual or
entity before a body on which he or she serves. A Commissioner shall not
represent any individual or entity before anybody subject to this section.
However this does not limit any official's ability to appeal his or her
residential (or, if the official is the sole proprietor of a business, that
business') property tax valuation or to address zoning or construction
matters involving his or her residence (or, if the official is the sole
proprietor of a business, such matters involving that business).



      (7)   An official shall not display any favor for or disfavor
of anyone in the discharge of the official's duties. City actions and
decisions shall be made fairly and impartially. An official shall treat
persons appearing before a body with courtesy and respect. However, this does
not prevent an official from stating his or her views or advocating regarding
matters under consideration or communications to that public body.



   (E)   It is the intent of these provisions to encourage officials to
disclose potential concerns and seek advice as needed or desired to ensure
compliance. Accordingly, this section shall be administered and enforced as
follows:



      (1)   Any official, other than a Commissioner, in an effort to
comply with this section, may seek the advice of the City Manager and, with
the City Manager's consent, the city attorney, regarding any upcoming
proceeding, action or decision, or regarding any potential situation
addressed by this section. A Commissioner, in an effort to comply with this
section, may directly seek the advice of the City Attorney. If an official:



         (a)   Does so prior to any violation of this section;



         (b)   Truthfully and fully discloses all information
requested by the City Manager or City Attorney; and



         (c)   Complies with the City Manager's or City
Attorney's advice and direction, he or she shall not be subject to sanctions
as detailed in division (5).



      (2)   Disclosure.



         (a)   Before any discussion on the matter by the body on
which he or she serves, an official shall disclose to that body any situation
that could appear to some to violate this section and disclose any guidance
the official received as provided by division (1). The official shall or
shall not participate in the consideration of the matter as provided in the
City Manager's or City Attorney's opinion. If the official is not to
participate, he or she shall leave the dais or other place where members of
the body sit during its meetings to return after the body completes its
consideration of that matter.



         (b)   If, regardless of compliance with this section, an
official strongly believes that, due to a close family or friendship
relationship, he or she would find it very difficult to objectively
participate in a matter before the body on which the official serves, the
official may ask remaining members of the body on which the official serves
to excuse the official from his or her duty to otherwise participate in the
discussion and action on that matter. The remainder of the body, by a
majority vote, may excuse the official's participation. An official shall
have no duty to request the body to excuse the official's participation, the
body shall have no duty to grant such a request, and no other persons shall
have any right under this division (b).



      (3)   If questions are first raised at a meeting about the
applicability of this provision to an official and a matter pending at that
meeting, the highest ranking city staff member at the meeting shall address
the issue. The meeting may be recessed to seek advice from the City Manager
or City Attorney or consideration of the matter may be postponed to a later
meeting.



      (4)   Procedure.



         (a)   Anyone may contact the chair of the body on which
an official serves or the City Manager with any allegations or concerns that
an official has violated this section. If the chair of a body is contacted,
the chair shall contact the City Manager. For an issue regarding a
Commissioner, the Mayor or any Commissioner may contact the City Attorney
without first contacting the City Manager.



         (b)   The City Manager or, with the City Manager's
consent, the chair of the affected body, may contact the City Attorney for an
opinion regarding the allegations or concerns. For an issue regarding a
Commissioner, the City Attorney shall be contacted.



         (c)   The City Manager or the City Attorney may ask the
affected official and others for information the City Manager or the City
Attorney think is relevant. All officials shall promptly and fully comply
with such requests. For an issue regarding a Commissioner, the City Attorney
shall conduct the inquiry.



         (d)   After obtaining the information, the City Manager
or City Attorney shall opine as to whether or not a violation of this section
occurred. (For an issue regarding a Commissioner, the City Attorney shall
render the opinion.) If she or he concludes a violation occurred, she or he
shall explain any needed and optional actions to be taken and include any
information and considerations that may be helpful in addressing the
situation. The affected body, the Commission, and city staff and officers
shall act upon that opinion as they deem appropriate.



         (e)   If the City Manager or City Attorney concludes no
violation of this section occurred, she or he shall notify the complaining
party and such city staff and officers as she or he deem appropriate.



         (f)   If anyone, including the complainant, another
official, city staff, or anyone else actually affected by the situation,
believes the City Manager's or City Attorney's opinion is incorrect or the
accompanying information is incorrect, that person may address the Commission
regarding the issue. Any action by the Commission is final.



         (g)   If an official violated this section and that
violation may have affected the outcome of any action, the affected body
shall reconsider the decision or action as directed by the City Manager or
City Attorney.



      (5)   In addition to any other results,  the Commission may
impose one or more of the following sanctions for a violation of this
section. In deciding which, if any, of these sanctions to impose, the
Commission may consider such factors as:



         (a)   The severity of the violation;



         (b)   Its intentionality;



         (c)   Its effects;



         (d)   Whether it was the violating official's first or a
repeated violation of this section;



         (e)   Whether the violating official acknowledged the
violation and intends future compliance with this section; and



         (d)   Other factors the Commission may deem pertinent
under the circumstances.



            1.   A violation of this section constitutes
misconduct, misfeasance and malfeasance in office. For all appointed
officials it therefore can be grounds for removal from office.



            2.   Upon the affirmative vote of either a
majority of its members either the Commission may publicly censure an
official for a violation of this section. The official who is the subject of
the body's action shall not participate in the consideration or decision on
the censure.



            3.   If the violation of this section included the
disclosure of confidential information, the Commission may decide to withhold
confidential information from the violating official. If the confidential
information was information presented during a closed session, the Commission
may bar the violating official from participating in one or more future
closed sessions. A Commissioner who is the subject of the action shall not
participate in its consideration or vote on it.



         (d)   If the violation of this section was willful or
knowing and the City is sued, fined, or suffers another loss as a result, the
Commission may seek indemnification or contribution from the violating
official that could include amounts paid in any settlement, judgment, fine or
other penalty, plus the costs (e.g., attorneys' fees, expert costs, discovery
costs, etc.) to defend any such action. A Commissioner who is the subject of
the action shall not participate in its consideration or vote on it.



(Ord. 1041, passed 10-8-18)



CHAPTER 31:  ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS AND CITY OFFICIALS



Section




Elections




   31.01   Nominating petitions



   31.02   Campaign financing




Administrative Organization




   31.15   Establishment of four divisions



   31.16   Option of City Manager to retain duties of Director



   31.17   Division of Community Services



   31.18   Division of Finance and Records



   31.19   Division of Public Works



   31.20   Division of Public Safety



Cross-reference:



   Administrative officials, see Charter Art. III



ELECTIONS



§ 31.01  NOMINATING PETITIONS.



   All nominating petitions to fill the elective offices provided under
Article IV of the Charter of the City of Mount Pleasant shall be filed with
the City Clerk within the time limitation set for filing petitions as
provided by the laws of the State.



(Ord. 513, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 546, passed  5-15-78; Am. Ord. 1041,
passed 10-8-18)



§ 31.02  CAMPAIGN FINANCING.



   All elections held within the city shall be subject to the Michigan
Campaign Finance Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 169.201 et seq. as enforced by the
Isabella County Clerk.



Cross-reference:



   Campaign financing; restrictions, adopt ordinance, see Charter Art.
XIV, § 6



ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION



§ 31.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF FOUR DIVISIONS.



   The administrative organization of the city shall be established in
four divisions: Community Services, Finance and Records, Public Works and
Public Safety. The Director of each Division shall be appointed by the City
Manager subject to approval of the Commission, and shall exercise such powers
and duties as may be assigned to him/her by state law, the City Charter and
local ordinances or delegated by the City Manager.



(Ord. 468, passed 4-2-73)



§ 31.16  OPTION OF CITY MANAGER TO RETAIN DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   Subject to approval of the Commission, the City Manager may elect to
retain the duties of the Director of one or more divisions and shall in this
instance exercise powers and duties vested in the Director. He/she may,
subject to approval of the Commission establish, transfer and re-assign
functions and activities to promote the efficient and effective performance
of municipal activities.



(Ord. 468, passed 4-2-73)



§ 31.17  DIVISION OF COMMUNITY SERVICES.



   The Division of Community Services shall be headed by the Director who
shall be responsible for municipal programs which preserve and improve the
community social, cultural and physical environment through the enrichment of
leisure time the conservation of safe, sanitary and decent housing, and the
physical and economic development of the community.



(Ord. 468, passed 4-2-73)



§ 31.18  DIVISION OF FINANCE AND RECORDS.



   The Division of Finance and Records shall be headed by the Finance
Director who shall be responsible for accounting for the receipt and
expenditure of public funds, the maintenance and preservation of public
records and documents and the assessment of taxable property. The City Clerk,
Treasurer and Assessor shall be responsible to the Director.



(Ord. 468, passed 4-2-73)



§ 31.19  DIVISION OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   The Division of Public Works shall be headed by the Director. He/she
shall be responsible for community health and environment through the design,
construction, maintenance and operation of the water supply system, streets
and other public property including cemeteries and airports and the disposal
systems for solid and liquid wastes.



(Ord. 468, passed 4-2-73)



§ 31.20  DIVISION OF PUBLIC SAFETY.



   The Division of Public Safety shall be headed by the Director. He/she
shall be responsible for maintenance of the public peace and safety through
the prevention and suppression of fires, crime prevention and the detection
and arrest persons who have violated local, state or federal laws.



(Ord. 468, passed 4-2-73)



CHAPTER 32:  COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES



Section




Housing Commission




   32.01   Creation



   32.02   Appointment of members




Downtown Development Authority




   32.15   Title



   32.16   Definitions



   32.17   Determination of necessity



   32.18   Creation of Authority



   32.19   Description of Downtown District



   32.20   Board of Trustees



   32.21   Powers of the Authority; instrumentality of city



   32.22   Fiscal year; adoption of budget



   32.23   Downtown development tax



Planning Commission



   32.30   Powers



Cross-reference:



   Parks and Recreation Commission, see §§ 97.30 et seq.



HOUSING COMMISSION



§ 32.01  CREATION.



   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933 (Extra Session), being M.C.L.A. §§
125.651 et seq., a commission is hereby created in and for the City of Mount
Pleasant, Michigan, to be known as the Mount Pleasant Housing Commission.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-23-66)



§ 32.02  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The City Manager is hereby directed to appoint five members of the
Housing Commission as soon as possible after this section shall take effect.



(Ord. 394, passed 5-23-66)



DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



§ 32.15  TITLE.



   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Downtown
Development Authority Ordinance.”



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



§ 32.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT 197.  Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through
125.1680 as now in effect or hereafter amended.



   AUTHORITY.  The Mt. Pleasant Downtown Development Authority created by
this chapter.



   BOARDor BOARD OF TRUSTEES.  The Board of Trustees of the Authority,
the governing body of the authority.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  The City Manager of the city.



   COMMISSION.  The Commission of the city.



   DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT TAX.  The tax authorized by this chapter pursuant
to Act 197 to be imposed by the authority in the downtown area.



   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.  The downtown district designated by this
subchapter as now existing or hereafter amended.



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



§ 32.17  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.



   The Commission of the city hereby determines that it is necessary for
the best interest of the city to halt property value deterioration and
increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of
the city, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote
economic growth by establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to
Act 197.



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



§ 32.18  CREATION OF AUTHORITY.



   There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197 a downtown development
authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and
shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of “Mt. Pleasant
Downtown Development Authority.” The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue
and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers
necessary to carry out the purpose of its corporation as provided by this
subchapter and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this subchapter or in
Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the
Authority.



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



§ 32.19  DESCRIPTION OF DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.



   The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers
as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the following described territory in
the city, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this
subchapter and Act 197:



   (A)   Mission Street city limits.  The entire length of Mission
Street within the city limits, including all east and west frontage and
commercial properties, from U.S. Business Route 27 North to U.S. Business
Route 27 South.



   (B)   Pickard Street and surrounding areas.  Pickard Street north
and south frontage and commercial properties bounded on the east by the city
limits and west by Arnold Street. Other surrounding areas include the Fancher
School site bounded east by Mission Street, west by Kinney Street, north by
High Street, and south by Gaylord Street; the Kinney School site bounded east
by Mission Street, west by Kinney Street, north by Palmer Street, and south
by Bennett Street; and Broadway Street north and south frontage and
commercial properties bounded east by Mission Street and west by Fancher
Street.



   Said property is legally described as follows: A map is available for
inspection at city hall, Community Development Office.



Beginning at the center of the intersection of South Mission Street and
Bluegrass Road thence east along the center line of Bluegrass Road to a point
301 feet east of the east right-of-way line of South Mission Street, thence
north parallel to the east right-of-way line of South Mission 832 feet,
thence east parallel to the north right-of-way line of Bluegrass Road 1020
feet, thence north parallel to the east right-of-way line of South Mission
Street 1380.35€, thence west parallel to the south right-of-way line of
Broomfield Road 281 feet +/- to a point 1270 feet east of the east
right-of-way line of South Mission Street, thence north parallel to the east
right-of-way line 33 feet, thence west parallel to the south right-of-way
line of Broomfield Road 973.48 feet, thence north parallel to the east
right-of-way line of South Mission 470.37 feet to the south right-of-way line
of Broomfield Road, thence northerly to the intersection of the north
right-of-way line of Broomfield and the west right-of-way line of Evans
Street, thence northerly along the west right-of-way line of Evans Street to
a point 45 feet south of the north right-of-way line of McVey Street. Thence
west parallel to the north right-of-way line of Broomfield Street 85 feet,
thence north parallel to the east right-of-way of South Mission Street 163.06
feet, thence east parallel to the north right-of-way line of Broomfield Road
256 feet, thence north parallel to the east right-of-way line of South
Mission Street 454.95 feet, thence west parallel to the north right-of-way of
Broomfield Road 360 feet, thence north parallel to the east right-of-way line
South Mission Street 390 feet to a point on the north right-of-way line of
Appian Way, thence east along said right-of-way to a point 300 feet east of
the east right-of-way line of South Mission Street, thence north parallel to
the east right-of-way line of South Mission Street 445 feet to the south
right-of-way line of North Fairfield, thence west along said right-of-way to
a point 200 feet east of the east right-of-way line of South Mission Street,
thence north parallel to said right-of-way 280 feet, thence east parallel to
the north right-of-way line of North Fairfield 270 feet to a point on the
west lot line of Lot 13 Lynwood Subdivision, thence north along the west lot
line of Lots 13 and 12, 202.12 feet, thence west parallel to the south
right-of-way line of East Preston Road 335 feet, thence north parallel to the
east right-of-way line of South Mission Street 178 feet to the south
right-of-way of East Preston Road, thence east along said right-of-way to a
point 279 feet east of the east right-of-way of South Mission Street, thence
north to a point on the west right-of-way of Eastwood Drive 280 feet north of
the north right-of-way of East Preston Road, thence west parallel to said
right-of-way 129.14 feet, thence north parallel to the west right-of-way of
Eastwood Drive to the southwest corner of Lot 37 Eastwood Subdivision, thence
north along the west lot lines of Lots 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37
Eastwood Subdivision to the northwesterly corner of Lot 29 Eastwood
Subdivision, thence north parallel to the east right-of-way line of South
Mission Street 22 feet to a point on the south right-of-way of Bellows
Street, thence northerly to a point on the north right-of-way of Bellows 107
feet west of the west right-of-way of Anna Street, thence north parallel to
the west right-of-way of Anna Street 101.35 feet, thence east along the south
lot line of Lot 14 South Mission Heights to the west right-of-way line of
Anna Street, thence north along said right-of-way line to the north lot line
of Lot 18 South Mission Heights, thence west along said lot line to the
northwest corner of said lot, thence north along the west lot lines of Lots
19, 20, 21 South Mission Heights to the south right-of-way of Gaylord Street.
Thence northerly to a point on the north right-of-way line of Gaylord and the
west lot line of Lot 33 Assessor's Plat. Thence north along the west lot line
of Lot 33 Assessor's Plat to the northwest corner of said lot, thence east
along the north lot line of Lot 33 to the northeast corner of said lot,
thence north along the west lot lines of Lots 38 and 39 Assessor's Plat to
the south right-of-way of High Street, thence east along said right-of-way
346 feet, thence north 201 feet to the northwest corner Lot 2 Assessor's
Plat. Thence east along the north lot line of said lot to the northeast
corner of said lot, thence north along the east lot line of Lot 1 Assessor's
Plat to the northeast corner of said lot. Thence west along the north lot
line of said lot 310 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 1 Pleasant View I
Subdivision, thence north along the east lot lines of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Pleasant View I Subdivision to the northeast corner of said Lot 5, thence
west along the north lot line of said lot to the southeast corner of Lot 6
Pleasant View I, thence north along the east lot line of said lot to the
southwest corner of Lot 93 Pleasant View I, thence east along the north line
of said lot to the southeast corner of Lot 95 Pleasant View I, thence north
along the east line of said lot to the northwest corner of Lot 90 Pleasant
View I, thence east along the north line of said lot to the northeast corner
of said lot, thence north 66 feet along the west right-of-way of Anna Street,
thence west 132.6 feet, thence north 109.1 feet to the southwest corner of
Lot 7, Block 4, Bennett & Burrows Addition, thence east along the south line
of said lot to the west right-of-way of Anna Street. Thence north along said
right-of-way to the northeast corner of Lot 8, Block 4, Bennett & Burrows
Addition, thence west along the north line of said lot 60.3 feet. Thence
north parallel to the west right-of-way of Anna Street 198 feet to the north
line of Wisconsin Street, thence west along said right-of-way to the
southeast corner Lot 4, Block 3 Bennett & Burrows Addition to the south
right-of-way of Illinois Street, thence north 66 feet to the southeast corner
of Lot 4, Block 2 Bennett & Burrows Addition. Thence north along the east
lines of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, Block 2, Bennett & Burrows Addition to the south
right-of-way of Michigan Street, thence north 66 feet to the southeast corner
of Lot 8, Block 1 Bennett & Burrows Addition. Thence north along the east
lines of Lots 2, 5, 8, Block 1 Bennett & Burrows Addition to the south
right-of-way of East Broadway. Thence east along said right-of-way 99 feet,
thence north 66 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 2, Block 1 M. Brown
Addition. Thence north to the northeast corner of said lot, thence west along
the north line of said lot to a point 48 feet east of the southeast corner of
Lot 19 Block 1 M. Brown Addition, thence north parallel to the east
right-of-way of South Mission Street 115.5 feet to a point on the north line
of said Lot 19. Thence west along said north line to a point 97 feet east of
the east right-of-way of South Mission Street, thence north parallel to the
east right-of-way of South Mission Street to the south right-of-way line of
Chippewa Street, thence east along said right-of-way 90 feet, thence north 66
feet to the north right-of-way of Chippewa Street, thence north parallel to
the east right-of-way of South Mission Street 132 feet to a point on the
south line of Lot 14, Block 2 M. Brown Addition 187 feet east of the east
right-of-way of South Mission Street, thence east along the south line of
said lot to the southeast corner of said lot, thence north parallel to the
east right-of-way of South Mission Street 462 feet to the northeast corner of
Lot 14, Block 14, part of M. Brown Addition, thence north 66 feet to the
southeast corner Lot 1, Block 4, part of M. Brown Addition, thence west along
the south line of said lot 131.3 feet. Thence north parallel to the east
right-of-way of South Mission Street 132 feet to a point on the south line of
Lot 18, Block 4, part of M. Brown Addition. Thence east along the south line
of said lot to the southeast corner of said lot. Thence north along the east
line of said lot to the south right-of-way of Andre Street, thence north 70.5
feet to the north right-of-way of Andre Street, thence west along said
right-of-way 165 feet to the southeast corner Lot 49 Assessor's Plat 4,
thence north parallel to the east right-of-way of Mission Street 340 feet to
the south right-of-way of Bennett Street, thence east 13 feet along said
right-of-way. Thence north parallel to the east right-of-way of Mission
Street 338 feet to the south right-of-way of Palmer Street. Thence east along
said right-of-way 795.6 feet, thence north 66 feet to the north right-of-way
of Palmer Street. Thence north parallel to the west right-of-way of Brown
Street 153 feet, thence east parallel to the south right-of-way of Pickard
Avenue 220 feet to the west right-of-way of Brown Street. Thence south along
said right-of-way 131 feet, thence east 100 feet to the east right-of-way of
Brown Street, thence east parallel to the south right-of-way of East Pickard
Avenue to the west line of Lot 1 Solar Heights. Thence north to the northwest
corner of said lot. Thence east along the north line of said lot extended
475.06 feet to a point on the east right-of-way of Russell Road 120 feet
south of the South Pickard Avenue right-of-way. Thence south along the
Russell Road easterly right-of-way to the northwest corner Lot 32, Gardenview
Estates #2. Thence east along the north line of said lot extended 406 feet.
Thence north parallel to the Russell Road right-of-way 326 feet to the south
right-of-way of Pickard Avenue. Thence north parallel to Pickard Street to
the south right-of-way of Corporate Drive, thence west along said Corporate
Drive right-of-way to a point 1323.19 feet west of the west € corner of the
southwest ¼ of the southwest ¼ of Section 11, Union Township, Isabella
County. Thence north to the north right-of-way of Corporate Drive. Thence
west along said right-of-way to the west right-of-way of Mission Street.
Thence south along west right-of-way to the south right-of-way of Corporate
Drive. Thence west along said south right-of-way 128.30 feet. Thence south
parallel to the South Mission Street right-of-way 214 feet, thence west
parallel to the Corporate Drive right-of-way 63.14 feet. Thence south
parallel to the Mission Street right-of-way 115.15 feet, thence west parallel
to Corporate Drive right-of-way 235.26 feet. Thence south parallel to the
Mission Street right-of-way 584.85 feet, thence east parallel to the north
right-of-way line of Pickard 143.61 feet, thence south parallel to the
Mission Street right-of-way 250 feet to the north right-of-way line of
Pickard Avenue. Thence south to the northeast corner Lot 2, Block 1
Kinney-Richmond Addition. Thence south along the east lines of Lots 2, 3, 6,
7, Block 1 Kinney-Richmond Addition to the north right-of-way of Palmer
Street. Thence west along said right-of-way to the west right-of-way line of
Kinney Avenue, thence south along said westerly right-of-way to the south
right-of-way of Bennett Street. Thence east along said southerly right-of-way
to the northeast corner, Lot 2, Block 5 Kinney-Richmond Addition, thence
south along the east lot lines of Lots 2, 3, 6, 7, Block 5 and Lots 2, 3, 6,
7, Block 7, Kinney-Richmond Addition to the north right-of-way of Crosslanes.
Thence south to the northeast corner, Lot 2, Block 1, part of Kinney
Addition. Thence south along the east lines of Lots 2, 3, 6, 7, Block 1; Lots
2, 3, 6, 7, Block 8; Lots 2, 3, 6, 7, Block 9, part of Kinney Addition, to
the north right-of-way of Mosher Street. Thence west along street northerly
right-of-way to the west right-of-way of Arnold Street, thence south along
said westerly right-of-way to a point 54 feet south of the northwest corner
Lot 5, Block 14, part of Kinney Addition, thence west parallel to the
Broadway Street right-of-way 59.4 feet, thence north parallel to the Arnold
Street right-of-way to the northwest corner, Lot 5, Block 14, part of Kinney
Addition. Thence west along the northerly lot line of Lot 5, Block 14, part
of Kinney Addition extended to the west right-of-way of Fancher Street.
Thence south along said westerly right-of-way to the northeast corner, Lot 7,
Block 18, part of Kinney Addition. Thence east along said northerly lot line
extended to west right-of-way line of Arnold Street, south along said
westerly right-of-line to the northeast corner, Lot 1, Block 22, part of
Kinney Addition. Thence east along the south right-of-way of Michigan Street
to the northeast corner, Lot 2, Block 23, part of Kinney Addition. Thence
south along the east lot lines of Lots 2, 3, 6, 7, Block 23, Lots 2, 3, 6, 7,
Block 24, and Lots 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, Block 31, part of Kinney Addition; Lots 3,
4, Block 1, Lots 5, 6, 7, 8, Block 4, and Lots 3, 4, Block 5, Young & Vedders
Addition; Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Block 4, Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Block 1,
Boulevard Park, to the north right-of-way line of High Street, thence west
along said northerly right-of-way line to the west right-of-way of Kinney
Avenue. Thence south along said westerly right-of-way to the south
right-of-way of Gaylord Street, thence east along said southerly right-of-way
line to the northeast corner, Lot 23 Yorba Linda Subdivision, thence south
along the east line of said lot and the east line of Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, Mission Gardens. Thence south to the south right-of-way of
Bellows Street, thence east along said right-of-way to the west right-of-way
of Mission Street, thence south along said westerly right-of-way to a point
693 feet north of the north Preston right-of-way, thence west parallel to
Preston Street 330 feet. Thence south 693 feet to the north right-of-way line
of Preston Street, thence south to the south right-of-way of Preston Street,
thence east along said southerly right-of-way 167 feet, thence south parallel
to the Mission Street right-of-way 165 feet. Thence west parallel to the
Preston Street right-of-way 150 feet. Thence south parallel to the Mission
Street right-of-way 668 feet. Thence east parallel to the Preston Street
right-of-way 313 feet to the west right-of-way line of Mission Street, thence
south along said right-of-way 218.75 feet, thence west parallel to Preston
Street right-of-way 330 feet. Thence south parallel to Mission Street
right-of-way 397 feet, thence east parallel to Preston Street right-of-way
132 feet, thence south parallel to the Mission Street right-of-way 168 feet,
thence west parallel to Preston Street right-of-way 66 feet, thence south
parallel to Mission Street right-of-way 164 feet, thence west parallel to
Preston Street right-of-way 66 feet, thence south parallel to Mission Street
247.5 feet. Thence east parallel to Preston Street 95 feet, thence south
parallel to Mission Street 200 feet, thence east parallel to Preston Street
33 feet, thence south parallel to Mission Street 154 feet. Thence east
parallel to Preston Street 86.4 feet, thence south parallel to Mission Street
to the north right-of-way line of Broomfield Road. Thence west along said
northerly right-of-way 260 feet, thence south to the south right-of-way of
Broomfield. Thence south parallel to the right-of-way of Mission Street 419.8
feet, thence east parallel to Broomfield Road 170 feet to a point on the west
lot line of Lot 6, Burdick's Southview, thence south along the west line of
Burdick's Southview to the southwest corner of said plat. Thence east along
the south line of said plat to the west right-of-way of Mission Street,
thence south along said westerly right-of-way to the intersection of Mission
Street and the center line of Bluegrass Road extended. Thence east to the
point of beginning.



Also included are Section 11, T14NR4W, part of NW¼ of SW¼, commencing at
W¼ corner, thence S 01°00 2/3 W, 1312.63 feet, thence 87°44'29" East,
197.68 feet, thence N 26°36'32" W, 206.36 feet, thence N 13°47'38" East
12.29 feet to the point of beginning, thence northeasterly 470.32 feet along
a curve to the right, thence S 39°17'41" E, 192.28 feet, thence S 22°47'37"
E, 164.8 feet, thence S 48°20'44" W 174.13 feet, thence S 87°44'29" E
283.42 feet to the point of beginning. Except a parcel commencing at W¼
corner of Section 11, thence S 01°00' W 1312.63 feet along Section line,
thence S 87°44'29" E 224.68 feet along the northerly right-of-way line of
Corporate drive, thence N 02°15'31" E 192.76 feet to the point of beginning,
thence N 02°15'31" E 10.0 feet, thence S 87°44'29" E 169.64 feet, thence S
48°20'44" W 14.42 feet, thence N 87°44'29" W 159.26 feet to the point of
beginning. (2.37 Acres M/L)



AND



Section 14, T14NR4W, part of NW¼ of SW¼, commencing at the W¼ corner,
thence S 01°00' W, 1312.63 feet, thence S 87°44'29" E, 197.68 feet to the
point of beginning, thence N 26°36'32" W, 206.36 feet, thence northeasterly
12.29 feet, thence S 87°44'29" E, 283.42 feet, thence S 48°20'44" W, 18.40
feet, thence S 02°15'31" W, 180 feet, thence N 87°44'29" W, 173 feet to the
point of beginning. Also a parcel commencing at W¼ corner of Section 11,
thence S 01°00' 1312.63 feet along the Section line, thence S 87°44'29" E
224.68 feet along the northerly right-of-way line of Corporate Drive, thence
N 02°15'31" E 192.76 feet to the point of beginning, thence N02°15'31" E
10.0 feet, thence S 87°44'29" E 169.64 feet, thence S 48°20'44" W 14.42
feet, thence N 87°44'29" W 159.26 feet to the point of beginning. (1 acre
M/L)



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord. 742, passed 9-28-92)



§ 32.20  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   (A)   The Downtown Development Authority shall be under the
supervision and control of a board consisting of the City Manager of the city
and ten members appointed by the City Manager, subject to approval by the
Commission. At least five of the members shall be persons having an interest
in property located in the downtown district. At least one of the members
shall be a resident of the downtown district, if the downtown district has
100 or more persons residing within it. Of the members first appointed, two
shall be appointed for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and
two for four years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor
is appointed. Thereafter, a member shall serve for a term of four years. The
term of office for the first Board shall begin October 22, 1990. An
appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the City Manager for the
unexpired term only. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation,
but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The Chairman of
the Board shall be elected by the Board.



   (B)   Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify
by taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt rules governing its procedure and the
holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the Commission.
Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in the rules
of the Board and in accordance with applicable state law. Meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public.



   (D)   Pursuant to notice and an opportunity to be heard, a member of
the Board may be removed for cause by the Commission. Removal of a member is
subject to review by the Circuit Court.



   (E)   All expense items of the authority shall be publicized monthly
and the financial records shall always be open to the public.



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



§ 32.21  POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY; INSTRUMENTALITY OF CITY.



   (A)   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this subchapter,
the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the
limitations imposed by law and herein.



   (B)   The Authority shall be deemed an instrumentality of the city.



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



§ 32.22  FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (A)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on January 1 or
each year and end on December 31 of the same year, or such other fiscal year
as may hereafter be adopted by the city.



   (B)   The Board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it
to the Commission on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is
required to be submitted to the Commission. The Board shall not finally adopt
a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the
Commission. The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection
with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue
bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds.



   (C)   The Authority shall submit financial reports to the Commission
at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are
required to submit reports. The Authority shall be audited annually by the
same independent auditors auditing the city and copies of the audit report
shall be filed with the Commission.



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



§ 32.23  DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT TAX.



   (A)   The Authority is hereby authorized by the city to impose an ad
valorem tax on all taxable property in the Downtown District for the purposes
provided by Act 197. The tax shall not exceed two mills on the value of
taxable property in the Downtown District as finally equalized.



   (B)   In order to impose the tax, the Board shall include in its
budget each year an estimate of the amount necessary to be raised from the
Downtown Development Tax. The amount of tax imposed shall not exceed the
amount necessary as estimated in the budget and approved by the Commission.
The Board shall certify to the proper tax assessing official of the city the
amount so determined in the same manner and at the same time as general city
taxes are certified for collection.



   (C)   The city shall collect the Downtown Development Tax at the
same time and in the same manner as other city taxes are collected. The tax
shall be paid to the treasurer of the Authority and credited to the general
fund of the Authority for the purpose provided by Act 197. The Commission may
assess a reasonable pro rata share of the funds for the cost of handling and
auditing the funds against the funds of the authority, other than those
committed, which cost shall be paid annually by the Board pursuant to an
appropriate item in its budget.



(Ord. 711, passed 10-22-90)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 32.30  POWERS.



   The Planning Commission established in Article XIII of the City Charter
may exercise all powers granted in the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, 2008
PA 33, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq., and shall carry out all functions
assigned to it by statute or ordinance.



(Ord. 1031, passed 10-23-17)



CHAPTER 33:  TAXATION



Section




Property Taxes




   33.01   Tax day



   33.02   Assessment roll



   33.03   Board of Review meetings




Special Assessment Procedure




   33.15   Short title



   33.16   Definitions



   33.17   Authority to assess



   33.18   Resolution to initiate special assessment projects



   33.19   Initiation by petition



   33.20   Survey and report



   33.21   Determination on project



   33.22   Hearing on necessity



   33.23   Deviation from plans and specifications



   33.24   Limitations on preliminary expenses



   33.25   Special assessment roll



   33.26   Assessor to file assessment roll



   33.27   Review of special assessment; objections



   33.28   Payment in annual installments



   33.29   Creation of lien



   33.30   Additional assessments; refunds



   33.31   Additional procedures



   33.32   Fund for payment of bonds



   33.33   Special assessment accounts



   33.34   Re-assessment for benefits



   33.35   Combination of districts



   33.36   Assessment of single lots or parcels



   33.37   Authorization of bonds




Taxable Personal Property




   33.50   Duties of City Assessor



   33.51   Neglect or refusal to file; penalties



Cross-reference:



   Taxation, see Charter Art. VIII



   Special assessments, see Charter Art. IX



   Tax exemptions, see T.S.O. II



PROPERTY TAXES



§ 33.01  TAX DAY.



   December 31 each year shall be the tax day in the city. The taxable
status of persons and real and personal property shall be determined as of
the tax day.



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions and additional statutory requirements, see
M.C.L.A. § 211.2(2)



§ 33.02  ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   The City Assessor shall on or before the first Monday in March of each
year, make and complete the assessment roll.



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions and additional statutory requirements, see
M.C.L.A. § 211.24



§ 33.03  BOARD OF REVIEW MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Board of Review shall meet for the purpose of reviewing
and correcting the assessment roll on the Tuesday immediately following the
first Monday in March in the Commission rooms, at 9:00 a.m.  (M.C.L.A. §
211.29)



   (B)   The Board of Review shall also meet on the second Monday in
March at 9:00 a.m., and continue in session during the day for not less than
six hours. The Board shall also meet for not less than six hours during the
remainder of that week. Persons or their agents who have appeared to file a
protest before the Board of Review at a scheduled meeting or at a scheduled
appointment shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the Board of
Review.  (M.C.L.A. § 211.30(1))



   (C)   The completed assessment roll shall be delivered by the by the
Assessor to the County Equalization Director not later than the tenth day
after the adjournment of the Board of Review, or the Wednesday following the
first Monday in April, whichever date occurs first.  (M.C.L.A. § 211.30(4))



Statutory reference:



   For additional statutory requirements, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.29 and
211.30



SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE



§ 33.15  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Special
Assessment Ordinance” of the city.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



Cross-reference:



   Adopt ordinance, assessment procedure, see Charter Art. IX, § 2



§ 33.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COST.  When referring to the cost of any local public improvement,
said reference shall include the cost of services, plans, condemnation,
spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction and legal
fees and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the
special assessments therefor and the financing thereof.



   LOCAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.  Any public improvement which is of such a
nature as to benefit especially any real property or properties with a
district, such benefit being over and above that derived by the city at large.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.17  AUTHORITY TO ASSESS.



   The whole cost or any part thereof of any local public improvement may
be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the
improvement in the manner hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.18  RESOLUTION TO INITIATE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROJECTS.



   Proceedings for the making of local public improvements within the
city, the tentative necessity thereof, and the determination that the whole
or any part of the expense thereof shall be defrayed by special assessment
upon the property especially benefited, provided that all special assessments
levied shall be in proportion to the benefits derived from the improvements,
may be commenced by resolution of the Commission, with or without a petition.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.19  INITIATION BY PETITION.



   Local public improvements may be initiated by petition signed by
property owners whose aggregate frontage represents more than 50% of the
frontage of the property in the proposed district. Petition for local
improvement shall be made on the petition forms provided by the City Clerk.
This requirement may be waived by the Commission. Such petition shall contain
a brief description of the property owned by the respective signatories
thereof and if it shall appear that the petition is signed by more than 50%
as aforesaid, the City Clerk shall certify same to the Commission. The
petition shall be addressed to the Commission and filed with the City Clerk
and shall in no event be considered directory but is advisory only.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.20  SURVEY AND REPORT.



   Before the Commission shall consider the making of any local public
improvement, the same shall be referred by resolution to the City Manager
directing him/her to cause to be prepared a report which shall include
necessary plans, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of cost, an
estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment
district or districts, and such other pertinent information as will permit
the Commission to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement
proposed and what part or proportion thereof should be paid by special
assessments upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any,
should be paid by the city at large. The Commission shall not finally
determine to proceed with the making of any local public improvement until
such report of the City Manager has been filed, nor until after a public
hearing has been held by the Commission for the purpose of hearing objections
to the making of such improvement.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.21  DETERMINATION ON PROJECT.



   After the City Manager has presented the report required in § 33.20
for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of the
Commission, and the Commission has reviewed said report, a resolution may be
passed tentatively determining the necessity of the improvement, setting
forth the nature thereof, prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of
such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property
especially benefited, determination of benefits received by affected
properties, and what part, if any, shall he paid by the city at large;
designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected,
designating whether to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits,
placing the complete information on file in the office of the City Clerk,
where the same may be found for examination, and directing the City Clerk to
give notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement, at which time and
place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice
shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated
within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of or person
in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax
assessment roll of the city, said publication and mailing to be made at least
ten full days prior to the date of said hearing. The hearing required by this
section may be held at any regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the
Commission.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.22  HEARING ON NECESSITY.



   At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons
interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the
Commission may modify the scope of the local public improvement in such a
manner as it shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole;
provided that if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the
district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in
§ 33.21. If the determination of the Commission shall be to proceed with the
improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles,
plans, specifications, assessment district and detailed estimates of cost,
and directing the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance
with the Commission's determination and report the same to the Commission for
confirmation.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.23  DEVIATION FROM PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   No deviation from original plans or specifications as adopted, other
than changes of a technical nature that do not alter the nature, or scope of
the improvement, shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the city
without authority of the Commission by resolution. A copy of the resolution
authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the City Clerk
and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in his/her
office.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.24  LIMITATIONS ON PRELIMINARY EXPENSES.



   The Commission shall specify the provisions and procedures for
financing a local public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for
the cost of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications and estimates
of cost, shall be made for the improvement, nor shall any improvement be
commenced until the special assessment roll to defray the costs of the same
shall have been made and confirmed.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.25  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   The Assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and
parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed
improvement and access to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount
benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the
detailed estimate of the City Manager as approved by the Commission.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.26  ASSESSOR TO FILE ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   When the Assessor shall have completed such assessment roll he/she
shall file the same with the City Clerk for presentation to the Commission
for review and certification by it.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.27  REVIEW OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT; OBJECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the Commission,
by resolution, shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in
the office of the City Clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and
place the Commission will meet to review such special assessment roll and
direct the City Clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of
affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice
shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated
within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of or person
in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax
assessment roll of the city said publication and mailing to made at least ten
full days prior to the date of said hearing. The hearing required by this
section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the
Commission. At this meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present
their objections, if any, to the assessments against the properties benefited.



   (B)   The Commission shall meet at the time and place designated for
the review of the special assessment roll, and at the meeting, or a proper
adjournment, shall consider all objections submitted in writing. The
Commission may correct said roll as to any special assessment or description
of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by
resolution, annul the assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be
instituted. The new proceedings may be commenced at any phase of the petition
and hearing process described that shall have been satisfactorily completed.
The same proceeding shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making
of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of
the changes as the Commission deems justified, the Commission determines that
it is satisfied with said special assessment roll and that assessments are in
proportion to benefits received, it shall pass a resolution reciting its
determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file, in the office of
the City Clerk and directing the City Clerk to deliver to the City Assessor
within ten days a certified copy thereof. The Assessor shall spread and the
City Treasurer shall collect the various sums and amounts appearing thereon
as directed by the Commission. The roll shall have the date of confirmation
endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the
purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to
conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in § 33.32 of
this chapter. 



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.28  PAYMENT IN ANNUAL INSTALLMENTS.



   The Commission may provide for the payment of special assessments in
annual installments. The annual installments shall not exceed the lesser of
the usable life of the project or 30 in number, the first installment being
spread upon the next annual city tax roll and made a part of each annual city
tax roll thereafter until all are paid. Interest shall be charged on all
installments at a rate not to exceed 7% or the maximum authorized by state
law, commencing on a date determined by the Commission, and payable on the
due date of each installment, the full amount of all or any deferred
installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be
paid in advance of the due dates thereof, provided, however, that in the
event that special assessment bonds are issued in anticipation of the
collection of said installments, the interest on the roll shall be at a rate
not greater than 1% in excess of the rate on interest borne by said bonds.
Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until 30 days after
the due date, after which time the installments shall be collected as
delinquent and the penalty on said installments shall be collected and
provided in the City Charter for collection of delinquent general city taxes.
After the Commission has confirmed the roll, the City Treasurer shall notify,
by mail, each property owner on said roll that said roll has been filed,
stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of
the City Treasurer to give said notice or of such owner to receive said
notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any
assessment thereon, nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 522, passed 5-2-77)



§ 33.29  CREATION OF LIEN.



   Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges from the
date of confirmation of the roll shall become a debt to the city from the
persons to whom they are assessed, and, until paid, shall be and remain a
lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien
created by general law for the state and county taxes and by the City Charter
for city taxes, and the lands upon which the same are a lien shall be subject
to sale the same as are lands upon which delinquent city taxes constitute a
lien.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.30  ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS; REFUNDS.



   The City Clerk shall, within 60 days after the completion of each local
or special public improvement, compile and certify the actual cost to the
Assessor who shall adjust the special assessment roll correspondingly. Should
the assessment prove larger than necessary, the same shall be reported to the
Commission which may make a refund thereof pro rata according to the
assessment. No refunds of special assessments may be made which impair, or
contravene the provision of any outstanding obligation or bond secured in
whole or part by such special assessments. When any special assessment roll
shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was
made, the Commission may make an additional pro rata assessment.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.31  ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES.



   In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be
insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the
Commission shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures
required.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.32  FUND FOR PAYMENT OF BONDS.



   In the event bonds are issued in anticipation of the collection of
special assessments as hereinbefore provided, all collections on each special
assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set in a separate fund for
the payment of the principal and interest on the bonds so issued in
anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall be used
for no other purpose.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.33  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACCOUNTS.



   Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local
improvements shall be had in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any
money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only
for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, expenses
incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal and interest on
money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments, if refunds be
authorized.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.34  RE-ASSESSMENT FOR BENEFITS.



   Whenever the Commission shall deem any special assessment invalid or
defective for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in
whole or in part, the Commission shall have power to cause a new assessment
to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made,
whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed and whether
any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such
re-assessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the manner as
provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the original
assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied
upon the re-assessment and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed
satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the
balance shall be refunded to the person making the payment.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.35  COMBINATION OF DISTRICTS.



   The Commission may combine several districts into one project,
provided, however, that for each district there shall be established separate
funds and accounts to cover the cost of the same.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.36  ASSESSMENT OF SINGLE LOTS OR PARCELS.



   When any expense shall be incurred by the city upon or in respect to
any separate or single lot, parcel or premises which the Commission may
charge and collect as a special assessment against the same (and not being of
that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon several
lots or parcels in a special assessment district), proceedings necessary to
be had before making the improvement shall, in the discretion of the
Commission, not apply to assessments to cover the expenses incurred, in
respect to that class of improvements contemplated in this section. The owner
of such separate or single lot, parcel or premises may consent to the making
of a special assessment without the necessity of conducting a public hearing
relative to necessity or the special assessment roll and without notices of
hearing as provided.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



§ 33.37  AUTHORIZATION OF BONDS.



   Bonds issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments
and general obligation bonds evidencing the city's share of the cost of any
local improvement, may be authorized by resolution of the Commission.



(Ord. 512, passed 12-20-76)



TAXABLE PERSONAL PROPERTY



§ 33.50  DUTIES OF CITY ASSESSOR.



   (A)   The City Assessor shall ascertain the taxable value of real
and personal property of the city of Mount Pleasant as of Tax Day, which
shall be December 31 of each year.



   (B)   For this purpose, he/she shall require every person who he/she
believes has personal property in his/her possession, whether held by him/her
for his/her use or the use of another, to make and subscribe to a true and
correct written statement of all the personal property of such person, firm
or corporation, whether owned by him/her or it or held for the use of another.



   (C)   The written statement, provided for in division (B) above,
shall be in form and of such content as shall be prescribed by the City
Assessor, and/or as required by statute, and shall be completed and delivered
to the City Assessor on or before February 20 of each year.



(Ord. 514, passed  12-20-76)



Statutory reference:



   For additional statutory requirements, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.18 - 211.20



   For time, contents, and method of property tax assessment roll, see
M.C.L.A. § 211.24



§ 33.51  NEGLECT OR REFUSAL TO FILE; PENALTIES.



   (A)   In every case when any person or member of a firm or officer
of any corporation shall willfully neglect or refuse to make out a true and
correct sworn statement as herein provided, or shall answer falsely or refuse
to answer questions concerning his/her property or property under his/her
control as required by this chapter, such person shall be punished as
provided in M.C.L.A. § 211.21.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Assessor whenever he/she is
satisfied that any person liable to make such assessing statement is justly
liable to such penalty, to report the case to the City Attorney and make
proper complaint for such prosecution.



(Ord. 514, passed  12-20-76)



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 211.21



CHAPTER 34:  RECOVERED STOLEN PROPERTY



Section



   34.01   Application of provisions



   34.02   Report to Commission; money credited to General Fund



   34.03   Authority for sale



   34.04   Receipts from sale



   34.05   Validity of claim



   34.06   Reimbursement, limitation



§ 34.01  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any stolen money or other
property recovered by the Police Department which shall not be claimed within
six months after said recovery.



(Ord. 450, passed 6-7-71)



§ 34.02  REPORT TO COMMISSION; MONEY CREDITED TO GENERAL FUND.



   Forthwith after the expiration of said six months period, the Director
of Public Safety or his/her designee shall report to the Commission, listing
the money or other property so recovered and held, and requesting authority
from the Commission to turn any money over to the City Treasurer to be
credited to the general fund and requesting authority from the Commission to
sell at public sale any other property so recovered and held.



(Ord. 450, passed 6-7-71)



§ 34.03  AUTHORITY FOR SALE.



   The Commission shall act on the request of the Director of Public
Safety or his/her designee within six months after the receipt of such
request. In case authority is granted to the Director of Public Safety or
his/her designee to turn any money so recovered and held over to the City
Treasurer or to sell any other property so recovered and held, the Director
of Public Safety or his/her designee shall post three notices in the city or
county in which the stolen money or other property was recovered, and also
publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation in such city or county
by insertions in two issues of said newspaper. Such notice shall describe the
money so recovered and held, together with the time and place of public sale
at which said other property may be purchased by the highest bidder. Up until
the date of sale, the money or other property may be claimed at the Division
of Public Safety, Mount Pleasant, Michigan.



(Ord. 450, passed 6-7-71)



§ 34.04  RECEIPTS FROM SALE.



   After the holding of any such sale, the money received from such sale,
after deducting the cost of the conducting thereof, and any other money
recovered and held included in the notice provided for in § 34.03, shall be
turned over to the City Treasurer to be credited to the general fund of the
city.



(Ord. 450, passed 6-7-71)



§ 34.05  VALIDITY OF CLAIM.



   Except as provided in § 34.06, no claim shall be valid to obtain any
money or other property recovered by the city police after notice and sale as
provided in § 34.03, said property and money being considered as abandoned
and belonging to the city.



(Ord. 450, passed 6-7-71)



§ 34.06  REIMBURSEMENT, LIMITATION.



   The owner of the stolen property may prove his/her claim by proving the
identity of the property and be reimbursed from the City Treasurer in an
amount not to exceed the amount paid for such goods at said sale; provided,
however, that such claim shall have been filed with the Commission not later
than six months after said sale.



(Ord. 450, passed 6-7-71)



CHAPTER 35:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   35.01   Definitions



   35.02   Department of Emergency Management



   35.03   Powers and duties of the Mayor



   35.04   Powers and duties of City Manager



   35.05   Powers and duties of the Director of Emergency Management



   35.06   Emergency management and disaster control plan



   35.07   Conflicting ordinances and regulations



   35.08   Violations



Statutory reference:



   Emergency Management Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 30.401 et seq.



§ 35.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY.  A condition resulting from enemy attack or natural
disaster which cannot be handled by normal operating personnel and facilities.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are
primarily responsible, for protection against and to minimize and repair
injury and damage resulting from enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile
action, or by natural disaster.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER.  Any person who serves without
compensation in the emergency management organization.



   NATURAL DISASTER.  Any condition seriously affecting or threatening
public health, welfare, or security as a result of severe fire, explosion,
flood, tornado, hurricane, or similar natural or accidental cause and which
is beyond the control of public or private agencies ordinarily responsible
for the control or relief of such conditions. Riots, strikes, insurrections
or other civil disturbances shall not be included within the meaning of
NATURAL DISASTER.



§ 35.02  DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.



   A Department of Emergency Management is hereby created utilizing to the
fullest extent personnel and facilities of existing city departments and
agencies. The City Manager shall be responsible for its organization,
administration, and operation. The organization shall consist of the
following:



   (A)   A Department of Emergency Management within the executive
department of the city government. There shall be an executive head of the
Department of Emergency Management, appointed in the manner provided in the
Charter for the appointment of the majority of administrative officials
specifically enumerated in the Charter, who shall be known as the Director of
Emergency Management, and such assistants, clerical help, other employees and
emergency management volunteers as are deemed necessary to the proper
functioning of the organization.



   (B)   Five designees with responsibility for financial services, law
enforcement, fire control, engineering services, and health and medical
services, appointed by the City Manager. These shall, so far as possible, be
additional duty assignments to existing personnel, and it is the intent of
this chapter that emergency management and disaster assignments shall be as
nearly consistent with normal duty assignment as possible.



   (C)   The employees, equipment, and facilities of all city
departments, and agencies suitable for, or adaptable to emergency management
and designated by the City Manager to participate in the emergency management
activity.



   (D)   Emergency management volunteers, including persons and private
agencies or governmental units offering services to the organization.



Cross-reference:



   Appointment of city officials, see Charter Art. III, § 2.



§ 35.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   (A)   In the event of actual or threatened enemy attack or natural
disaster, the Mayor, or in his/her absence or inability to serve, the Mayor
Pro Tem, as conservator of the peace, shall:



      (1)   Declare a state of emergency within the city thereby
placing in effect the emergency management and disaster control plan required
by this chapter.



      (2)   As soon as may be thereafter, convene the Commission to
perform its legislative and administrative functions as the situation may
demand. The Commission shall have the power to terminate the state of
emergency. The state of emergency shall not be continued or renewed for a
period in excess of seven days except with the consent of the Commission.



      (3)   Request the state, its agencies or political
subdivisions to send aid if the situation is beyond the control of the
regular and emergency city forces.



      (4)   Have the power to command services and the use of
equipment, and facilities for such work and duties as the city may require to
aid the regular and volunteer city forces in time of emergency.



      (5)   Promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed
necessary to protect life and property and conserve critical resources, and
such regulations may be invoked when necessary for test of emergency
management and disaster plans. All such regulations shall be subject to
approval of the Commission as soon as practicable subsequent to promulgation.



   (B)   The Mayor, or in his/her absence or inability to serve, the
Mayor Pro Tem, shall have power to order emergency management forces to the
aid of the state or political subdivisions thereof subject to Commission
review as soon as practicable.



§ 35.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the City Manager shall consist of the
following:



      (1)   The City Manager, through the Director of Emergency
Management, shall maintain general supervision over the planning and
administration for the Emergency Management Organization and the execution of
the emergency management and disaster plans. He/she shall coordinate the
emergency management activities and make emergency assignments of emergency
management duties and emergency management forces in order to meet situations
not covered in the normal duties of such forces.



      (2)   The City Manager may take all necessary action to
conduct tests of the emergency management and natural disaster plans.



      (3)   When a state of emergency has been declared, the City
Manager shall assemble and utilize emergency management forces and prescribe
the manner and conditions of their use.



      (4)   The City Manager shall designate a line of succession
among his/her department heads to carry out the powers and duties of this
division in the event of his/her absence or inability to serve.



   (B)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to exercise the powers
granted to the Mayor in § 35.03, hereof, either in the absence or inability
to serve of the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem or where delay in the exercise of
such powers would be contrary to the public interest.



§ 35.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   The Director shall be executive head of the Department of
Emergency Management, and shall have responsibility for the organization,
administration, and operation of the Emergency Management and Disaster
Control Organization subject to the direction and control of the City Manager.



   (B)   The Director of Emergency Management shall be responsible for
public relations, information, and education regarding all phases of
emergency management.



   (C)   The Director shall be responsible for the development of a
emergency management and disaster control plan, and upon adoption, shall be
responsible for such implementation as revision of the plan as to maintain it
on a current state of readiness at all times.



   (D)   The Director shall coordinate all activities for emergency
management and disaster control, and shall maintain liaison and cooperate
with all other interested and affected agencies, public and private.



   (E)   The Director shall coordinate the recruitment and training of
volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of
the city for emergency management purposes.



   (F)   The Director may issue proper insignia and papers to emergency
management workers and other people directly concerned with emergency
management.



§ 35.06  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND DISASTER CONTROL PLAN.



   As soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter, a
comprehensive emergency management and disaster control plan shall be adopted
by resolution of the Commission upon the recommendations of the City Manager.
In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is
the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all
existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent
possible. When approved it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and
agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the plan and to
maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all
times.



§ 35.07  CONFLICTING ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS.



   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith.



§ 35.08  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or
delay the Emergency Management Organization in the enforcement of any rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any
rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this
chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or
display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member
of the Emergency Management Organization of the city unless authority so to
do has been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for
violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 36:  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS



Section



   36.01   Definitions



   36.02   Commencement of action



   36.03   Issuance and service of citation



   36.04   Contents of citations



   36.05   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau



   36.06   Schedule of civil fines established



   36.07   Violations



Statutory reference:



   Municipal Civil Infractions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701 et seq.



§ 36.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 et seq., as
amended.



   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL.  A police officer, code enforcement
personnel or anyone designated by the City Manager, including in appropriate
circumstances law enforcement, code enforcement or ordinance enforcement
officers of the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan upon whom the City
Manager has conferred such authority, or other personnel of the city
authorized by this code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction
citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. A park attendant
shall also be considered to be an AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL with respect to
violations of the park ordinance.



   BUREAU.  The City of Mount Pleasant Municipal Ordinance Violations
Bureau, as established by this chapter.



   CITATION or MUNICIPALCIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or
notice, in a form approved under applicable state or tribal law for use in
the applicable court of competent jurisdiction, prepared by an authorized
city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence
or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited.



   COURT, COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION or DISTRICT COURT.  Generally,
the 76th District Court of the State of Michigan, except when otherwise
required by the Zoning and Land Use Agreement, the Law Enforcement Agreement,
or the Local Regulation Agreement between the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe
of Michigan and the city, entered by the United States District Court for the
Eastern District of Michigan, Northern Division, Case No. 05-10296-BC, on
December 17, 2010, in which case COURT, COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION or
DISTRICT COURTshall mean the appropriate tribal court of the Saginaw Chippewa
Indian Tribe of Michigan.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE.  A written notice
prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the
City Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if
any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by
the city, as authorized under M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8396 and 600.8707(6).



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-24-11)



§ 36.02  COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION.



   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized city official of:



   (A)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court; or



   (B)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the
alleged violator to appear at the City Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95)



§ 36.03  ISSUANCE AND SERVICE OF CITATION.



   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized city officials as follows:



   (A)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be
within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.



   (B)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the
district court.



   (C)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in
a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall
be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by
the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by M.C.L.A. §
600.8705.



   (D)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an
authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately
above the date and signature of the official:



   “I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above
are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief.”



   (E)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.



   (F)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person
if:



      (1)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable
cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or



      (2)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who
allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for
an infraction, and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in
writing the issuance of the citation.



   (G)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an
authorized city official as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided by division (G)(2) below, an
authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon
the alleged violator.



      (2)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the
use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but
may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by
posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class
mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last
known address.



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95)



§ 36.04  CONTENTS OF CITATIONS.



   (A)   A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.



   (B)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that
he or she may do one of the following:



      (1)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.



      (2)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
“with explanation” by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in
person, or by representation.



      (3)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by doing either of the following:



         (a)   Appearing in person for an informal hearing in
court, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a
formal hearing is requested by the city.



         (b)   Appearing in court for a formal hearing, with the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



   (C)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of
the following:



      (1)   That if the alleged violator desires to admit
responsibility “with explanation” in person or by representation, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or
by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time for an appearance.



      (2)   That if the alleged violator desires to deny
responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by
mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing,
unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.



      (3)   That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a
formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city.



      (4)   That at an informal hearing, the alleged violator must
appear in court without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



      (5)   That at a formal hearing, the alleged violator must
appear in person in court with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.



   (D)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a
misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the
alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-24-11)



§ 36.05  MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau (“Bureau”) as authorized under M.C.L.A. §
600.8396 to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil
infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices
issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain
civil fines and costs as prescribed by this code or any ordinance.



   (B)   Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The
Bureau shall be located at Mount Pleasant City Hall, and shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer, subject to
the approval of the Commission, shall adopt rules and regulations for the
operation of the Bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to
administer the Bureau.



   (C)   Disposition of violations. The Bureau may dispose only of
municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and
for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a
citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a
particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation
at the Bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city
from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from
prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person
shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the
Bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of competent
jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at
the Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's
rights, privileges and protection accorded by law.



   (D)   Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The
scope of the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the
offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event
shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of
any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation.



   (E)   Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil
infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city
officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided
for citations as provided in § 36.03(F) and (G). In addition to any other
information required by this code or other ordinance, the notice of violation
shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the
Bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and
telephone number of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open,
the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the
consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the
required time.



   (F)   Appearance; payment of fines and costs.  An alleged violator
receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the
Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for
appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance
may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.



   (G)   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine
not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal
ordinance violation notice, and if an admission of responsibility is not made
and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for
the violation are not paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil infraction
citation may be filed with the court and a copy of the citation may be served
by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's
last-known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply
in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by
M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8705 and 600.8709, but shall consist of a sworn complaint
containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice
and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation.



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-24-11)



§ 36.06  SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES ESTABLISHED.



   A schedule of civil fines payable to the Bureau for admissions of
responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices
is hereby established by virtue of amendments the applicable ordinances.



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95)



§ 36.07  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Violations of ordinances for which civil fines are established
and all other violations designated as such shall be municipal civil
infractions governed by the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Unless a violation of this code or any ordinance of the city
is specifically designated in the code or ordinance as a municipal civil
infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 763, passed 8-14-95)



CHAPTER 37:  RETIRED PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEES HEALTH CARE BENEFITS



Section



General Provisions



   37.01   Purpose



   37.02   Short title



   37.03   Interpretation and law; construction



   37.04   Collective bargaining agreements and personnel policies



   37.05   Definitions



   37.06   Notice



   37.07   Reporting and disclosure



   37.08   Amendments



Health Care Plan



   37.20   Benefit groups



   37.21   Eligibility



   37.22   Commencement of benefit



   37.23   Enrollment



   37.24   Termination of benefits



   37.25   Health care benefits - general



   37.26   Health care benefits - costs



   37.27   Alternative policies or programs



   37.28   Duplicate coverage disallowed



   37.29   Medicare eligibility



   37.30   Coordination of benefits



   37.31   Plan administration - city duties



   37.32   Plan administration - insurance carrier duties



   37.33   Plan administration - Plan Administrator duties



   37.34   Plan administration - City Manager duties



   37.35   Health care benefits, claims procedure



   37.36   Funding



Declaration of Police Retiree Health Care Fund



   37.50   Irrevocable fund trust, established



   37.51   Use of fund assets



   37.52   Funding



   37.53   Board of Trustees



   37.54   Trustees' terms of office



   37.55   Officers and administration



   37.56   Board meetings



   37.57   Compensation



   37.58   Trustees' powers and responsibilities



   37.59   Fund liabilities



   37.60   Termination of the fund



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 37.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide health insurance
benefits approved by collective bargaining agreements and PACT Employee
Benefits and Personnel Policies for the welfare of the retirees of the city
who are eligible to receive a retirement benefit from the City of Mt.
Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement System.



   (B)   This chapter is created under the authority of the Public
Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999, for the
exclusive purpose of accumulating and investing funds to provide benefits
through policies issued by duly licensed commercial insurance companies,
through a fund of self-insurance, or through any other lawful means of
providing group health insurance as determined by city decisions and in
accordance with any and all applicable collective bargaining agreements
between the city and applicable collective bargaining associations and PACT
Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies, and for the benefit of the City of
Mt. Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement System retirees who are eligible to
participate in accordance with this chapter. The city intends the benefits to
be provided by the establishment and maintenance of a fund in conformance
with all applicable federal statutes and regulations, state and local law.



   (C)   The city reserves the right to enter into insurance agreements
and to modify, alter or amend such agreements from time to time, with
commercial insurance carriers, health maintenance organizations, preferred
provider organizations or any other qualified entity currently existing or
created for the purpose of providing benefits under this chapter.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may be known and cited as the City of Mt. Pleasant Police
Retiree Health Care Plan ("plan").



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.03  INTERPRETATION AND LAW; CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   This chapter is established in accordance with the Public
Employee Health Care Fund Investment Act, Public Act 149 of 1999, as may be
amended, and shall be administered consistent with applicable federal and
Michigan law. If any provisions of this chapter shall be for any reason
invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions nevertheless shall be
carried into effect.



   (B)   Neither the establishment of this chapter nor any modification
thereof nor the creation of any fund or account nor the payment of any
benefits shall be construed as giving to any person covered under this
chapter or other person any legal or equitable right against the city, its
elected or appointed officials or employees, the trustees or any individual
trustee, nor any title or interest in any assets of the city, its elected or
appointed officials or employees, or any trustee except as may otherwise be
provided in this chapter.



   (C)   Neither the city nor the trustees shall be responsible for the
validity of any insurance agreement issued in connection with this chapter or
for the failure on the part of the insurer to make payments provided by such
insurance agreement, or for the action of any person which may delay payment
or render an insurance agreement null and void or unenforceable in whole or
in part.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.04  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS AND PERSONNEL POLICIES.



   (A)   The benefit provisions of this chapter are subject to relevant
provisions of applicable collective bargaining agreements between the city
and the various collective bargaining associations of the city. The
provisions of a collective bargaining agreement relative to retiree health
care benefits are controlling in the event of a conflict between the terms of
the collective bargaining agreement and this chapter.



   (B)   The benefit provisions of this chapter are subject to relevant
provisions of PACT employee benefit policies as approved by the City
Commission for non-union members of this chapter. The provisions of the PACT
Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies relative to retiree health care
benefits are controlling in the event of a conflict between the terms of the
PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies and this chapter.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to modify or
limit in any way the rights that the parties to the collective bargaining
agreement or members covered under the PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel
Policies may have, any supplements or memoranda thereto, or any arbitrator's
award to enforce the terms of this chapter, inclusive of the collection of
any amounts due to the trust and the right of the parties to sue for same.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE PLAN .  The current benefits in effect for the bargaining unit
and PACT unit of which the retiree was a member, as provided by the policy or
the comprehensive program (exclusive of HMO, PPO and other alternative plans)
or by a substantially equivalent policy or program at the election of the
city.



   CITY .  The City of Mt. Pleasant, Michigan.



   CODE .  The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, including any
regulations or rulings promulgated thereunder. Reference to any section or
subsection of the code includes reference to any comparable or succeeding
provision of any legislation which amends or replaces such section or
subsection.



   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS .  Any written agreement,
supplemental agreement, memorandum of understanding, final arbitrator's
decision, judicial decision or decision of any public board or agency, by and
between applicable collective bargaining associations and the city and any
amendments, continuations or renewals which require the city or any other
entity to make payments into group health insurance programs for police
employees who are members of the City of Mt. Pleasant Police and Fire
Retirement System.



   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING ASSOCIATIONS .  Those associations which
participate in this plan.



   CONTRIBUTIONS .  The payment required to be made to the fund by the
city and/or employees under the terms of this chapter or under any applicable
existing collective bargaining agreements or PACT Employee Benefits and
Personnel Policies or any future collective bargaining agreements or PACT
Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies for the purpose of providing group
health insurance for retirees covered by this chapter.



   EFFECTIVE DATE .  The date as provided in the applicable collective
bargaining agreement this upon which the terms and conditions of this chapter
shall become effective.



   EMPLOYEE .  A person employed by the city.



   FUND .  The City of Mt. Pleasant Police Retiree Health Care Fund of
the City of Mt. Pleasant Police Retiree Health Care Plan as provided for in
§§ 37.50 et seq. of this chapter.



   FUND ADMINISTRATOR .  The person, persons, firm, corporation or
insurance company or companies appointed by the trustees to administer the
fund. The Fund Administrator shall be responsible for the day-to-day
operations of the fund and shall carry out the directives of the trustees.
The Fund Administrator may also serve as administrator for the retirement
plans of the city.



   HEALTH CARE BENEFITS .  Group health care benefits as currently
provided and any other future health care related benefits as may be
determined to be part of this chapter pursuant to city decisions and/or
collective bargaining agreements.



   INSURANCE AGREEMENT .  The health insurance plans and any amendments
thereto, including any substitute insurance agreement with a commercial
insurance carrier, health maintenance organization, preferred provider
organization, or any other qualified entity currently existing or created for
the purpose of providing benefits under this chapter. The term INSURANCE
AGREEMENT shall include the plural where applicable.



   INSURANCE CARRIER .  A commercial health insurance carrier, health
maintenance organization, preferred provider organization or other qualified
entity designated by the city to provide benefits under this chapter.



   INVESTMENT FIDUCIARY .  The Board of Trustees of the Police Retiree
Health Care Fund as provided in § 37.53 of this chapter.



   PARTICIPANT .  An employee who meets the following requirements:



      (1)   Who is included in the membership of the City of Mt.
Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement System, is covered by a collective
bargaining agreement with the city or PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel
Policies that provide membership in this health care plan as a bargained for
benefit and whose participation has not terminated under other applicable
provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Anyone the City Manager shall decide who is a
participant within the meaning of the provisions of this chapter provided
such decision is consistent with any applicable collective bargaining
agreements or established city policy.



   PLAN .  The City of Mt. Pleasant Police Retiree Health Care Plan as
described in this chapter and any subsequent amendments and any insurance
agreements, collective bargaining agreements or other applicable insurance
policy documents incorporated by reference into this chapter. A description
of the health benefits provided to retirees under this chapter is maintained
by the Plan Administrator.



   PLAN ADMINISTRATOR .  The person, persons, firm, corporation or
insurance company or companies appointed by the city to administer this
chapter. The Plan Administrator shall be responsible for the day to day
operations of this chapter who shall carry out the directives of the city.



   PLAN YEAR .  The period commencing on January 1 and ending on December
31 of each year.



   RETIREE .  An individual receiving a retirement benefit allowance from
the City of Mt. Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement System who retired from
employment with the city.



   RETIREMENT PLAN .  The City of Mt. Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement
System.



   TRUSTEE(S) .  The Board of Trustees of the fund or a member of the
Board of Trustees of the fund as provided for in §§ 37.50 et seq. of this
chapter.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.06  NOTICE.



   Notice given to all interested parties shall, unless otherwise
specified in this chapter, be sufficient if in writing and delivered or sent
by prepaid first class mail. Except as otherwise noted, the distribution or
delivery of any statements or documents required under this chapter shall be
sufficient if delivered in person or prepaid first class mail.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.07  REPORTING AND DISCLOSURE.



   The city and the trustees or their respective designees shall complete
and provide to participant and retirees and to the appropriate government
agencies any reports as maybe required by the code and applicable federal,
state or local law.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.08  AMENDMENTS.



   The provisions of this chapter may be amended at anytime by ordinance
adopted by the City Commission in accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



HEALTH CARE PLAN



§ 37.20  BENEFIT GROUPS.



   (A)   Composition.  The following benefit groups are designated for
the purpose of determining benefit eligibility conditions, benefit amounts
and member contribution rates.



      (1)   Benefit group:  Police.  All employees who are members
of the Mt. Pleasant Patrol Officers Association affiliated with the Police
Officers Association of Michigan.



      (2)   Benefit group:  Command.  All employees who are
members of the Mt. Pleasant Command Officers Association.



      (3)   Uniformed PACT employee.  All employees who are sworn
officers of the City of Mt. Pleasant not a part of a collective bargaining
unit who select retirement benefits from a bargaining unit for which this
benefit is provided.



      (4)   Determination.  In case of doubt, the City Manager
shall determine the benefit groups that apply to a particular member.



   (B)   Determination of benefits.  Benefit eligibility conditions
shall be those applicable to the member's benefit group at the time of that
member's termination of membership.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.21  ELIGIBILITY.



   In order to be eligible for post-retirement health care benefits during
any plan year, an individual must:



   (A)   Meet all of the following:



      (1)   Have been a participant of this chapter;



      (2)    Have been an employee on the date preceding the
effective date of the retiree's retirement from the city; and



      (3)   Have met the requirements of the member's benefit group
as follows:



         (a)   Benefit group: Police.  Retire on or after
January 1, 2002, attain age 50 with 25 or more years of service or attain age
60;



         (b)   Benefit group: Command.  Retire on or after
January 1, 2002, attain age 50 with 25 or more years of service or attain age
60;



         (c)   Uniformed PACT.  Retire on or after January 1,
2002, attain age 50 with 25 or more years of service or attain age 60; or



   (B)   Be a retiree who was a participant of this chapter receiving
duty and/or non-duty disability benefits from the City of Mt. Pleasant Police
and Fire Retirement System; or



   (C)   Be a retiree who was in receipt of benefits at the effective
date of this chapter.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.22  COMMENCEMENT OF BENEFIT.



   Subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter and/or insurance
agreement, a participant shall commence eligibility for benefits from this
chapter on the first day he or she satisfies the eligibility requirements of
§ 37.21, provided the participant has enrolled for coverage on such date.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.23  ENROLLMENT.



   (A)   The city shall give each participant timely written notice of
his or her eligibility and his or her right to enroll for coverage under this
chapter.



   (B)   A participant or retiree may enroll for coverage immediately
upon retirement or may make a one-time deferment to a date/event certain. The
participant or retiree shall make the election on a form or forms provided by
and filed with the Human Resources Department. In connection with his or her
enrollment for coverage, the participant or retiree shall furnish all
pertinent information requested by the city, Plan Administrator and/or the
insurance carrier. The Plan Administrator or the insurance carrier may rely
upon all such forms and information furnished.



   (C)   Participants or retirees must report changes impacting
eligibility as required by the Plan Administrator.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.24  TERMINATION OF BENEFITS.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 37.25, participation in this chapter
shall terminate in accordance with this chapter and/or insurance agreement or
applicable collective bargaining agreement, on the earliest of:



      (1)   Termination of this chapter;



      (2)   Non-payment of any required participant or retiree
contributions;



      (3)   Death of the individual receiving benefits under this
chapter;



      (4)   A participant's or retiree's election in writing to
cease coverage under this chapter;



      (5)   For certain benefit groups, in accordance with the
applicable collective bargaining agreement, if the retiree fails to enroll in
Medicare Part A and B.



   (B)   A retiree is ineligible to participate or re-enroll in this
chapter once participation ceases unless the retiree had been receiving
medical coverage through another employer or the retiree's spouse and
subsequently lost coverage.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.25  HEALTH CARE BENEFITS -  GENERAL.



   (A)   Beginning on the effective date, the city shall provide, as
reflected in the applicable attachment, health care benefits to each eligible
retiree and, if elected and at the retiree's cost, to his or her eligible
spouse or dependents, unless modified by an applicable collective bargaining
agreement, PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies or ordinance of the
City Commission.



   (B)   The cost for said benefits shall be funded from the retiree
Health Care Fund subject to the limitations set forth in § 37.26 and the
retiree's costs for elective coverage. The benefits provided under this
chapter are those set forth in this chapter and/or insurance agreement and
collective bargaining agreements or PACT Employee Benefits and



   (C)   The insurance agreements, collective bargaining agreements and
PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies are incorporated herein by this
reference.



   (D)   A complete description of benefits provided under this chapter
and the insurance agreement, inclusive of those set forth in the collective
bargaining agreements and PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies,
shall be maintained by the city's Human Resources Department.



   (E)   In accordance with this chapter and/or insurance agreement
with the insurance carrier, retirees and their spouses and dependents will be
entitled to the benefits in effect for the employee's applicable bargaining
unit or PACT unit ("Base Plan"). These benefits may be provided under the
same policy or program in place at the retiree's retirement or under a
substantially equivalent policy or program at the discretion of the city.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.26  HEALTH CARE BENEFITS - COSTS.



   The Retiree Health Care Fund will pay the monthly premiums for Base
Plan benefits subject to the following:



   (A)   Benefit group:  Police.  Commencing January 1, 2003, all
active employees shall contribute 2% of their gross wages to the Retiree
Health Care Fund. The employees will pay such contributions to the extent
allowable under applicable law to the Retiree Health Care Fund on a pre-tax
("employer pick-up") basis.



   (B)   Benefit group:  Command.  Commencing January 1, 2003, all
active employees shall contribute 2% of their gross wages to the Retiree
Health Care Fund. The employees will pay such contributions to the extent
allowable under applicable law to the Retiree Health Care Fund on a pre-tax
("employer pick-up") basis.



   (C)   Uniformed PACT employees.  Commencing January 1, 2003, all
active employees shall contribute 2% of their gross wages to the Retiree
Health Care Fund. The employees will pay such contributions to the extent
allowable under applicable law to the Retiree Health Care Fund on a pre-tax
("employer pick-up") basis.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.27  ALTERNATIVE POLICIES OR PROGRAMS.



   The city, in its discretion may offer alternative policies or benefit
structures to retirees. In the event that the city chooses to offer
alternative policies or benefit structures, retirees may transfer from one
policy or benefit structure to another policy or benefit structure during
open enrollment periods. However, any additional cost above the Base Plan
shall be borne by the participant or retiree or the participant's or
retiree's spouse and/or dependents.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.28  DUPLICATE COVERAGE DISALLOWED.



   (A)   If a retiree has similar health care benefits available
through another employer as are available under the terms of this chapter,
the retiree shall enroll in that employer's plan if required under the terms
of the applicable collective bargaining agreement or PACT Employee Benefits
and Personnel Policies.



   (B)   Duplicate coverage will not be provided in the event that
there are two or more participants and/or retirees who:



      (1)   Are each independently eligible for health care benefits
from the city or this chapter; and



      (2)   Are each also eligible for health care benefits from the
city or this chapter as a spouse or dependent of a participant or a retiree.



   (C)   Said parties shall be eligible to participate in only one
policy or program so that one party participates in the one policy or program
as the principal insured and the other party participates in the same policy
or program as a spouse or dependent of the participant or retiree. A
dependent shall suffer no detriment as a result of the disallowance of
duplicate coverage.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.29  MEDICARE ELIGIBILITY.



   Unless otherwise stated below, upon attaining the age of Medicare
eligibility all eligible retirees shall enroll in both Medicare A and B, and
are obligated to pay for Medicare Part B. Once a retiree is in receipt of
Medicare A and B coverage, this chapter will provide complimentary coverage
as provided pursuant to any applicable collective bargaining agreement or
PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies.  In the event a retiree is
not eligible for Medicare coverage, and provides proof of same to the Plan
Administrator, retiree shall be eligible for continued health care coverage
at the same benefit level under this chapter.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.30  COORDINATION OF BENEFITS.



   (A)   Intent.  The city intends that this chapter shall provide
each retiree with payment for health care expenses incurred by the retiree,
as provided in this chapter and/or insurance agreement. The city does not
intend that payment under this chapter shall exceed the amount of the
expenses incurred. For this reason, this chapter coordinates benefits with
other insurance policies according to industry standards and applicable laws.
If a participant becomes eligible for Medicare, plan benefits for such
participant will be adjusted to reflect Medicare as primary coverage.



   (B)   Reimbursement.  If an expense is paid under this chapter by
the Plan Administrator on behalf of a retiree and such expense subsequently
is paid from any other source, in whole or in part, the retiree shall remit
to this chapter an amount equal to the duplicated benefits. In addition, the
Plan Administrator may reimburse any other plan, person or entity that has
paid an expense on behalf of a retiree which expense was payable under this
chapter. In such event, this chapter, Plan Administrator and/or the insurance
carrier shall be relieved of all further responsibility with respect to that
expense.



   (C)    Subrogation.  In the event any payment is made by the fund
under this chapter, this chapter shall be subrogated and shall succeed to the
rights of any retiree against any other plan, person or entity for recovery
of health care expenses for which such other plan, person or entity legally
is liable. All amounts so recovered, by settlement, judgment or otherwise
shall be paid to the fund.  Retirees shall furnish such information, execute
and deliver such assignments, documents or other instruments and take
whatever steps are necessary to secure the rights of this chapter. Retirees
shall take no action to prejudice the rights and interests of this chapter
hereunder.



   (D)   Effect of exclusions.  The provisions of this section shall
not be construed to create any independent right to payment of any benefit
under this plan. Any exclusion or limitation contained in this chapter and/or
insurance agreement shall supersede any provision of this section regarding
coordination of benefits.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.31  PLAN ADMINISTRATION - CITY DUTIES.



   (A)   The city shall be responsible for complying with the code's
reporting and disclosure requirements and for the purpose of fulfilling such
other plan administrative functions as are not specifically assigned to the
Plan Administrator and/or insurance carrier. The city may employ a Plan
Administrator and/or insurance carrier who will be responsible for the
interpretation and administration of this chapter including the payment of
health care claims under this chapter.



   (B)   The city shall be responsible for the performance of its
duties as employer and plan sponsor under applicable Internal Revenue Code
sections. The city may delegate all or any part of its plan administration
responsibilities. Any such delegation shall be done in writing.



   (C)   The city may employ one or more persons to render advice with
regard to any responsibility such fiduciary has under this chapter. Any
fiduciary, agent, representative or other person performing services to or
for this chapter shall be entitled to reasonable compensation for services
rendered, unless such person is employed by the city and already receives
full pay from the city, and to reimbursement or expenses properly and
actually incurred.



   (D)   In administering this chapter, the city shall be entitled to
the extent permitted by law to rely conclusively on all tables, valuations,
certificates, opinions and reports which are furnished by or in accordance
with the instructions of accountants, counsel or other experts employed or
engaged by the city. All actions taken in a good faith reliance on advice
from such advisors are conclusive and binding upon all persons.



   (E)   The city shall furnish the Plan Administrator and/or insurance
carrier, while this chapter is in effect, any information as may be required
at intervals and in the form prescribed by the Plan Administrator and/or
insurance carrier for the enrollment of retirees for coverage under this
chapter and for the processing of terminations or other changes in coverage
of retirees and also shall furnish to the Plan Administrator and/or insurance
carrier such other information required for the administration of this
chapter.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.32  PLAN ADMINISTRATION -  INSURANCE CARRIER DUTIES.



   Each insurance carrier shall have the responsibility for interpreting
and administering their respective insurance agreement and for processing and
paying benefit claims thereunder and shall provide the city with such
information as the city may deem necessary to permit the timely filing of all
reports required by law. The insurance carrier also shall provide a
description of the benefits provided under their respective insurance
agreement directly to the retirees or to the city for distribution to
retirees.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.33  PLAN ADMINISTRATION - PLAN ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES.



   The Plan Administrator shall have the responsibility for interpreting
and administering this chapter and for processing and paying benefit claims
thereunder. The Plan Administrator shall exercise his or her  authority in a
non-discriminatory manner so that all persons similarly situated shall
receive substantially the same treatment. The Plan Administrator shall
maintain the appropriate records and accounts necessary in the administration
of this chapter and shall provide the trustees with such information
necessary to permit the timely filing of all reports required by applicable
laws or regulations governing the fund.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.34  PLAN ADMINISTRATION - CITY MANAGER'S DUTIES.



   The City Manager shall be vested with the authority to render decisions
regarding participation in this chapter. Such authority shall be specifically
limited by:



   (A)   The eligibility requirements of § 37.21 or as otherwise
provided for in this chapter; and



   (B)   The city's ability to obtain coverage under this chapter
and/or from the applicable insurance carrier.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.35  HEALTH CARE BENEFITS, CLAIMS PROCEDURES.



   A claim for benefits under this chapter must be submitted in writing to
the Plan Administrator and/or insurance carrier in accordance with procedures
established by the Plan Administrator or this chapter and/or insurance
carrier.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.36  FUNDING.



   For the purpose of creating and maintaining this chapter for the
payment of benefits payable as provided in this subchapter, the city shall
appropriate an amount sufficient to maintain the fund subject to the
provisions of §§ 37.50 et seq. of this chapter or the city may elect to
fund the retiree health care benefits on a pay-as-you-go basis.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



DECLARATION OF POLICE RETIREE HEALTH CARE FUND



§ 37.50  IRREVOCABLE FUND TRUST, ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The fund established in this chapter isestablished in
accordance with Public Act 149 of 1999, and shall be irrevocable and shall
conform to all applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code, the
collective bargaining agreements, PACT Employee Benefit and Personnel
Policies, the statement of purpose in § 37.01 of this chapter and all
statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, arbitrators' awards and judicial
decisions interpreting the foregoing provisions.



   (B)   The fund shall consist of city contributions, employee
contributions, all investments made or held under the fund and all income
therefrom, both received and accrued, and any other property which may be
received or held by reason of this fund.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.51  USE OF FUND ASSETS.



   (A)   No part of the net earnings of the fund may inure to the
benefit of any participant or retiree other than by benefit payment; or for
services provided to the trustees in the administration of the fund. The fund
assets shall not be used for or diverted to purposes other than to provide
the benefits contemplated under this chapter for the exclusive benefit of
retirees except any administrative expenses for which the fund is liable. A
portion of net earnings may be used for payment of reasonable and necessary
professional services, costs and expenses related to assisting the trustees
and Fund Administrator in the operation of the fund.



   (B)   All income, profits, recoveries, contributions, forfeitures
and any and all monies, securities and properties of any kind at any time
received or held by the trustees hereunder shall become part of the fund when
received and shall be held for the use and purposes hereof.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.52  FUNDING.



   (A)   For the purpose of creating and maintaining a fund for the
payment of health care benefits payable as provided in this chapter, the city
intends to pay to the fund an amount consistent with the actuarial valuations
and calculations made by the actuary forthe fund to result in a pre-funded
plan. The city reserves the right to fund these health care benefits on a
"pay-as-you-go" basis. Such contributions shall also be made in accordance
with any:



      (1)   Collective bargaining agreements between the collective
bargaining associations and the city;



      (2)   PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies;



      (3)   This fund; and



      (4)   Such other regulations of the Board of Trustees as are
not inconsistent with the authority stated in this chapter.



   (B)   Benefit Groups, Police, Command and PACT, commencing January
1, 2003, all active employees shall contribute 2% of their gross wages on a
pre-tax basis ("employer pick-up") to the fund.



   (C)   Subject to the tax provisions of the City Charter and state
law, the city may, to the extent not set forth in the fund, use their
discretion to decide the manner and means of payments, the procedures to be
followed in making the payments and the forms required to accompany the
payments to the trustees.



   (D)   Time is of the essence in making and processing all payments
to the fund. The parties recognize that the regular and timely payments of
contributions are essential to the operation of the fund and to the providing
of benefits under various insurance programs.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.53  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall consist of the same five
individual trustees who serve as members of the Board of Trustees of the City
of Mt. Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement System, as follows:



      (1)   The Treasurer of the city;



      (2)   The same two elected uniformed employee representatives
that serve on the Board of Trustees of the City of Mt. Pleasant Police and
Fire Retirement System;



      (3)   The same two appointed representatives that serve on the
Board of Trustees of the City of Mt. Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement
System.



   (B)   The general administration, management and responsibility for
the proper operation of the fund and for making effective and construing the
provisions of the fund shall be vested in the Board of Trustees established
by this section, consistent with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations. A trustee or other fiduciary under the fund shall discharge his
or her duties with respect to the fund solely in the interest of the
participants for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants
and paying reasonable expenses of administering the fund. A trustee shall
discharge his or her duties with the care, skill and caution under the
circumstances then prevailing which a prudent person, acting in a like
capacity and familiar with those matters, would use in the conduct of an
activity of like character and purpose.



   (C)   The election of the employee trustees provided in (A)(2) of
this section shall be held under such rules and regulations as the collective
bargaining units shall adopt.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.54  TRUSTEES' TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The regular terms of office of the trustees shall coincide
with and be identical to the trustees' terms of office on the Board of
Trustees of the City of Mt. Pleasant Police and Fire Retirement System.



   (B)   Each trustee shall serve until the expiration of his or her
term of office or until his or her death, incapacity, resignation or removal.



   (C)   A vacancy or vacancies in the office of the trustees shall not
impair the powers of the remaining trustees to administer the affairs of the
fund, provided there are sufficient trustees to constitute a quorum.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.55  OFFICERS AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   At its meeting in January of each year, the trustees shall
elect a president and a secretary from the group of the then existing
trustees and the president and secretary shall serve a term of one year or
until a new president and secretary are elected.



   (B)   Consistent with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations, the trustees shall have the power to promulgate rules and
regulations for the day-to-day management of the fund, to invest monies held
by the fund, to determine all questions regarding the interpretation of the
fund, and to handle such other fund related subjects as shall be deemed
necessary and proper by the trustees. If any rule or regulation of the fund
or part thereof is found to be in conflict with any collective bargaining
agreement, PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies, law, statute,
judicial decision, arbitration decision or any other competent body or
tribunal, such rule or regulation or part thereof shall be deemed voided and
all other rules and regulations of the fund shall remain in full force and
effect.



   (C)   Whenever the signature of a trustee is required on any
document, the signature of the president and secretary shall be required.



   (D)   In the event of any suit brought against the trustees arising
out of the acts within the scope, powers and duties of the trustees or in the
event of any lawsuit brought by the trustees as authorized by this chapter,
the cost of defense or prosecution of such lawsuit shall be charged to the
fund and shall be paid directly from the fund, provided such costs are not
incurred by reason of bad faith, gross negligence or breach of a fiduciary
obligation to the fund or to the beneficiaries thereof.



   (E)   The trustees may employ such clerical personnel or
administrative personnel to perform whatever administrative activities are
required in the proper performance of the fund. In addition thereto, the
trustees may, if they desire, contract with an administrator to perform such
clerical and administrative duties as they may in their sole discretion
determine is reasonably and prudently necessary to carry out the fund's
activities and purposes. Under no circumstances shall said administrator have
control or authority with respect to the management of the fund or its
assets. The said administrator shall not be clothed with any type of
authority or power which will constitute the administrator as a fiduciary.
Said administrator will not have the power or authority to act as an
investment counselor or manager and will not be authorized to furnish
investment advice.



   (F)   The Board may utilize city staff for such functions as
personnel administration, accounting, banking and purchasing. In such
utilization, the Board will comply with all established city control
procedures and policies related to these services. The Board will annually
reimburse the city for actual costs of these services as determined by a
method jointly agreed upon by the Board and the city.



   (G)   City employees, upon the request of the Board, may also be
assigned to the fund for the proper operation of the fund. Said employees
shall be subject to the supervision of the Board. The Board shall have the
authority to establish job descriptions and promulgate rules and regulations
appropriate for the fund in addition to those adopted by City Commission. The
supervision of city employees by the Board shall not serve to impair the
authority and responsibility of the City Administrator under the City Charter
for personnel services. The Board will annually reimburse the city for the
actual costs of these employees as determined by a method jointly agreed upon
by the Board and the city.



   (H)   The trustees may employ an investment manager to manage the
assets of the fund.  Such investment manager must be registered under the
Investment Advisor's Act of 1940, as amended, and must meet any applicable
state and federal requirements to act as an investment manager. The trustees
may, if they deem proper in their discretion or if the circumstances require
it, appoint such investment manager, banks or insurance companies as
fiduciaries and enter into an agreement with such institutions, naming it a
fiduciary and conveying to such fiduciary all or a portion of the assets of
the fund, so that said fiduciary may handle, manage and hold those assets
conveyed to it. All assets conveyed to said fiduciary shall be subject to the
provision of the agreement or agreements between the trustees and the
fiduciary.



   (I)   The trustees may employ legal counsel with whom they may seek
advice, consult with, require attendance at meetings and to otherwise
represent the trustees in matters relating to this chapter and fund.



   (J)   The trustees may authorize the purchase of insurance for the
fund and for the trustees to cover liability or losses occurring for any
reason, including but not limited to an act or omission (errors or omissions)
of a fiduciary, including the trustees; provided however, that such insurance
policy permits recourse by the insured against the fiduciary, including the
trustee or trustees involved, in case of breach of fiduciary obligation by
the fiduciary.



   (K)   The trustees shall appoint an actuary who shall advise the
trustees on the actuarial operation of this chapter and fund. The trustees
shall, from time to time, adopt such mortality and other tables of experience
along with a rate or rates of regular interest as are necessary for the
operation of the fund on an actuarial basis.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.56  BOARD MEETINGS.



   (A)   The trustees shall meet at least quarterly. The trustees shall
determine the time for the regular meetings of the trustees and the place or
places where such meetings shall be held. The secretary of the trustees or
his or her designee shall be responsible for giving notice of the time and
place of such meetings to the other trustees.



   (B)   Notice and conduct of all meetings of the trustees, both
regular and special, shall be given in accordance with applicable law
including the Michigan Open Meetings Act.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall
keep a record of its proceedings.  Three trustees shall constitute a quorum
at any meeting of the Board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on
each question before the Board and at least three concurring votes shall be
necessary for a decision of the Board.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.57  COMPENSATION.



   All trustees shall serve without compensation as members of the Board,
except that elected employee trustees shall suffer no loss in compensation on
account of their services as trustees. Trustees may also be reimbursed by the
fund for reasonable and necessary costs and expenses incurred by the trustees
in the performance of their duties as trustees and as related to the
operation of this chapter.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.58  TRUSTEES' POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The trustees shall hold all powers that are necessary to carry
out the purposes of the fund and that are generally available to trustees
under the laws of the State of Michigan, except as limited by the fund and by
federal law and regulations. The trustees shall take no action nor make any
determination inconsistent with any qualification or ruling of the Internal
Revenue Service, an arbitrator or the courts with respect to the fund. In the
case of amendments to the Internal Revenue Code or changes to regulations of
the Internal Revenue Service or the Labor Department, the trustees are
empowered to take all necessary action authorized by this chapter, federal
and state law and regulations.



   (B)   In carrying out the purposes of the fund, the trustees shall
have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   The trustees shall, in order to effectuate the purposes
of the fund, be bound by the terms of this chapter and any applicable
collective bargaining agreements between the city and the collective
bargaining associations and shall comply with all applicable laws.



      (2)   The trustees shall establish a uniform system for the
timely transmission of required reports and contributions from the city on
behalf of the participants to the fund.



      (3)   The trustees, in accordance with the requirements of
law, may direct an impartial firm of independent certified public accountants
to act as agent of the trustees, to examine the payroll records and reports
as may be necessary to determine the monies due on behalf of a participant
covered by this fund and to make a written report to the trustees, with an
identical copy to the city.



      (4)   The trustees shall maintain or cause to be maintained
proper books of accounts and records of and for the administration of the
fund, including the minutes of all meetings, make them available for
inspection at the permanent office of the fund during reasonable business
hours by the city, by any collective bargaining association or any
participant covered by this chapter and fund.



      (5)   The financial records of the fund  shall be subject to
the annual audit of the city. The trustees shall fully comply with all
applicable statutory and municipal budgetary and accounting procedures and
shall provide access to and/or documentation of all assets and liabilities of
the fund. The trustees shall also provide a report of the operations of the
fund for the preceding year together with such other data as may be required
by law and/or as part of the city's annual financial report to the State
Treasurer.



      (6)   The trustees shall be authorized, pursuant to Public Act
149 of 1999, as amended, to invest the assets of the fund in accordance with
the provisions of Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.59  FUND LIABILITIES.



   (A)   The city shall not be liable for payment to the fund of any
amount other than those required of it by the fund and/or any applicable
collective bargaining agreement or PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel
Policies. Neither the city nor any participant or trustee shall be liable for
any debts, liabilities or obligations of the fund except as provided for in
this chapter. Neither the city nor any participant shall have any right to
the return of any money properly paid into the fund, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, or to money improperly paid which has
already been invested or distributed. Any contribution improperly paid into
the fund by the city or on behalf of a participant shall be returned by the
trustees upon the request of the city, the participant or upon discovery by
the trustees that such monies have been improperly paid into the fund, unless
those monies have already been invested or distributed.



   (B)   No part of the fund or any benefits payable by the trustees
shall be subject to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge or
encumbrance by any person. No participant shall be entitled to receive any
part of the contributions made by the city or payments required to be made by
the fund, in lieu of such benefits provided under this chapter as determined
by the trustees in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



§ 37.60  TERMINATION OF THE FUND.



   (A)   Subject to the limitations of this chapter, the parties hereby
contemplate that new employment benefit decisions may be made by the city
and/or new collective bargaining agreements or PACT Employee Benefits and
Personnel Policies may be entered into which continue or modify the
provisions of the fund. The fund shall continue during such period or time as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of any plan or collective
bargaining agreement and PACT Employee Benefits and Personnel Policies
requiring payment to the fund and the fact that such collective bargaining
agreements or employment benefit decisions are not extended shall not by
itself terminate the fund. The fund shall continue for a period of time
sufficient to wind up the affairs of said fund.



   (B)   Provided there are no longer any retirees eligible for
benefits from the fund, the fund may be terminated at any time by the
trustees so long as the termination is not inconsistent with any then
existing resolution or collective bargaining agreement. It shall not be
necessary for the city or the collective bargaining associations to execute
such an agreement for the fund to terminate.



   (C)   If the fund shall terminate, the trustees shall forthwith
notify any insurance carrier or carriers then providing insurance to retirees
in the fund.



   (D)   In the event of the termination of the fund, the remaining
funds available after providing for all the outstanding obligations shall be
used in a manner as will in the opinion of the trustees best effectuate the
purposes of the fund, including, but not limited to the purchase of insurance
benefits.



(Ord. 886, passed 11-11-02)



CHAPTER 38: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES OR CONDITIONS



Section



   38.01   Recovery of costs



   38.02   Hazardous substances defined



   38.03   Parties responsible to reimburse city for costs



   38.04   Reimbursable costs of city



   38.05   Appeal of reimbursable costs by responsible party



   38.06   Rights of responsible party to seek contribution and/or
indemnity from another party



§ 38.01  RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (A)   The city shall be entitled to recover the cost/expenditures
incurred by the city in responding to, recovering from, safeguarding,
isolating, and/or cleaning up of hazardous substances and dangerous or
hazardous conditions.



   (B)   The city shall be entitled to recovery of the
costs/expenditures incurred by the city in responding to, recovering from,
safeguarding, isolating, and/or cleaning up technological/man-made
emergencies and/or disasters, including any condition regulated by Chapter 93.



(Ord. 892, passed 7-28-03)



§ 38.02  HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES DEFINED.



   Hazardous substances shall include all substances as defined in
M.C.L.A. §324.20101(t).



(Ord. 892, passed 7-28-03)



§ 38.03  PARTIES RESPONSIBLE TO REIMBURSE CITY FOR COSTS.



   (A)   Any person, company, organization or entity that owns or
controls a hazardous substance within the city which is released shall
reimburse the city the costs incurred by the city in responding to,
recovering from, safeguarding, isolating, and/or cleaning up the hazardous
substance.



   (B)   Any person, company, organization or entity that causes the
release of any hazardous substance or the creation of a situation resulting
in the release or possible release of a hazardous substance within the city
shall reimburse the city the cost incurred by the city in responding to,
recovering from, safeguarding, isolating, and/or cleaning up the hazardous
substance.



   (C)   Any person, company, organization or entity that causes a
technological/man-made emergency or disaster within the city shall reimburse
the city of the costs incurred by the city in responding to, recovering from
or cleaning up said technological/man-made emergency and/or disaster.



   (D)   Any person, company, organization or entity that causes or
contributes to a dangerous or hazardous condition within the city shall
reimburse the city the costs incurred by the city in responding to,
recovering from, safeguarding, isolating, and/or cleaning up said dangerous
or hazardous condition.



(Ord. 892, passed 7-28-03)



§ 38.04  REIMBURSABLE COSTS OF CITY.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall determine the costs/expenditures of
the city in responding to, recovering from, safeguarding, isolating, and/or
cleaning up a hazardous substance, dangerous or hazardous condition, or a
technological/man-made emergency or disaster. The total costs/expenditures
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Salaries of all employees, including overtime and
benefits.



      (2)   All long distance, cellular and fax telephone calls
within any period.



      (3)   Replacement/repair of all equipment owned or leased by
the city which is deemed unserviceable due to exposure to the hazardous
substance, or dangerous or hazardous condition.



      (4)   Expenses of vehicle operation/use of emergency command
trailer.



      (5)   On scene rehab of emergency personnel including, but not
limited to, beverage and food for long-term events.



      (6)   All other related expenses caused by the event.



   (B)   Once the costs/expenditures of the city have been determined
by the Finance Director, the Public Safety Director shall submit the bill to
the party/parties named by the Public Safety Director as being responsible
pursuant to § 38.03, above.



(Ord. 892, passed 7-28-03)



§ 38.05  APPEAL OF REIMBURSABLE COSTS BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY.



   (A)   The responsible individual/company may request a detailed
explanation of costs/expenditures. If dissatisfied, the responsible party may
request to review the costs/expenditures with the city or its designated
representative.



   (B)   If after review the responsible party is still dissatisfied,
the party may make a final appeal directly to the City Manager. The decision
of the City Manager shall be final.



(Ord. 892, passed 7-28-03)



§ 38.06  RIGHTS OF RESPONSIBLE PARTY TO SEEK CONTRIBUTION AND/OR INDEMNITY
FROM ANOTHER PARTY.



   Neither this chapter nor the determination by the Public Safety
Director or the City Manager shall increase or diminish the right of a party
(who has reimbursed the city pursuant to this chapter) to seek contribution
and/or indemnity from another party.



(Ord. 892, passed 7-28-03)



CHAPTER 39:  HUMAN RIGHTS



Section



   39.01   Purpose



   39.02   Definitions



   39.03   Employment practices



   39.04   Housing practices



   39.05   Public accommodations



   39.06   General prohibited practices



   39.07   Exceptions



   39.08   Investigation and enforcement procedure



   39.09   Violators operating under license issued by the city



   39.10   Severability



 



   39.98   Private cause of action for damages or injunctive relief



   39.99   Penalty



§ 39.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city intends that no individual be denied the equal
protection of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his
or her civil rights or be discriminated against because of his or her race,
religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, marital status, physical
or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation or gender identity.



   (B)   The prohibitions against discrimination in this chapter are
intended to supplement federal and state civil rights law prohibiting
discrimination in the areas of employment, housing and public accommodations.
However, this chapter shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent
with jurisprudence regarding the freedom of speech and exercise of religion
under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to require or shall be
construed to require preferential treatment of any individual or group
identified in division (A).



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



§ 39.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGE. Chronological age.



   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer, code enforcement personnel
or any other personnel of the city designated and authorized by the City
Manager, this code or any ordinance to investigate or issue municipal civil
infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.



   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City, or his or her designee.



   COMPLAINANT. An individual or other person who files a complaint
alleging a violation of this chapter.



   DISCRIMINATE, DISCRIMINATION. To make a decision, offer to make a
decision or refrain from making a decision based in whole or in part on the
race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, marital status,
physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation or gender
identity of an individual.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A public or private institution, or a separate
school or department thereof, including an academy, college, elementary or
secondary school, extension course, kindergarten, nursery, local school
system, or a business, nursing, professional, secretarial, technical, or
vocational school. For the purposes of this chapter, EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
includes an agent of the institution.



   EMPLOYEE. An individual who is hired for a wage, salary, fee, payment
or other remuneration to perform work for an employer.



   EMPLOYER. A person who has one or more employees, and includes an agent
of that person.



   EMPLOYMENT AGENCY. A person regularly undertaking, with or without
compensation, to procure, refer, recruit, or place an individual in an
employment relationship with an employer.



   FAMILY STATUS. One or more individuals related by blood within three
degrees of consanguinity, marriage, adoption, in a foster care relationship
or other legal custody relationship. For the purposes of this definition,
FAMILY STATUS shall include an individual who is pregnant.



   GENDER. The actual biological state of being male or female as of
birth, or subsequent alteration through surgical procedure, and without
regard to any outward physical display or expression of gender identity.



   GENDER IDENTITY. An individual’s appearance, expression, identity or
behavior as being either male or female, whether or not that appearance,
expression, identity or behavior is different from that which is
traditionally associated with the individual’s designated gender at birth.



   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Any improved or unimproved real property or part
thereof, dwelling unit or facility used or intended, arranged, or designed to
be used or occupied as a home, domicile, or residence of one or more
individuals.



   INDIVIDUAL. A single human being.



   LABOR ORGANIZATION. An organization of any kind, an agency or employee
representation committee, group, association, or plan in which employees
participate in or are members of, which exists for the purpose, in whole or
in part, of dealing with employers concerning collective bargaining,
grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours, or other terms or
conditions of employment. For purposes of this definition, a LABOR
ORGANIZATION need not be subordinate to or affiliated with a national or
international labor organization.



   MARITAL STATUS. The state of being married, unmarried, divorced or
widowed.



   PERSON. An individual, agent, association, corporation, labor
organization, legal representative, partnership, receiver, trust or any other
legal or commercial entity.



   PHYSICAL OR MENTAL DISABILITY. A determinate physical or mental
characteristic of an individual, which may result from disease, injury,
congenital condition of birth, or functional disorder, if the characteristic
substantially limits a major life activity of that individual and is
unrelated to the individual’s ability to perform the duties of a particular
job or position, is unrelated to the individual’s ability to utilize and
benefit from a place of public accommodation, or is unrelated to the
individual’s ability to acquire, rent, or maintain property. For the
purposes of this definition, PHYSICAL OR MENTAL DISABILITY does not include
any condition caused by the current illegal use of a controlled substance or
the use of intoxicating liquors by an individual.



   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, educational, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, health or transportation facility, organization or
institution of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered,
sold, or otherwise made available to the public.



   PRIVATE CLUB. An establishment that is not open to the public. A
PRIVATE CLUB is one whose members’ association with each other and the club
is sufficiently intimate, small and exclusive that it is not open to the
public.



   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION OR INSTITUTION. A religious corporation,
association, educational institution or society, which is, in whole or
substantial part, owned, supported, controlled or managed by a particular
religion whose purpose or character is directed toward the propagation of
that particular religion and that has the inculcation of religious values or
the provision of charity as its purpose; primarily employs persons who share
its religious tenets; and primarily serves persons who share its religious
tenets or, on a charitable basis, the broader community. RELIGIOUS
ORGANIZATION OR INSTITUTION includes, for illustration and not limitation:
churches, mosques, synagogues and other houses of worship; any subsidiary
organizations; educational institutions affiliated with, controlled, or
managed by those houses of worship or with articles of incorporation, bylaws
and other documents stating an intention to inculcate its religious tenets in
students; and, faith-based organizations that, due to a sense of duty based
on particular religious tenets, provide charitable services to the public.



   RESPONDENT. A person against whom a complaint is filed under this
chapter.



   SEX. Includes, but is not limited to pregnancy, childbirth, or a
medical condition related to pregnancy or childbirth. Discrimination based on
sex includes sexual harassment. SEXUAL HARASSMENT means unwelcome sexual
advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or
communication of a sexual nature under the following conditions:



      (1)   Submission to the conduct or communication is made a
term or condition, either explicitly or implicitly, to obtain employment,
housing, or public accommodations.



      (2)   Submission to or rejection of the conduct or
communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the
individual’s employment, housing, or public accommodations.



      (3)   The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect
of substantially interfering with an individual’s employment, public
accommodations or public services, or housing, or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive employment, housing, or public accommodations.



   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. Male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality or
bisexuality, whether by orientation or practice. SEXUAL ORIENTATION does not
include any sexual activity or attempted activity otherwise prohibited by law.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



§ 39.03  EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.



   Except as otherwise provided in § 39.07:



   (A)   An employer shall not discriminate in the employment,
compensation, work classifications, conditions or terms, promotion or
demotion, or termination of employment of any individual.



   (B)   A labor organization shall not exclude or expel from
membership a member or applicant for membership, or otherwise discriminate in
a manner prohibited by this chapter when dealing with employers concerning
collective bargaining, member grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of
pay, hours or other terms or conditions of employment.



   (C)   An employment agency shall not discriminate in the
procurement, referral, recruitment, or placement of an individual in an
employment relationship with an employer.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)  Penalty, see § 39.99



§ 39.04  HOUSING PRACTICES.



   Except as otherwise provided in § 39.07:



   (A)   A person shall not discriminate in leasing, selling, or
otherwise making available any housing accommodation.



   (B)   A person shall not discriminate in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or
services in connection with any housing accommodation.



   (C)   A person shall not discriminate in providing financing for the
purchase, repair, or remodeling of any housing accommodations.



   (D)   A person shall not discriminate in making referrals, listings
or otherwise providing information regarding housing accommodations.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)  Penalty, see § 39.99



§ 39.05  PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.



   Except as otherwise provided in § 39.07, a person shall not
discriminate in making available full and equal access to all goods,
services, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public
accommodation.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)  Penalty, see § 39.99



§ 39.06  GENERAL PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   Except as otherwise provided in § 39.07:



   (A)   A person shall not adopt, enforce, or employ any policy or
requirement, publish, post, circulate or otherwise broadcast any
advertisement, sign, solicitation or notice which discriminates or suggests
discrimination in providing employment, housing or public accommodations.



   (B)   A person shall not coerce, threaten or retaliate against
another for making a complaint or assisting in any investigation regarding a
violation or alleged violation of this chapter. A person shall not require,
request, conspire with, coerce or otherwise assist a person to retaliate
against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation.



   (C)   A person shall not conspire with, assist, coerce, or request
another to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this chapter.



   (D)   A person shall not adopt, enforce, or employ any policy,
practice or requirement which, while facially neutral, has the effect of
discriminating in a manner prohibited by this chapter, except when there is a
bona fide business necessity for such a policy, practice or requirement. For
the purposes of this chapter, BONA FIDE BUSINESS NECESSITY means that the
policy, practice or requirement is reasonably necessary to the normal
operation of the person’s business. A bona fide business necessity does not
arise due to a mere inconvenience or because of suspected or actual objection
by neighbors, customers, or other persons.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)  Penalty, see § 39.99



§ 39.07  EXCEPTIONS.



   Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding:



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any religious
organization or institution with respect to its employment of individuals.



   (B)   A religious organization or institution may restrict the
occupancy of any of its housing facilities or place of public accommodations
operated as a part of its religious activities to persons of its denomination
or those who conform to the moral tenets of that religious organization or
institution. This exception shall apply to a religious organization or
institution that allows persons other than its members to use its facilities
if its facilities remain exempt from Michigan property taxation pursuant to
section 7s of 1893 PA 206, as amended, M.C.L.A. § 211.7s.



   (C)   The owner of a housing facility or accommodation devoted
entirely to the housing of individuals of one gender may restrict the
occupancy of such a facility or accommodation on the basis of gender.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the rental of a
housing accommodation in a building that contains housing accommodations for
not more than two families living independently of each other if the owner or
a member of the owner’s immediate family resides in one of the housing
accommodations, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single family
dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor’s immediate
family resides in the dwelling. This exception shall extend to
advertisements, postings, notices or other solicitations for such a rental
arrangement.



   (E)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any arrangement
for shared ownership, lease or residency of a dwelling unit.



   (F)   An educational institution may limit the use of its facilities
to those affiliated with such institution.



   (G)   A governmental institution may restrict any of its facilities
or restrict employment opportunities based on duly-adopted institutional
policies that conform to state and federal laws and regulations.



   (H)   A person may discriminate based on an individual’s age when
such discrimination is required by other local, state or federal laws.



   (I)   A person may provide discounts on products or services to
students, or on the basis of age.



   (J)   A person may refuse to enter into a contractual relationship
with an unemancipated minor.



   (K)   A person may restrict the use of restrooms, lavatories, locker
room facilities or changing rooms on the basis of gender. Restrictions for
the use of restrooms, lavatories, locker room facilities or changing rooms as
provided in this section shall not be considered a violation of this
chapter’s prohibitions on discrimination based on gender identity.



   (L)   A person may restrict participation in an instructional
program, athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age or gender.



   (M)   A person may restrict membership in a private club that is not
open to the public.



   (N)   An employer may restrict employment opportunities to members
of one’s family.



   (O)   An employer offering health or pension plans may provide for
marital or family status limitations in such plans provided those limitations
conform to state and federal laws, rules and regulations. Further, nothing in
this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to either require, nor
prohibit a private employer from offering employment benefits to the same-sex
partner of an employee.



   (P)   This chapter shall not prohibit the city from allowing use of
its facilities or services by persons that may be affiliated with, or
otherwise supported by a religious organization or institution, which may
espouse policies or practices inconsistent with the general intent of this
chapter. Further, this chapter shall not prohibit the city from allowing use
of its facilities or services by persons not generally affiliated with or
supported by a particular religious organization or institution, but who may
espouse policies or practices inconsistent with the general intent of this
chapter.



   (Q)   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit a city
employee from exercising his or her First Amendment rights to donate to a
charitable organization of his or her choosing through the use of the
city’s automatic payroll deduction program. This chapter shall not be
construed to limit the availability of the city’s automatic payroll
deduction program only to charitable organizations that support or conform to
the general intent and purposes of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided
by law, the city retains the discretion to determine whether or not to
participate in or allow any payroll deduction.



   (R)   This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed to
require an educational institution to, and an educational institution shall
not use this chapter as a justification to, suspend, expel or otherwise
discipline a student enrolled in a medical, pharmaceutical, nursing,
counseling, social work, or psychology program because the student refuses to
counsel or serve a client or patient in a manner that conflicts with a
sincerely held religious belief of the student. However, this provision is
not intended to alter or affect any professional ethics or academic standards
or codes of conduct.



   (S)   This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed to
require an employer to, and an employer shall not use this chapter as a
justification to, take any employment, promotion, compensation, benefits,
termination or extension of employment action against, or alter the
employment privileges of a professional employee, because that professional
employee refuses to provide medical, social work, psychological or other
professional counseling services when that counseling would reasonably
conflict with that employee’s sincerely held religious beliefs. However,
this provision is not intended to alter or affect any professional ethics
standards or codes of conduct.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



§ 39.08  INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person claiming to be discriminated against in a manner
prohibited by this chapter, and not otherwise prohibited by state or federal
law, may, within 180 days of the alleged violation, file a signed, written
complaint with the City Manager, specifying, in detail, the names, dates,
known witnesses and other pertinent facts relevant to the alleged violation.
For any complaint alleging a violation of state or federal law, the City
Manager shall refer the complainant to the appropriate state or federal
agency responsible for investigation and enforcement of such alleged
violations.



   (B)   After receiving a complaint, the City Manager shall review the
complaint and may, in his or her reasonable discretion, do any of the
following:



      (1)   Undertake, or refer to city staff or the City Attorney
to undertake an investigation of the alleged violation.



      (2)   Refer the matter to an authorized city official or the
City Attorney to issue a municipal civil infraction citation and prosecute
the violation as a municipal civil infraction.



      (3)   Refer the matter to the Isabella County Trial Court
Alternative Program for Dispute Resolution, or other organization for
conciliation or facilitative mediation services. A complainant or respondent
failing to appear for a scheduled conciliation or mediation shall pay any
costs resulting from such failure to appear. If a conciliation or mediation
agreement is entered into under this section, the parties shall be bound to
its terms. A breach of such an agreement by the respondent shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.



      (4)   Notify the complainant that no city action will be taken
related to the complaint. Such a determination shall not be evidence of
non-violation should the complainant choose to initiate a private civil
action against the alleged violator as provided in this section.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit a
person’s right to initiate a private civil action for an alleged violation
as provided in § 39.09 of this chapter.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



§ 39.09  VIOLATORS OPERATING UNDER LICENSE ISSUED BY CITY.



   The City Manager may suspend the license of any person operating under
a license issued by the city, or any agency thereof, found to be in violation
of this chapter and provide opportunity for a hearing conducted in accordance
with the provisions of the City Code under which that person is licensed to
determine whether such license should be revoked. The provisions of this
section are not applicable to violations which are remedied through either
conciliation or mediation services. However, a violation of a conciliation or
mediation agreement shall be grounds for the revocation of a license as
provided under this section.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



§ 39.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



§ 39.98  PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION FOR DAMAGES OR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   A person alleging a violation of this chapter may bring a civil action
within 180 days of the alleged violation, or 180 days after the end of an
actions taken by the city under § 39.08, whichever is later, for appropriate
injunctive relief or damages, or both, in a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



§ 39.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If a violation of this chapter is prosecuted as a municipal
civil infraction under the §§ 36.01 et seq., fines of up to $2,500 may be
assessed. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, a court
shall have equitable jurisdiction to enforce any judgment, writ, or order
necessary to enforce any provision of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, abatement of the violating condition or the granting of
injunctive relief.



   (B)   A court rendering judgment in a private civil action brought
pursuant to § 39.09 of this chapter may order any remedy authorized by
Article 8 the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act, 1976 PA 453, as amended,
M.C.L.A. §§ 37.2101 et seq.



   (C)   Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate and new violation.



(Ord. 973, passed 7-9-12)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



   50.   SOLID WASTES



   51.   SEWERS



      APPENDIX:  TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS



   52.   WATER



   53.   RESERVED



   54.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTES



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Accumulation of solid waste



   50.03   Unauthorized dumping and littering



   50.04   Prohibited wastes



   50.05   Anti-scavenging provisions



   50.06   Refuse pre-collection requirements



   50.07   City refuse bag and tag specifications



   50.08   City refuse cart specifications



   50.09   Commercial refuse container specifications



   50.10   Authority, costs, notice to remove solid waste



   50.11   Source separation of recyclable materials



   50.12   Material collection licenses



   50.13   Rules and regulations



   50.14   Enforcement



   50.15   Participation in recycling collection service



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Utilities, see Charter Art. XII



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  A structure used in whole or in part for human habitation,
manufacturing, sales, and other purposes.



   CITY DESIGNATED DISPOSAL FACILITY.  A facility which the city has
identified from time to time as an approved location for the disposal of
leaves, yard waste, and/or recyclable materials.



   CITY MANAGER.  The Manager of the City of Mount Pleasant.



   CITY REFUSE BAG.  A bag sold by the city as a suitable container for
the purposes of residential refuse collection.



   CITY REFUSE CART.  A city-specified cart provided by the city's
designated refuse collector as a container for rooming house refuse.



   CITY REFUSE TAG.  A tag sold by the city which may be attached to an
acceptable refuse container for the purposes of residential refuse collection.



   COMMERCIAL REFUSE.  Solid waste collected in commercial refuse
collection.



   COMMERCIAL REFUSE COLLECTION.  Refuse pickup from all commercial,
business, institutional and multi-unit residential establishments which
regularly generate in excess of one cubic yard of solid waste per week.



   COMMINGLED MATERIAL.  A mixture of types of recyclable material
separated from other solid waste but requiring further processing after
collection.



   COMMISSION.  The Mount Pleasant City Commission.



   COMPOST.  An accumulation of lawn debris, yard waste, coffee grounds,
tea leaves, raw vegetables or fruit scraps, in a form suitable for composting.



   CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION. Representative group of property owners who
have legal authority to manage the assets of a condominium development.



   CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT.  Those legal real estate ownership
arrangements as defined by Michigan statute the Condominium Act 59 of 1978 as
amended M.C.L.A. § 559.101.



   CONTAINERS OR RECEPTACLES - RESIDENTIAL.  Plastic bags or can liners
closed by drawstrings or twist ties, and containers constructed of a
permanent material such as steel, aluminum, or plastic with tight-fitting
covers, which, if lifted manually shall have a capacity of no less than five
or no more than 34 gallons, and the gross weight with contents shall not
exceed 50 pounds.



   CONTAINERS OR RECEPTACLES - COMMERCIAL.  Durable, water-tight
containers or dumpsters with tight-fitting covers meeting National Solid
Waste Management Association, American National Standards Institute, and
Consumer Products Safety Commission requirements as applicable to design,
application and safety.



   CONTAINERS OR RECEPTACLES - RECYCLING.  Sturdy, lightweight and
identifiable containers for the storage and placement of recyclable materials
at curbside. Every newly constructed residence in the city shall receive, at
no charge, one storage container.  Replacement containers shall be available
to residents of the city at cost at a county-designated site.



   CURBSIDE RECYCLABLES COLLECTION.  The collection of recyclable
materials at the point of generation by a designated collector of the city on
a regularly scheduled basis.



   DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.  Refuse which is incidental to
construction, renovation or demolition of buildings, other structures or
appurtenances on a premise.



   DESIGNATED COLLECTOR.  A licensed collector who has been awarded a
contract within the city to collect refuse, leaves, yard waste and/or
recyclable materials.



   FERROUS METAL CONTAINER.  Those non-aluminum food containers which are
commonly referred to as tin cans.



   GENERATOR.  A person, business, or commercial establishment generating
solid waste.



   GLASS CONTAINER.  All containers made from silica or sand, soda ash
and limestone, the product being transparent or translucent and being used
for packaging or bottling of various matter and all other material commonly
known as glass, excluding, however, blue glass, flat glass, plate glass and
glass commonly known as window glass, and other types as designated by the
Material Recovery Facility Board (MRF).



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Hazardous waste as defined in Public Act 64 of 1979,
being M.C.L.A. § 324.11103, as amended, and as identified in administrative
rules and promulgated pursuant to said Act by the Director of the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources.



   LEAVES.  Deciduous and coniferous seasonal deposition.



   LEAF COLLECTION SEASON.  A period during the fall of each year as
scheduled by the City Manager or designee during which a leaf collection
service is provided in specified areas of the city.



   LICENSED COLLECTOR.  A collection agent who has received a material
collection license from the city.



   MRF.  The material recovery facility as operated by the County of
Isabella and the City of Mount Pleasant.



   MATERIAL COLLECTION LICENSE.  A license issued by the city to a
collection agent for the purpose of providing a specified type of refuse,
yard waste and/or recyclable material collection service.



   NONRESIDENTIAL SITE OF GENERATION.  Any site of generation other than
a residential site of generation of four units or more.



   PERSON.  The owner, proprietor, occupant, or agent in charge of any
premise.



   PLASTIC CONTAINER.  Any container made of one type or combination of
types of plastics, for example, high-density polyethylene HDPE which is
accepted for recycling by the MRF. The list of acceptable plastics is subject
to review and change by the MRF Board.



   PREMISES.  A parcel of land within the city including the adjoining
street right-of-way or legal easement, separated from adjacent parcels of
land by legal description.



   RECYCLING FACILITY.  A facility designed and operated to recover or
process recyclable materials for the purpose of conversion into raw materials
or new products. This term does not include sanitary landfills, solid waste
transfer facilities, and municipal solid waste incinerators provided,
however, a recycling facility may be located on the same site as a landfill,
transfer facility, or incinerator.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.  Materials such as clean and uncontaminated
newspaper, corrugated cardboard, magazines, computer print-out paper, office
paper, glass containers, plastic containers, ferrous metal containers,
ferrous metal, and aluminum containers or articles separated for the purpose
of preparation for and delivery to a secondary market or other use. A list of
acceptable recyclables shall be kept on file at all times in the office of
the City Clerk at city hall. This list may change subject to approval of the
material recycling board.



   REFUSE.  The same meaning as solid waste.



   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE.  Solid waste collected in residential refuse
collection.



   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION.  Refuse pickup from residential
buildings with no more than three dwelling units.



   RESIDENTIAL SITE OF GENERATION.  Any site of generation containing a
single-family residential dwelling of three units or less.



   ROOMING HOUSE REFUSE.  Solid waste collection in residential rooming
house refuse collection.



   ROOMING HOUSE REFUSE COLLECTION.  Refuse pickup from rooming houses
that have been defined in accordance with the city Housing Licensing Code
ordinance number 592 (See Chapter 152).



   SITE OF GENERATION.  Any premises in or from which solid waste is
generated by any person.



   SMALL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.  Commercial, business, institutional
or residential establishments with four or more units which regularly
generate less than one cubic yard of solid waste per week.



   SOLID WASTE.



      (1)   Solid waste as defined in Public Act 641 of 1978, being
M.C.L.A. § 324.11506, as amended from time to time.



      (2)   Garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator
residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, solid commercial
and solid industrial waste, and animal waste. Solid waste does not include
body waste, liquid waste, materials that have been separated at the source or
a processing site for the purpose of reuse, recycling or composting, or any
material that has been identified by state or federal regulation to be
unsuitable for disposal in a sanitary landfill.



   SPECIAL REFUSE.  White goods, furniture, household appliances, brush,
large tree limbs, and other bulky refuse items, with the exception of
construction and demolition debris, that are unsuitable for regular refuse
collection services.



   TIPPING FEE.  The fee charged upon delivery of recyclable materials to
the MRF.



   YARD WASTE.  Grass clippings, weeds, hedge clippings, garden waste,
and twigs and brush no longer than four feet in length and less than one inch
in diameter.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)



§ 50.02  ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE.



   (A)   No owner or occupant of a residential dwelling unit or
commercial establishment shall permit the accumulation of refuse upon
residential or commercial premise for a period in excess of six days.



   (B)   Leaves, yard waste and vegetable waste may be stored for
composting purposes in a manner which will not harbor rodents or become a
public nuisance.



      (1)   Compost piles shall be located only in a rear or side
yard, a minimum of three feet from any lot line and 20 feet from any
residence located on adjacent property.



      (2)   No single compost pile and compost bin shall exceed five
feet in height and 125 cubic feet in volume. On lots smaller than 8,000
square feet, the total volume of compost shall not exceed 125 cubic feet.



      (3)   Compost may contain only lawn debris, yard waste, coffee
grounds, tea leaves, raw vegetables or fruit scraps in a form suitable for
composting. Compost shall not contain meat, poultry, fish, dairy products,
manure, oils, fats, or any of the permitted items in a form unsuitable for
composting.



      (4)   Compost piles and compost bins shall be constructed and
maintained to prevent the attraction and harborage of rodents and pests and
to prevent unpleasant odors.



      (5)   Compost piles and compost bins which constitute a
nuisance may be abated in accordance with an applicable nuisance abatement
procedure set forth in the city code.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.03  UNAUTHORIZED DUMPING AND LITTERING.



   No person's refuse or trash shall be placed or left upon or in any
street, right-of-way, alley, container or other property on any premise,
public or private, without the permission of the owner, proprietor, occupant,
or agent in charge of that premise.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.04  PROHIBITED WASTES.



   (A)   No person shall place in any container or receptacle any
material that might endanger the collection personnel or which would be
detrimental to the normal operation of collection or incineration, for
example: hazardous household chemicals or waste, medical waste including
sharps (needles), gaseous, solid, or liquid poisons, dead animals,
ammunition, explosives, concrete, dirt, appliances, furniture, auto or
equipment parts, or any material that possesses heat sufficient to ignite any
other collected materials.



   (B)   No person shall be permitted to place leaves or yard waste in
a refuse container for the purposes of refuse collection, removal or disposal.



   (C)   No person shall be permitted to place recyclables as defined
in § 50.01, in a refuse container for the purpose of refuse collection,
removal or disposal.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.05  ANTI-SCAVENGING PROVISIONS.



   No person shall take, collect, or transport any refuse, leaves, yard
waste or recyclable material from any street right-of-way, alley or refuse
dumpster of this city without a material collection license authorizing such
activity. However, this section shall not apply to authorized city officials,
including police officers, acting within the scope of their official duties,
or residents when participating in a city authorized reuse program.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.06  REFUSE PRE-COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Residential.



      (1)   For purposes of collection, those eligible for the
city’s residential refuse collection services must place all accumulated
refuse in an area designated by the Division of Public Works (“DPW”) in
the public right-of-way in a city refuse bag, or in any other acceptable
refuse container with a city refuse tag attached to the container. Special
refuse, yard waste, hazardous waste, construction and demolition debris, and
other prohibited waste as set forth in § 50.04, shall not be placed out for
residential refuse collection. Residential refuse not put in a prepaid city
refuse bag or fixed with a city refuse tag will not be picked up.



      (2)   Properly tagged or bagged refuse must be placed in the
area designated by the DPW in the public right-of-way for collection by the
city refuse collection contractor. The property owner and tenant shall be
responsible for ensuring that refuse bags or containers are placed at the
designated collection area no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the night before
collection, and containers are removed from the designated collection area
and front yard by 12:00 a.m. on the day following collection by the refuse
contractor. However, if the designated collection area is an alley, the
refuse container may be stored in the alley provided it does not interfere
with use of the alley. Refuse containers and bags shall be stored only in
garages, backyards or side yards or in the alley if the alley is the
designated collection area for the property, and out of sight from the street.



      (3)   To be eligible for the city’s refuse collection
services, there must be adequate open space in the public right-of-way for
collection to accommodate the number of refuse containers or refuse bags
generated by all residents of the dwelling unit without interfering with
driveways, vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic, or business traffic. The
DPW shall have authority to make determinations regarding the adequacy of the
open space for refuse containers or refuse bags.



      (4)   Contents of refuse containers with lids placed for
collection shall not exceed what can be reasonably placed within the
container and still allow the lid of the container to be placed in a
completely closed position. If the refuse container does not have a lid, the
contents shall not overflow the top of the refuse container. The gross weight
of city refuse bags or containers with tags placed for collection shall not
exceed 50 pounds for each bag or container. Each refuse container placed for
collection shall not exceed 34-gallon capacity. Containers or bags that do
not meet these requirements will not be collected.



      (5)   Multi-family dwellings, rooming houses, and condominium
developments. Refuse collection for multi-family dwellings, rooming houses,
and condominium developments shall be provided by one of the following
methods. The property owner of each multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or
condominium association of a condominium development, shall be responsible
for securing an approved method of refuse collection and shall notify the DPW
of the method selected on an annual basis. Changes to the method of
collection are limited to once per calendar year. All dwelling units within
the multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or condominium development must use
the same method for refuse collection.



         (a)   Collection by the city refuse collection
contractor. The multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or condominium
development may use city refuse collection.



            1.   The city refuse collection contractor shall
not collect refuse on private streets unless a waiver of liability is
provided by the affected multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or condominium
development. The liability waiver must release the city and the city refuse
collection contractor from any claims for damages to the private street,
utilities, and pavement due to the operation of the refuse collection
vehicle. The city refuse collection contractor has the right to not operate
on private streets if the streets are not constructed or maintained to allow
safe operation of the refuse collection vehicle.



            2.   If the multi-family dwelling, rooming house,
or condominium development uses city refuse collection, the multi-family
dwelling, rooming house, or condominium development, and its residents, shall
comply with division (A)(1) through (A)(4) above, except, however, when the
multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or condominium development is using
city refuse collection on private streets, and has provided the requisite
waiver under division (A)(5)(a)1. above, the properly tagged or bagged refuse
must be placed in the area designated by the city adjacent to the private
street for collection by the city refuse collection contractor; or



         (b)   Collection by private refuse contractor. The
multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or condominium development may contract
with a licensed, private contractor to collect refuse generated by the
multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or condominium development. Contents of
refuse containers with lids placed for collection shall not exceed what can
be reasonably placed within the container and still allow the lid of the
container to be placed in a completely closed position. If the refuse
container does not have a lid, the contents shall not overflow the top of the
refuse container. The property owner and tenant shall be responsible for
ensuring that refuse bags and containers are placed at the collection area
designated by the private refuse contractor no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the
night before collection, and containers are removed from the collection area
designated by the private refuse contractor and front yard by 12:00 a.m. on
the day following collection by the refuse contractor. However, if the
designated collection area is an alley, the refuse container may be stored in
the alley, provided it does not interfere with use of the alley. Refuse
containers and bags shall be stored only in garages, backyards or side yards
or in the alley if the alley is the designated collection area for the
property, and out of sight from the street.



         (c)   This section shall not apply to:



            1.    Multi-family dwellings, rooming houses, and
condominium developments, with more than four attached dwelling units within
a single residential building, and where travel off a public right-of-way is
required for refuse collection; or



            2.   If a dumpster is required for the dwelling
unit for site plan approval, special use approval, other zoning approval, or
by zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Commercial establishments. Commercial establishments shall be
responsible for securing an approved method of refuse collection and
disposal. Approved methods shall be limited to arrangements with a licensed
contractor, transport of an establishment’s own refuse to a state approved
disposal facility, or city refuse collection and recycling with permission
from the DPW. Contents of refuse containers with lids placed for collection
shall not exceed what can be reasonably placed within the container and still
allow the lid of the container to be placed in a completely closed position.
If the refuse container does not have a lid, the contents shall not overflow
the top of the refuse container. Containers or bags that do not meet these
requirements will not be collected.



   (C)   Other refuse. All special refuse, yard waste, hazardous waste,
construction and demolition debris, and other prohibited waste as set forth
in § 50.04 shall be removed using a licensed contractor or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with applicable state law and regulations.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 800, passed 6-23-97; Am. Ord. 809, passed
11-24-97; Am. Ord. 870, passed 3-11-02; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04; Am.
Ord. 1001, passed 8-10-15)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  CITY REFUSE BAG AND TAG SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   City refuse bags shall be of a distinctive color or material
and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate to
refuse collectors that the refuse bags are intended for residential refuse
collection service.



   (B)   City refuse tags shall be of a distinctive color and printed
with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate to refuse
collectors that when the tag is affixed to a refuse container it is intended
for residential collection.



   (C)   Specifications for city refuse bags and tags and their use,
and any future changes to those specifications shall be developed in
accordance with § 50.13 of this chapter. These specifications shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the materials used and the content of printed
information.



   (D)   The city refuse bags and tags shall be sold at a price
determined by resolution of the Commission.



   (E)   The city or its authorized representative may sell city refuse
bags and tags to individuals and/or to retail sales establishments.
Participating sales establishments  shall sell city refuse bags and tags 
for not more than the maximum price specified by the Commission. However, the
appropriate sales tax may be charged by the retail establishment if so
required by state or federal law.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)



§ 50.08  CITY REFUSE CART SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   City refuse carts shall be of a distinctive color or design
and shall be marked to make them recognizable as containers that are intended
for rooming house refuse collection service.



   (B)   Specifications for city refuse carts and their use, and any
future changes to those specifications shall be developed in accordance with
§ 50.13 of this chapter.



   (C)   City refuse carts shall be provided by the designated refuse
collector as part of rooming house refuse collection services.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)



§ 50.09  COMMERCIAL REFUSE CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All container units used for commercial refuse collection
shall be kept clean and in good repair.



   (B)   The property owner of each commercial establishment is
responsible for maintaining sanitary conditions in and around the refuse
container.



   (C)   The lid and side doors of all commercial collection containers
shall be kept closed. No refuse shall be placed beside or on top of a refuse
container.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.10  AUTHORITY, COSTS, NOTICE TO REMOVE SOLID WASTE.



   (A)   The City Manager or designee is authorized to notify, in
writing, the owner and/or tenant(s) of any premises to remove solid waste
found to be in violation of § 50.02. Such notice shall be by hand delivery
or certified mail, addressed to said owner and/or tenant(s). If the owner
and/or tenant(s) cannot be located, or if the notice is returned as
undeliverable, the notice shall be posted upon the premises addressed to the
last known owner.



   (B)   If solid wastes are not removed from the premises within six
days after the date of mailing or posting of such notice, or if the solid
waste is located within an abutting public right-of-way, the owner and/or
tenant(s) of the premises shall be subject to penalties as set forth in §
50.99. The City Manager or designee is authorized to pay for the removal of
the solid waste or to order the removal by the city or its designated agent.



   (C)   When the city has effected the removal of such solid waste or
has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at a
rate of 1% per month from the date of removal shall be charged to the owner
of the premises. If payment is not received, the cost plus accrued interest
will be added to the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the
city, and said charge shall be due and payable at the time of payment of such
tax bill.



   (D)   Where cost of removal is not paid by an owner within 60 days
after the removal of such solid waste as set forth in divisions (B) and (C)
of this section, then the City Manager or designee shall cause to be recorded
in the Treasurer’s Office the date and premises on which removal was done.
The recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the property and
shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and
interest until final payment has been made and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law for collection of taxes; further, the total amount
shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 1% per month in the event same is
not paid in full on or before the date of the tax bill upon which said charge
appears becomes delinquent; said sworn statements recorded in accordance with
the provisions hereof shall be notice to every person concerned that the
amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the
premises described in the statement that the same is due.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 947, passed
4-13-09)



§ 50.11  SOURCE SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   (A)   Procedure.



      (1)   Separation of recyclables and placement or removal from
residential sites of generation.



         (a)   All persons living in residential sites of
generation shall separate recyclables from all other solid waste produced by
such household. Such recyclable material shall be placed commingled in a
designated storage container and placed at curbside for collection on the
same day as the other solid waste is collected.



         (b)   The city recycling collection contractor shall not
collect recyclable materials on private condominium streets unless a waiver
of liability is provided by the affected condominium association.  The
liability waiver must release the city and the city recycling collection
contractor from any claims for damages to the condominium streets, utilities
and pavements due to the operation of the recycling collection vehicle.  The
city recycling collection contractor has the right to not operate on private
condominium streets if the streets are not constructed to allow safe
operation of the recycling collection vehicle.



         (c)   Violations of this section shall result in
penalties being assessed as provided in § 50.99 of this chapter.



      (2)   Preparation of recyclable materials. Glass, plastic and
metal recyclables shall be clean, and all contents shall be removed
therefrom, prior to placement at curbside for collection. Non-metal caps
shall be removed from glass recyclables; all caps shall be removed from
plastic recyclables; and labels shall be removed from metal recyclables prior
to placement for collection. Ferrous metal containers and plastic containers
shall be flattened prior to placement for collection. Newspapers and fibrous
materials shall be bundled and placed on top of the recycling bin.



   (B)   Exceptions and variances.  In cases of extreme hardship, or
practical difficulties, the City Manager or designee may, upon receipt of a
written request, authorize variances to this chapter's requirements regarding
separation, points of collection and collection frequency.



   (C)   Fees.  Fees to be assessed for the service of curbside
collection of recyclables shall be set by resolution of the Commission.



   (D)   Responsibilities of collectors.



      (1)   The designated collector shall make available to all
residential sites of generation within the city the service of collecting
recyclable materials which are separated from solid waste prior to collection.



      (2)   Any licensed collector shall make available to all
customers owning or operating a nonresidential site of generation within the
city the service of collecting recyclable material after separation from the
solid waste by the customer. Upon collection of any source separated
recyclable material from a nonresidential site of generation, the licensed
collector shall deliver the recyclable material to the MRF or another
facility designed and operated to process the material into raw materials or
new products, provided that the facility is consistent with the Isabella
County Act 641 Plan.



      (3)   Any licensed collector shall not collect any solid waste
from a residential site of generation unless all recyclable materials and
yard waste have been separated from the solid waste prior to collection.



      (4)   If a vehicle of a licensed collector is used to collect
or transport solid waste and either recyclable materials, or yard waste, or
both, from any site of generation (residential or nonresidential), the waste
hauler shall transport the solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard waste
each in separate compartments of the vehicle for delivery and disposal.



      (5)   A licensed collector shall deliver all source-separated
recyclable materials collected from a site of generation within the city to
the MRF. No waste hauler shall deliver source-separated recyclable materials
collected from a site of generation within the city, to any disposal site
other than the MRF or a recycling facility designated by the city.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.12  MATERIAL COLLECTION LICENSES.



   (A)   No person or organization shall engage in the business of
collecting or disposing of refuse, leaves, yard waste, or recyclable material
without first obtaining a material collection license in the manner outlined
in this section. The city expressly reserves the right to restrict the
collection of residential refuse and recycling materials to a city designated
contractor.



   (B)   No material collection license shall be issued except upon
application to the City Clerk. At a minimum, the application must include the
following information:



      (1)   A description of the methods and equipment which the
applicant proposes to use for collecting refuse, leaves, yard waste and/or
recyclable material in the city.



      (2)   A description of the type of collection to be provided
and the part of the city which it will affect.



      (3)   A plan for meeting the pre-collection requirements
outlined in § 50.06.



      (4)   Proof of liability insurance as required by city policy.



      (5)   A plan for meeting all collection and disposal
requirements outlined in other relevant city, county, state and federal
regulations as appropriate.



      (6)   The name and address of the city-designated site or
sites to be used to dispose of each material collected.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall submit all such applications to the
Director of Public Works who may approve the applications of such persons or
organizations as deemed to be in the best interests of the city and its
inhabitants.



   (D)   The Commission may establish by resolution a license fee to be
paid by the applicant upon receipt of the material collection license.



   (E)   Whenever an application made hereunder has been approved by
the Director of Public Works, the City Clerk shall, upon payment of any
established fee by the applicant, issue a material collection license.



   (F)   Unless revoked under circumstances hereinafter provided, every
material collection license shall expire on the next succeeding January 1
following its issuance.



   (G)   The city may restrict the number of material collection
licenses issued and the scope of service of such licenses based on the
geographic area to be serviced; the population sector to be served such as
residential, commercial, or rooming house; the type of material be collected;
the points of collection such as the curb, alley, or other location; and/or
the schedule of such collections. A license may only be used for the scope of
services expressly stated in the material collection license.



   (H)   No licensed collector shall dispose of refuse, leaves, yard
waste and/or recyclable material at sites other than those specified in the
terms of the collectors material collection license.



   (I)   In residential zones and on commercially zoned property that
directly abuts residential zones that have dwelling units, no collection of
refuse or recycling shall occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.



      (1)   The City Commission may approve a policy that allows for
exceptions to the 7:00 a.m. start time under extenuating circumstances.



      (2)   The City Commission may establish by resolution an
application fee to be paid by the applicant requesting an exception to the
7:00 a.m. start time.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 1021,
passed 1-23-17; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 1-22-18)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.13  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Manager shall have the authority to promulgate rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)



§ 50.14  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   If a review finds recyclable materials commingled with other
waste, the designated collector may refuse to collect such other solid waste.
Occupants are required to remove such uncollected solid waste from curbside
not later than 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection.



   (B)   Solid waste which contains unseparated leaf and yard waste
will not be collected by the designated collector. Said designated collector
shall either tag said unseparated waste or notify the Division of Public
Works of a residence's noncompliance. Uncollected solid waste must be removed
from curbside not later than 6:00 pm. on the day of collection.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.15  PARTICIPATION IN RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICE.



   (A)   Participation by additional dwellings. Multi-family dwellings,
rooming houses, and condominium developments within the city limits shall
utilize recycling collection services in compliance with the provisions of
this section.



      (1)   Residential recycling collection for multi-family
dwellings, rooming houses, and condominium developments located within the
city shall use city recycling collection services as provided for in §
50.11. The city recycling collection contractor shall not collect recyclable
materials on private streets unless a waiver of liability is provided by the
affected multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or condominium development.
The liability waiver must release the city and the city recycling collection
contractor from any claims for damages to the private street, utilities, and
pavements due to the operation of the recycling collection vehicle. The city
recycling collection contractor has the right to not operate on private
streets if the streets are not constructed or maintained to allow safe
operation of the recycling collection vehicle.



      (2)   Designated storage containers for such recyclables shall
be provided to the dwellings by the city at no cost to the owner or occupant
of the dwelling. However, owners and/or occupants shall be responsible for
replacing any lost, damaged, stolen, or otherwise unavailable storage
containers at the owner or occupant's sole expense. One storage bin per six
licensed residents shall be issued by the city to each dwelling.



      (3)   The property owner shall be responsible for the monthly
charge for city recycling collection services and such monthly charge shall
be billed to the property owner on the property owner's sewer and water
bills. Rates for participation in the city recycling service shall be set by
resolution of the City Commission.



      (4)   The scheduled recycling collection day for each dwelling
will be scheduled by the city for those using city recycling services. This
may or may not coincide with the city residential refuse collection date.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to multi-family dwellings,
rooming houses, and condominium developments, with more than four attached
dwelling units within a single residential building, and where travel off a
public right-of-way is required for recycling collection. Such dwellings
shall contract with a licensed, private contractor to collect recyclable
materials generated by the multi-family dwelling, rooming house, or
condominium development and such private contractors shall comply with §
50.11(D)(2) through (D)(5).



(Ord. 1001, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 1015, passed 9-12-16; Am. Ord. 1014,
passed 8-8-16)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction. Any person violating any provision
of this chapter shall be held responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and prosecuted in accordance with the municipal civil infraction ordinance.



   (B)   The fine for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be $50; the second violation, $100; and the third or any subsequent violation
within one calendar year, $250.



   (C)   In addition to imposing a fine for a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, a court may order compliance with the provisions
of the City Code.



   (D)   The city may revoke a material collection license issued under
this chapter, when either the licensee or a person operating a vehicle or
equipment on behalf of the licensee is responsible for three separate
incidents (occurring on three separate days) within a 12 month period
resulting in a plea of responsibility (with or without explanation), a plea
of guilty, a plea of no contest, or a court's determination of responsibility
or guilt for a violation of one or more of the following:



      (1)   A violation of City Code § 50.12(I).



      (2)   A violation of any provision of this chapter.



      (3)   A violation of any other city, county or state
regulation concerning material collection activities.



      (4)   A violation of any term of the material collection
license.



(Ord. 745, passed 2-8-93; Am. Ord. 770, passed 8-14-95; Am. Ord. 803, passed
7-28-97; Am. Ord. 905, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 1001, passed 8-10-15; Am.
Ord. 1021, passed 1-23-17; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 1-22-18)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   51.001   Title



   51.002   Definitions



   51.003   Operation, maintenance and control of system



   51.004   Conditions of service



   51.005   Deposit of objectionable waste prohibited



   51.006   Discharge of untreated sewage into natural outlet



   51.007   Privies, septic tanks and other facilities



   51.008   Responsibility of owner to install suitable toilet
facilities



   51.009   Damaging or tampering with city equipment



   51.010   Requirements for connection of private sanitary sewer




Private Sewage Disposal System




   51.025   Connecting building sewer to private sewage disposal
system; compliance



   51.026   Maintenance of private sewage disposal facilities



   51.027   Connecting to public sewer; abandonment of private system




Building Sewers and Connections




   51.040   Separate building sewer for each building



   51.041   Installation costs to be borne by owner



   51.042   Building sewer specifications



   51.043   Inspector to be notified when work ready for inspection



   51.044   Permit required for connection; fee



   51.045   Connection regulations




Sewer Use Regulations




   51.060   Mandatory connection requirement



   51.061   Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage



   51.062   Prohibited discharges to public sewers



   51.063   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   51.064   Right of review by city; pretreatment may be required



   51.065   Special agreements



   51.066   Monitoring




Pretreatment Provisions




   51.080   Compliance with state and federal pretreatment regulations



   51.081   Dilution prohibited



   51.082   Accidental discharges; notice requirements



   51.083   Funding of pretreatment program



   51.084   Wastewater discharges and contribution permits



   51.085   Publication of violations



   51.086   Public records



   51.087   Enforcement provisions



   51.088   By-pass




Rates and Charges




   51.100   Charges established



   51.101   Table of unit factors



   51.102   Deferring charges



   51.103   Billing procedures



   51.104   Enforcement of charges




Administration and Enforcement




   51.125   Responsibility of Director of Public Works



   51.126   Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals



   51.127   Right of entry of inspectors



   51.128   Suspension of service



   51.129   Fiscal year, records and funds



   51.130   Violations; civil procedures



   51.999   Penalty



   Appendix: Table of Unit Factors



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Utilities, see Charter Art. XII



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the City of Mount Pleasant Municipal
Sewer Use Ordinance.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Pub. L.
92-500, also known as the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq. as
amended.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director of the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources.



   ATTORNEY.  The City Attorney of the City of Mount Pleasant, Isabella
County, Michigan.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER. 



      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of
vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation;



      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or



      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.



   AVAILABLE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.  A public sanitary sewer
system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, or public way which
crosses, adjoins, abuts, or is contiguous to the realty involved and passes
not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which
sanitary sewage originates.



   B.O.D. (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   BYPASS.  The diversion of the waste stream from any or all treatment
processes; whether intentional or otherwise.



   CAPACITY CHARGE.  In addition to any other assessments, costs or
levies hereunder, a charge for capacity utilization and/or reservation shall
be levied for all connections to the sewer system; further and existing
connections, where the use is increased, shall be charged a capacity charge
based on the increased units.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category
of industrial users.



   CITY.  The City of Mount Pleasant which has jurisdiction over the use
and operation of the sewage treatment plant and sewage collection system.



   CLASSES OF USERS.  The division of sanitary sewer customers into
classes by similar process or discharge flow characteristics, as follows:



      (1)    DOMESTIC USER.  Individual homes or dwelling units
(including mobile homes, apartments, condominiums, or multi-family
dwellings), or other structures, that discharge only segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.



      (2)    INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any user that is not considered a
domestic user as defined above.



      (3)    SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user that:



         (a)   Is subject to federal categorical pretreatment
standards.



         (b)   Has an average daily discharge of more than 25,000
gallons.



         (c)   Provides more than 5% of the POTW organic or
hydraulic dry weather loading.



         (d)   May have an adverse effect on the POTW.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH
and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants identified in the
NPDES permit if the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants,
and in fact can remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. The term
“substantial degree” generally means removals in the order of 80% or
greater.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  A charge allocated to all users for the purpose
of generating revenues for retirement of outstanding bond issues, collectible
via property taxes and the sewer service surcharge.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant that is not a compatible
pollutant, as defined in this section.



   INFILTRATION.  Any waters entering the system from the ground, through
such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections
or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from
inflow.



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW.  The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.



   INFLOW.  Any waters entering the system through such sources as, but
not limited to, building downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water
discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas and storm drain cross
connections.



   INSPECTOR.  Any person or persons authorized by the city to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connection to the
public sewer system.



   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement
of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33 USC
1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTION DISCHARGER.  A discharger having a flow volume of
10,000 gallons or more per average work day or containing any of the
prohibited discharges in § 51.062 of this chapter.



   MANAGER.  The Manager of the City of Mount Pleasant, or his/her
authorized agent or representative.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   NEW SOURCE.  Any source of discharge to the sewer system that began or
will begin after the effective date of the pretreatment standards applicable
to that source; or any existing source that has been substantially modified
so as to change the quantity or composition of its discharge.



   NORMAL STRENGTH SEWAGE.  A sanitary wastewater flow containing an
average daily B.O.D. of not more than 300 mg/l or an average daily suspended
solids concentration of not more than 350 mg/l.



   NPDES PERMIT.  The permit issued pursuant to the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System for the discharge of wastewaters into the waters
of the state.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE and REPLACEMENT COSTS.  All costs, direct
and indirect, (other than debt service) necessary to insure adequate
wastewater treatment on a continuing basis, conform with all related federal,
state and local requirements, and assure optimal long term facility
management (these O & M and R costs include replacement costs).



   OPERATIONAL UPSET.  An unintentional and temporary discharge from a
pretreatment facility in noncompliance with standards of a wastewater
contribution permit and beyond the reasonable control of the discharger.
Operational upset does not include noncompliance due to operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works.



   PRETREATMENT.  The treatment of extra strength industrial wastewater
flows in privately owned pretreatment facilities prior to discharge into the
public sewer.



   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.  Any septic tanks, lagoons,
cesspools, or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sanitary
sewage other than via the public sanitary sewer.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than ½-inch in
dimension.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The person or persons having legal title to the
premises according to the city's tax records and shall include in the case of
a land contract sale the land contract vendee or vendees, provided that the
city has been furnished with a copy of said land contract or assignment
thereof.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  The main collector sewer system in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by the city.



   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENTS or EQUIVALENT UNIT.  The factor representing a
ratio of the estimated sewage generated by each user class to that generated
by the normal single-family residential user.



   REPLACEMENT.  Necessary expenditures made during the service life of
the treatment works to replace equipment and plant appurtenances required to
maintain the intended performance of the treatment works.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, (including polluted cooling water) together with such ground,
surface, and storm waters as may be present. The three most common types of
sewage are:



      (1)    COMBINED SEWAGE.  Wastes including sanitary sewage
industrial sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow carried to the
wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer.



      (2)    INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE.  A combination of liquid and
water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and
resulting from a trade or process carried on in that establishment (this
shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling
water).



      (3)    SANITARY SEWAGE.  The combination of liquid and water
carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY. Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   SEWERAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  A residence in which only one family resides.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24
hours concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification pursuant
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.



   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER.  A storm sewer which carries storm and
surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.



   SURCHARGE.  The additional charge which a user discharging wastewater
having strength in excess of the limits set by the city of for transmission
and treatment within the sanitary sewage system will be required to pay to
meet the cost of treating such excessively strong wastewater.



   SEWER SERVICE SURCHARGE.  The charge collected from all non-taxable
customers for the purpose of generating that portion of debt retirement of
outstanding bond issues.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   SYSTEM.  The complete city wastewater collection and treatment system,
including all sewers, pumps, lift stations, treatment facilities or other
facilities and appurtenances used or useful in the collection,
transportation, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial or industrial
wastes, and all easements, rights and land for same and including all
extension and improvements thereto which may hereafter be acquired or
constructed.



   TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS.  That table which shall be adopted by the city
and utilized to identify the various classifications of sewer users and
stating as “residential equivalents” the ratio of such use of the system
to that of a single-family residence.



   TREATMENT WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating,
and disposing of sewage, as defined above.



   USER O & M & R CHARGE.  The charge levied on all users of the
treatment works for the cost of the operation and maintenance including
replacement, of such treatment works.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



   WASTEWATER.  Water which contains, or previous to treatment has
contained, pollutants such as sewage and/or industrial wastes.



   WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT.  As set forth in § 51.084 of this
chapter.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 727, passed 4-29-91)



§ 51.003  OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF SYSTEM.



   The operation and maintenance of the system shall be under the
supervision and control of the city. The city retains the exclusive right to
establish, maintain, and collect rates and charges for sewage collection,
treatment, transmission and debt service, and in such capacity the Commission
may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems
advisable, and may make such rules or regulations as it deems advisable and
necessary to assure the efficient establishment, operation and maintenance of
the system to comply with the terms of the NPDES permit and to discharge its
financial obligations.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.004  CONDITIONS OF SERVICE.



   (A)   At the time of original construction of the public sewer, the
city may install at its expense that portion of the service from the main to
the back of curb in street right-of-way. The city shall maintain at its
expense, the public sewer. Those customers making connections at the time of
original construction of the public sewer, shall install at their expense,
that portion of the service from back of curb on street right-of-way to their
premises. The customer shall maintain, at his/her expense, the building drain
and building sewer from the main to the building.



   (B)   Those customers making connections subsequent to the time of
original construction of the public sewer shall install at their expense that
portion of the service from the main to the back of curb in street
right-of-way in addition to that portion of the service from said back of
curb to their premises. The customer shall maintain at his/her expense the
service line from the main to the building.



   (C)   The city shall, in no event, be held responsible for claims
made against it by reason of the breaking of any mains or service pipes, or
by reason of any other interruption of the service caused by the breaking of
machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs; and no person shall be entitled
to damage nor have any portion of a payment refunded for any interruption.



   (D)   The premises receiving sanitary sewer service shall at all
reasonable hours be subject to inspection by duly authorized personnel of the
city.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.005  DEPOSIT OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited upon any public or private property within the city (or any area
under its jurisdiction) any human excrement, garbage, or other objectionable
waste.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.006  DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE INTO NATURAL OUTLET.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted water except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.007  PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND OTHER FACILITIES.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage or industrial waste.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.008  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER TO INSTALL SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES.



   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city
or any other area under the jurisdiction of the city and abutting any street,
alley, or right-of-way, in which, within 200 feet at the nearest point from
the structure in which sewage originates, there is now located or may in the
future be located a public sewer or combined sewer of the city is hereby
required at his/her own expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provision of this ordinance when given official notice
to do so, provided that such connection shall not be required to be made less
than 90 days after the sewer so located is constructed and made available for
connection thereto.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.009  DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH CITY EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with the system or any component thereof.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.010  REQUIREMENTS FOR CONNECTION OF PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER.



   Before any sanitary sewer system constructed by private, as
distinguished from public funding, hereinafter referred to as the “private
sanitary sewer”, shall be permitted to connect to the system, the owner of
said system, hereinafter referred to as the developer, shall do and provide
the municipality with the following:



   (A)   Provide the city with the developer's plans and specifications
for construction, an estimate of the cost of construction, and a performance
bond and deposit with the city the estimated cost of review of construction
plans covering the cost of hiring a registered professional engineer to
review plans and specifications, which monies shall be placed by the city in
an escrow account in the name of said developer.



   (B)   Obtain approval of the city of the plans and specifications.



   (C)   Secure all necessary permits for construction.



   (D)   Upon commencement of construction of the private sanitary
sewer, deposit with the city in the escrow account referred to in division
(A) of this section a sum of not less than 10% of the cost of construction of
the wastewater system improvements to cover the anticipated cost of
inspection of construction and payment of connection charges.



   (E)   Upon completion of connection of the private sanitary sewer to
the system, the performance bond, upon recommendation of the Director of
Public Works and approval of the Commission, shall be released and any monies
remaining in the developer's escrow account shall be returned to the
developer. Any additional expenses incurred by the city in assuring the city
that the private sanitary sewer is properly operating shall be deducted
therefrom or charged directly to the developer, at the option of the city. An
accounting of expenditures shall be made to the developer by the city.



   (F)   Thereafter, in accordance with the subdivision ordinance, any
accepted privately constructed main collector sewer system within a publicly
dedicated right-of-way, shall become a public sewer.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM



§ 51.025  CONNECTING BUILDING SEWER TO PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM;
COMPLIANCE.



   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 51.060 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sanitary sewer disposal system which shall be approved by the Central
Michigan District Health Department.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.026  MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.



   All private sanitary sewage disposal systems maintained in compliance
with this chapter shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times at
the sole expense of the owner thereof.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.027  CONNECTING TO PUBLIC SEWER; ABANDONMENT OF PRIVATE SYSTEM.



   (A)   At such time as the public sanitary sewer system becomes
available to premises served by a private sanitary sewage disposal system,
connection to the public system shall be made in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tank cesspools, and similar private disposal
facilities located thereon shall be abandoned and discontinued for sanitary
sewage disposal use.



   (B)   All abandoned private sanitary sewage disposal systems shall
be completely filled with earth, sand, gravel, concrete or other approved
material. Upon the abandonment or discontinuation of use of a septic tank or
privy, the sewage and sludge contents thereof shall be completely removed and
disposed of by a septic tank cleaner who is duly licensed under provisions of
Public Act 243 of 1951, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11701 et seq. The tank, or
the pit in the instance of a privy, shall be treated with at least ten pounds
of chlorinated lime or other chemical disinfectant acceptable to the Building
Official. Then the tank or pit shall be completely backfilled with approved
material and made safe from the hazard of collapse or entrapment.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 51.040  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING.



   A separate and independent building sewer (lead) shall be provided for
every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer. Other exceptions will be allowed only by
special permission granted by the Manager.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.041  INSTALLATION COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNER.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation of the building
sewer and the connection of same to the public sewer shall be borne by the
property owner.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.042  BUILDING SEWER SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All building sewers (leads) shall meet or exceed the
requirements of the ordinances of the city or the requirements of this
chapter, whichever shall be most stringent.



   (B)   Building sewers hereinafter installed shall consist of pipes
and fittings of the following types and sizes:



      (1)   Pipe must be of sufficient diameter to carry the
estimated volume of discharge. Minimum pipe size permitted is four-inch
inside diameter.



      (2)   Pipe must be one of the following materials and cannot
be mixed in the connection lines to include the fittings:



         (a)   Cast iron with rubber-type gaskets or leaded joint;



         (b)   Cast iron no hub pipe with neoprene stainless
couplings;



         (c)   Ductile iron with rubber-type gaskets, slip joint
or mechanical joint;



         (d)   Vitrified clay tile with ASTM C425 joints;



         (e)   Reinforced concrete with ASTM C443 joints;



         (f)   PVC plastic, Schedule 40 or better;



      (3)   No tees, double tees, or crosses, or double hub pipes
shall be permitted;



      (4)   Old building sewers or portions thereof may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and
tested by the Inspector to meet all requirements of this chapter; and



      (5)   All changes in grades or direction shall be made with
appropriate fittings.



   (C)   Clean-outs shall be installed every 100 feet of straight run
and at each 90-degree direction change, and all clean-outs shall be plugged.



   (D)   All lines shall be laid at a minimum slope of €-inch per
foot grade and a maximum slope of ½-inch per foot grade for four-inch lines
and at a minimum of €-inch per foot grade and a maximum ½-inch per foot
grade for six-inch lines.



   (E)   The method to be used in excavating, placing of pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the
requirements of the Plumbing Code Rules (Part 7) issued by the Michigan
Department of Labor Construction Code Commission and the regulations of the
city where applicable.



   (F)   All joints and connections shall be gas tight and shall
conform to the requirements of the current building and plumbing codes.



   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be
laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might
thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from
frost. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Inspector. Pipe
laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with current ASTM
Specifications except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected by the Inspector or his/her representative.



   (H)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by an approved pumping system and discharged to the
building sewer.



   (I)   All excavations for building sewer installation and connection
shall be adequately guarded by barricades and lighting so as to protect the
public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the installation and connection work
shall be restored in the manner set forth in Chapter 99 of this code.



   (J)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the “Y” branch designated for that property, if such
branch is available at a suitable location. Any connection not made at the
designated “Y” branch in the main sewer shall be made only as directed by
the Inspector and approved by the Manager. All taps directly into the main
require the use of a boring machine.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.043  INSPECTOR TO BE NOTIFIED WHEN WORK READY FOR INSPECTION.



   The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the Inspector when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or
his/her representative.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.044  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION; FEE.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
Before a permit may be issued, any person other than utility companies doing
excavation work in any city street or alley shall provide the city with a
surety bond in the amount of $1,000 per job or $5,000 per year guaranteeing
that the contractor will complete the work in accordance with all ordinances
and the plans and specifications as approved by the Director of Public Works.
This bond shall state that the persons will indemnify and save harmless the
city and the owner of the premises against all damages, costs, expenses,
outlays, and claims of every nature and kind arising out of unskillfulness or
negligence on his/her part in connection with plumbing or excavating for
plumbing as prescribed in this chapter. Such bond shall remain in force and
must be executed for a period of one year except that on such expiration it
shall remain in force as to all penalty claims, and demands that may have
accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.



   (B)   The fee, if any, for the connection permit shall be an amount
established by resolution of the Commission.



   (C)   The person applying for a connection permit will receive one
copy of the permit; one copy will be retained by the issuing City Department;
one copy will go to the City Treasurer; one copy will be retained by the
Inspector. The copy retained by the Inspector shall be returned to the
issuing department with a sketch of the actual installation on the back
showing all dimensions, directions, and other pertinent information
concerning the installation. The copy with the sketch shall bear the
signature of the Inspector and the date the inspection was made.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.045  CONNECTION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No connection to the system will be permitted unless there is
capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and
the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of B.O.D. and
suspended solids.



   (B)   All connections to the system will be made by a licensed
contractor or plumber provided, however, that a property owner may make
his/her own installation and connection in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and law so long as he/she has secured a connection permit.
This does not allow a property owner to hire an unlicensed contractor to do
his/her work.



   (C)   All licensed contractors and plumbers making connections to
the systems shall file with the city, a copy of their liability insurance
prior to performing any connections to the system meeting city requirements.



   (D)   No person shall connect roof downspouts, foundation drains,
area way drains, or any sources of surface or ground water to a building
sewer which in turn is connected to the system.



   (E)   No building sewer shall be covered until after it has been
inspected and approved by authorized personnel of the city or its designee.
No building sewer shall be used until final approval after the trench is
backfilled; an air test may be required at the owner's expense.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



SEWER USE REGULATIONS



§ 51.060  MANDATORY CONNECTION REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Mandatory connection requirement.  Each and every owner of
property on which is located a structure in which sanitary sewage originates,
shall, at his/her own expense, install suitable toilet facilities in said
structure, and shall cause such facilities to be connected to the available
public sanitary sewer system.



   (B)   Connection procedure.



      (1)   Such connection shall be completed promptly but in no
case later than 90 days from the date of the occurrence of the last of the
following events:



         (a)   Publication of a notice by the City Clerk of the
availability of the public sanitary sewer system in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city, and the mailing of written notice indicating the
availability of the public sanitary sewer to the owner or any one of the
owners in the case of co-ownership of the property in question.



         (b)   Modification of a structure so as to become a
structure where sanitary sewage originates.



         (c)   Improvement of land with building or structures
from which sanitary sewage originates.



      (2)   If the owner of property on which is located a structure
in which sanitary sewage originates does not complete connection to an
available sanitary sewer within the 90-day period described in division (1)
above, the City Clerk shall notify said person by written notice that
connection to the system is required forthwith. The giving of said notice
shall be made by first class mail to the owner of the property on which the
structure is located and by posting such notice on the property. Notice shall
provide the owner with the approximate location of the public sanitary sewer
system which is available for connection of the structure involved and shall
advise the owner of the requirements and the enforcement provisions of this
chapter and M.C.L.A. §§ 333.12751 through 333.12758, as amended.



      (3)   Adverse weather exception for late connection. In the
event the property owner is unable to connect to the system within the time
prescribed by this chapter due to or on account of inclement or adverse
weather conditions, said property owner may appeal to the Sanitary Sewer
Board of Appeals established pursuant to § 51.126(A) of this chapter to
allow said person additional time in which to connect without penalty and
without civil and criminal proceedings being initiated against him/her. The
foregoing notwithstanding, this appeal shall be made in writing within ten
days of notice of sanitary sewer availability as hereinbefore set forth.



   (C)   Enforcement of mandatory connection requirements - penalties
for late connection. Failure or refusal to connect to the system within the
time prescribed herein shall result in the property being charged a penalty
of $100 for each single-family residential unit multiplied by the number of
units and/or multiplying factors as established by the Table of Residential
Equivalents. Each day that a violation of this chapter shall continue shall
be construed to constitute a separate offense. Civil and/or criminal
proceedings to compel connection are established under § 51.130.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.061  DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, or roof water to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm water, ground water and all other unpolluted drainage
shall be discharged into storm drains or to a natural outlet approved by the
city.



   (C)   Industrial cooling water which is unpolluted and not
contaminated with oil, algaecides or other pollutants, or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, upon application to and approval of the city, to a
storm drain or natural outlet.



   (D)   Industrial cooling water containing only such pollutants as
insoluble oils or grease or other suspended solids shall be pretreated for
removal of the pollutants and then discharged to the storm water.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.062  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS.



   The following are prohibited discharges:



   (A)   Any waste with a closed cup flash point of less than 140° F.
or any liquids, solids, gases, vapors, or fumes, which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the POTW, the operation of the POTW, or the employees of the POTW.
Prohibited materials include but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and
sulfides.



   (B)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than
9.0 or having any other corrosive properties capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater system.



   (C)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, metal shavings, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.



   (D)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams
per liter, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.



   (E)   Any garbage with particle size of ½-inch in any dimension.



   (F)   The minimum temperature of the waste shall not be less than
32° F. at the point of discharge. The maximum temperature of the waste shall
not be greater than 150° F. at the point of discharge and shall not cause a
wastewater temperature in excess of 104° F. at the entrance to the treatment
facility, whichever is more restrictive, unless written authorization is
received from the city.



   (G)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance and repair.



   (H)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.



   (I)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration which may exceed limits established by applicable state and
federal regulations shall not be allowed.



   (J)   Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (B.O.D.,
and the like) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a
user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no
case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain quantities of pollutants
that exceed for any period of time longer than 15 minutes, more than five
times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal
operation.



   (K)   (1)   Any waters or wastes containing compatible or toxic
pollutants, which singly or by interaction with other pollutants, exceed
limitations established by the city for the following reasons:



         (a)   To prevent treatment process pass through of
pollutants which violate water quality standards of the receiving stream.



         (b)   To prevent injury or inhabitation of the treatment
process or sludge handling facilities.



         (c)   To prevent contamination of the wastewater sludge
and interference with the sludge disposal process.



         (d)   To comply with Federal EPA Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.



      (2)   Toxic pollutants shall include, but are not limited to,
any substance identified on the Federal EPA Priority Pollutant and State of
Michigan Critical Materials List. Methods used by the city to establish
limitations shall be in accordance with the latest guidance of the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources. Limitations may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the users' intake water supply in accordance with
part 403.15 of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency General Pretreatment
Regulations of January 28, 1981.



   (L)   Any waters or wastes exceeding the following characteristics:



      300 mg/l BOD(S), 350 mg/l S.S., 10 mg/l P.



   (M)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates
a public nuisance.



   (N)   Heavy metal discharge limits exceeding the following:



      0.005 mg/l    Cadmium



      0.620 mg/l    Total Chromium



      0.140 mg/l    Copper



      0.11  mg/l    Amenable Cyanide



      0.635 mg/l    Lead



      0.210 mg/l    Nickel



      1.125 mg/l    Zinc



   (O)   Any waste that is considered hazardous under RCRA regulations
unless specifically exempted through a user contribution permit.



   (P)   Any trucked or hauled waste except at specific locations that
have been approved by the superintendent of the POTW.



   (Q)   Any trucked or hauled waste that would be considered a
prohibited discharge under divisions (A) through (N) of this section.



   (R)   Any trucked or hauled waste that has not been approved by the
superintendent of the POTW.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.063  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors (traps) or any other method
approved by the city shall be provided at the expense of the property owner
when liquid wastes contain grease in excessive amounts, or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
single-family and multi-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease, oil and sand
interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of
substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable
covers which when bolted into place shall be gastight and watertight.



   (B)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors (traps)
or any other method approved by the city shall be maintained by the owner, at
his/her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.064  RIGHT OF REVIEW BY CITY; PRETREATMENT MAY BE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Right of review by city.  Admission into the public sewers of
wastewaters containing any prohibited discharges in § 51.062 or having an
average daily flow rate of 10,000 gallons or more shall be subject to review
by the city. All proposed discharges to the sanitary sewers shall be reviewed
prior to connection. The discharge of an existing user shall be subject to
review if a change in the contribution is anticipated or at the request of
the city to demonstrate continued compliance with ordinance requirements. In
support of this review, existing or potential users of the sewers shall
provide all information necessary to complete the review. This information
shall include, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   File a written statement setting forth the nature of the
enterprise, the source and amount of water used, the amount of water to be
discharged with its present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical,
radioactive, or other pertinent characteristics of the wastes.



      (2)   Provide a report on raw materials entering the process
or support system, intermediate materials, final product, and waste
by-products as those factors may affect waste control.



      (3)   Provide a plan map of the building, works, or complex,
with each outfall to the surface waters, sanitary sewer, storm sewers,
natural watercourse, or groundwaters noted, described, and the waste stream
identified.



      (4)   Records and reports on the final disposal of specific
liquids, solids, sludges, oils, solvents, radioactive materials, and other
wastes.



      (5)   In the case of existing discharges, sampling and test
reports as may be required by the city.



   (B)   Right to exclude or require pretreatment. On direction of the
city, an entity may be required to remove, exclude, or require pretreatment
of any waste in whole or in part for any reasons deemed to be in the city's
interest. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation
at no expense to the city and shall be designed and operated to assure that
wastewaters discharged meet the characteristics set forth in § 51.062. A
wastewater contribution permit may be required for any discharge as provided
in §§ 51.080 through 51.088.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.065  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No provision of this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any user whereby sewage
or wastes of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the sewage
system for treatment, subject to the payment by such user of such additional
charges as may be reasonable. However, federal and state prohibited discharge
standards can never be waived. If the waters or wastes discharged by an
industry exhibit any of the characteristics identified in § 51.062 at
anytime, the city may:



   (A)   Reject the wastes;



   (B)   Require pretreatment to the level defined as “normal
strength sewage”;



   (C)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable level for discharge to
the public sewers; and



   (D)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.066  MONITORING.



   (A)   When required by the city to demonstrate compliance with this
chapter, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer shall install
a suitable control manhole together with sampling equipment, flow meters, and
other appurtenances as necessary in the building sewer to facilitate
monitoring the control manhole shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Manager. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at
his/her expense, and shall be maintained by him/her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building
sewer is connected.



   (B)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristic of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be
determined in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, as amended, or as required by
the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. All measurements, tests, and
analyses shall be determined as the control manhole and upon suitable samples
taken at said manhole. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial
customer to provide flow measuring sampling equipment for each control
manhole.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)  Penalty, see § 51.999



PRETREATMENT PROVISIONS



§ 51.080  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Introduction. This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements
for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and
treatment system and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and
federal pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403).



   (B)   Federal standards supersede. Any existing or new federal
categorical pretreatment standards shall immediately supersede the
limitations imposed under this chapter if more stringent. In such a case, the
Manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.



   (C)   Modification of federal pretreatment standards.



      (1)   Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves
consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards,
the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific
limits in the federal pretreatment standards. “Consistent Removal” shall
mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of
the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless
state in the effluent.



      (2)   The city reserves the right to establish as described in
§ 51.062(K), more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)



§ 51.081  DILUTION PROHIBITED.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. (Exception is
made when applicable to dilution to meet the pH requirement.)



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.082  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter and
operational upset of pretreatment facilities. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials and operational upsets shall be
provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved
by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users shall
complete such a plan by 180 days after the effective date of this chapter. No
user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this
chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until
accidental discharge and operational upset procedures have been approved by
the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. Copies of the user's
spill prevention control and countermeasure (SPCC) plan and the pollution
incidence prevention plan (PIPP) shall be filed with the city.



   (A)   Immediate notice. In the case of an accidental discharge or
operational upset, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.



   (B)   Written notice. Within five days following an accidental
discharge or operational upset, the user shall submit to the Manager a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish
kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may
be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.



   (C)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on
the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.083  FUNDING OF PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.



   The pretreatment program shall be funded as provided by §§ 51.106 and
51.107 of this chapter.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)



§ 51.084  WASTEWATER DISCHARGES AND CONTRIBUTION PERMITS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge any wastewater to the municipal
sanitary sewer collection system or other natural outlets within the
jurisdiction of the city except as authorized by the city in accordance with
this chapter.



   (A)   The discharge of all major contributing dischargers shall be
subject to review by the city as provided in § 51.064 of this chapter.



      (1)   A wastewater contribution permit shall be obtained for
any discharge from a major contributing discharger which is characterized by
the city as any one of the following:



         (a)   A discharge with potential to cause violation of
the municipal NPDES permit limitations or water quality standards of the
stream receiving the effluent of the treatment works;



         (b)   A discharge with potential to cause interference
with the treatment process or wastewater sludge disposal procedures;



         (c)   A discharge regulated by federal EPA categorical
pretreatment standards;



         (d)   A discharge from any pretreatment facility;



         (e)   A discharge allowed under special agreement as
provided by § 51.065 of this chapter.



         (f)   A discharge from any “Significant Industrial
User” as defined in § 51.002 of this chapter.



      (2)   A wastewater contribution permit shall be obtained
within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter for existing major
contributing dischargers required by the city to obtain a permit. All other
permits shall be obtained prior to connection to the sewer system.



   (B)   Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit
shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed
by the city, and accompanied by a fee. Existing users shall apply for a
wastewater contribution permit within 30 days after the effective date of
this chapter, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the
user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
information required in § 51.064, herein. The following information shall
also be submitted:



      (1)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;



      (2)   If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment shall be submitted to the Manager.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable Pretreatment Standard. The following
conditions shall apply to this schedule:



         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress
in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contract for major components commencing construction, completing
construction and the like).



         (b)   No increment referred to in division (a) above
shall exceed nine months.



         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the Manager including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date
on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to
the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse
between such progress reports to the Manager.



      (3)   Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.



   (C)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of
users subject to such standards shall be revised to required compliance with
such standards within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a
user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not
previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as
required by division (B) above of this section, the user shall apply for a
wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user
with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the Manager
within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standard the information required by divisions (B)(1) and (2)
above.



   (D)   Permits may contain the following:



      (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;



      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.



      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities;



      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards of
tests and reporting schedule;



      (6)   Compliance schedules;



      (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports;



      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city
access thereto. All records shall be retained for a minimum of three years or
in the case of enforcement actions until all enforcement activities have
concluded;



      (9)   Requirements for notification of the city of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;



      (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;



      (11)   Requirements placing the waste treatment facilities,
process facilities, waste streams, or other potential waste problems under
the specific supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an
appropriate state agency as properly qualified to supervise such facilities;



      (12)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to
ensure compliance with this chapter;



      (13)   And shall contain at least the following: the term of
the permit; a statement of non-transferability; specific discharge
limitations; monitoring, sampling, recordkeeping, notification, and reporting
requirements; as well as compliance schedules, and a statement of penalties.



   (E)   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to
exceed three years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or
may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or
requirements are modified, due to a change in contribution by the user, or
other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes
in his/her permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.



   (F)   Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user
for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city.



   (G)   Any user issued a wastewater discharge permit shall submit to
the Manager during the month of June and December, unless required more
frequently, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent and any other information the Manager deems necessary as listed
in § 51.064.



   (H)   The Manager may impose mass limitations on users in cases
where they are appropriate, in such cases, the report required by division
(G) above of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.



   (I)   Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be
acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be
reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of
the changes.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)



§ 51.085  PUBLICATION OF VIOLATIONS.



   The city shall annually publish in the newspaper a list of the users
which, during the previous 12 months, were significantly violating applicable
pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. The notification
shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during
the same 12 months. For purposes of this paragraph, a significant violation
is a violation which:



   (A)   Remains uncorrected for 45 days after notification of
noncompliance.



   (B)   Is part of a pattern of non-compliance over a 12-month period.



   (C)   Involves a failure to accurately report non-compliance.



   (D)   Has endangered health or property, caused any interference or
adverse effects to the POTW, or resulted in the city exercising its right to
suspend service as pursuant to § 51.128, or § 51.087.



   (E)   Involved the failure of the user to meet the requirements of
its permit.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)



§ 51.086  PUBLIC RECORDS.



   (A)   All information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspection shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests the information be classified confidential on the
basis of proprietary processes. When information is classified confidential,
the Manager shall provide proper and adequate facilities and procedures to
safeguard the confidentiality of manufacturing proprietary processes, except
that confidentiality shall not extend to waste products discharged to the
waters of the state.



   (B)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon
request.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.087  ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the city, to meet the provisions of this section or to protect the
treatment system from threatened discharge that would jeopardize water
quality standards, possibly damage the sewerage system, or cause a nuisance
or unsafe condition.



   (B)   Any user who violates the following conditions of this
section, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having
his/her permit revoked.



      (1)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his/her discharge;



      (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



   (C)   Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is
violating this chapter, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition,
limitation of requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such a
person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days
of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof
shall be submitted to the city by the user.



   (D)   The city may bring legal action with civil and criminal
penalties against anyone using the disposal system contrary to this section,
in accordance with §§ 51.129, 51.130 and 51.999.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)



§ 51.088  BY-PASS.



   No user shall by-pass pretreatment processes, anticipated or
unanticipated, without prior notification and approval of the manager. Such
by-pass is prohibited unless unavoidable or justifiable.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed
4-29-91)  Penalty, see § 51.999



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.100  CHARGES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   It is recognized that use of the system requires payment of
costs of providing the services of the system.  Such costs include not only
the day- to-day operation and maintenance costs, but also the costs incurred
to construct and install the system components, the cost to undertake
reasonably foreseeable repairs and replacement, the costs to treat wastes of
extra strength or volume, and the like.  When the system components were
designed and constructed, they necessarily needed to be sized to accommodate
all foreseeable possible usage of the system from a premises so the system is
available to accommodate such reasonably foreseeable usage.  Accordingly,
certain charges are imposed regardless of actual usage, while other charges
recognize that those who actually make more use of the system should pay more.



   (B)   Rates, fees and charges for connection to and use of the
system shall be in amounts established from time to time by resolution of the
City Commission, based on the following:



      (1)   All users within the city shall pay user rates and
charges based on the cost of providing sanitary sewer service in accordance
with the following:



         (a)   A service charge based on water meter size for
each meter on the premises.  The service charge shall be the minimum charge
to a user, regardless of actual water or sanitary sewer use.



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G), a
consumption charge per cubic gallon of water used from the city water
system.  This volume or commodity charge shall be in addition to the service
charge.



         (c)   If a system user is not connected to the city
water system, the City Commission shall establish by resolution a flat rate
commodity charge, based on a table of unit factors, upon the size of the
water meter that would be installed if city water service was provided to the
premises or using another methodology that, at the City Commission's
discretion, provides a reasonable basis to roughly approximate the amount of
water and, consequently, sanitary sewer usage for the premises.



      (2)   A debt service charge shall be paid by all users of the
system for the purpose of generating revenues for retirement of bonds issued
after January 1, 2000, for the construction of system improvements.  Such
debt service charge may be calculated on the same basis as and added to
either the service charge provided in paragraph (B)(1)(a) of this section, or
the consumption charge provided for in paragraph



(B)(1)(b) of this section, or as part of both such charges.



      (3)   For any premises not currently metered, there shall be a
meter charge to defray the cost of the meter and its installation, which
shall be the current charge established under the water ordinance provisions
of the City Code.



      (4)   A connection fee or fees shall be levied for all
connections to the sewer system.  Such fees shall be based upon the table of
equivalent units to be established from time to time by resolution of the
City Commission.  Services shall be inspected to insure acceptable
connection to the public system.  This inspection shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:



         (a)   Direct connection.  Direct connections are those
which are made to an existing public sanitary sewer. (Refer to § 51.042(J).)



            (i)   Tap to main sewer.



            (ii)   Service line materials and installation.



            (iii)    Connection of service line within
right-of-way to service line on private property.



         (b)   Indirect connection.  The connection of service
line within right-of-way to service line on private property shall be
inspected.  Indirect connections are those which are made to an existing
service lead, which meets all chapter requirements.



      (5)   If the character of the sewage of any user imposes an
unreasonable additional burden upon the sewage disposal and transmission
system of the city, then an additional charge shall be made.  Effluent in
excess of the maximum limitations imposed by this chapter shall be deemed
prima facie subject to surcharge.  If necessary to protect the system or any
part thereof, the city shall deny the right of any user to empty such sewage
into the system.  Surcharges required by this section shall be computed as a
percentage of the annual cost of operation and maintenance, including
replacement, multiplied by the ratio of weight of surchargeable excess of the
discharged substance to the total weight of such substance that is treated in
that year.  This amount shall be collected, on the basis of estimated
surchargeable amounts, with each periodic billing and shall be adjusted
annually to reflect actual operation, maintenance and replacement costs. 
Surcharge rates shall be established by resolution of the Commission, and the
amount necessity of surcharge may be appealed by the user to the Sanitary
Sewer Board of Appeals hereinafter established.



      (6)   In addition to all other charges, individual users
affected by the pretreatment requirements of this chapter may be assessed
charges for recovery of cost incurred by the city for the following:



         (a)   A proportionate share of the cost to establish and
administer the pretreatment program.



         (b)   Fees to cover the cost of preparing and reviewing
wastewater contribution permits.



         (c)   The cost of inspecting construction of individual
pretreatment facilities.



         (d)   The cost to monitor compliance with provisions of
the wastewater contribution permit, including sampling, testing and analysis
of the individual discharge, inspections of a user's monitoring and
pretreatment facilities, review of response submitted by the user, and any
other surveillance activities.



         (e)   The cost of reviewing and inspecting spill
containment and accidental discharge procedures and facilities.



         (f)   Fees for the consistent removal of a pollutant (by
the city) which is otherwise subject to federal categorical pretreatment
standards.



         (g)   Other charges as may be necessary to carry out the
pretreatment requirements of the chapter.



      (7)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the city and the
users whereby the sanitary wastes of unusual flows, strength or character of
such user or class of users may be accepted into the system, subject to
payment therefor by such users or class of users.



   (C)   Rates shall be established by resolution of the City
Commission and shall be revised from time to time as required to maintain the
fiscal integrity of the system, and the same may be revised and taxed by
resolution of the City Commission as may be necessary to produce the amounts
required to pay such charges and expenditures and provide the fund necessary
for the maintenance of the financial integrity of the system.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting,
modifying or amending any special assessments levied against certain
properties within the city in connection with the construction of sanitary
sewers.



   (E)   For customers with multiple meters, each meter shall be
treated as a separate customer for calculation of charges.



   (F)   The city may require metering of water and/or sewage flows for
premises not connected to the city water system to determine the adequacy of
charges.



   (G)   Sewer users in the city are charged based on their metered use
of water.  However, some users use water in such a way that does not result
in return water flow to the sanitary sewer system, and therefore their sewage
charge does not reflect actual sewer use.  Accordingly, notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter, users meeting the following criteria may
install a city-approved meter to calculate the amount of water used that is
not discharged into the sewer system, and have their sewer charges reduced
according to that amount:



      (1)   Residential use.  A user may, at his or her sole
expense, install a city-approved meter for lawn irrigation or landscaping
purposes only.  Users installing residential meters in accordance with this
division shall be charged the service charge, defined in division (B)(1)(a)
above, for the months of May to October only.



      (2)   Commercial or industrial use. For commercial or
industrial manufacturing uses, the user shall:



         (a)   Submit an application to the Director of Public
Works, in a form developed by the Director of Public Works, for approval,
demonstrating that the proposed manufacturing use will not result in water
being discharged into the sanitary sewer system.  The Director of Public
Works shall develop a policy establishing the criteria to be considered for
approving such requests.



         (b)   Pay the full cost of installation of a separate
city-approved meter and appropriate lines that will meter the use of water
for manufacturing purposes only.  After installation, the city shall inspect
and approve the meter and lines.



         (c)   Users shall provide reasonable access to the
meters for ongoing inspections.



         (d)   Users shall not direct any water metered through a
water-only meter to the sanitary sewer system.



   (H)   Users meeting the criteria under § 51.100(G) will be charged
for all metered water at the rates set from time to time by the City
Commission, and shall not be charged for sanitary sewer services on the meter
readings made.



   (I)   If, through its inspections or meter readings, the city
determines that a user authorized under § 51.100(G) diverts water metered by
a water-only meter and into the sanitary sewer system, the city shall bill
the user for the sanitary sewer use at the rates then established, as they
may be amended from time to time by the City Commission, for all billing
periods during which the unlawful diversion occurred.  If the billing
periods during which unlawful diversion occurred cannot be established, the
sanitary sewer charges will be applied, based on the water usage of the meter
for the preceding three years.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 850, passed
12-11-00; Am. Ord. 979, passed 5-28-13)



§ 51.101  TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS.



   (A)   Table of unit factors. For the purposes of rates, fees and
charges as provided in  § 51.100, the City Commission may adopt and amend
from time to time by resolution a table of unit factors setting forth and
identifying the user class and all applicable factors to be multiplied by the
monthly charge established for single-family residential premises.



   (B)   Rules for interpreting table of unit factors.



      (1)   The minimum equivalent factor for commercial and
industrial users shall be 1.0.



      (2)   Equivalent units for users contained in said table will
be based upon the size of the water meter serving the facility.



   (C)   Appeal.  A property owner having an equivalent unit factor of
more than one may, upon written request, appeal to the Sanitary Sewer Board
of Appeals established pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord.  622,  passed  3-4-85;  Am. Ord. 704, passed  3-12-91; Am. Ord.
850, passed 12-11-00; Am. Ord. 866, passed 11-26-01)



Cross reference:



   Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals, see § 51.126



§ 51.102  DEFERRING CHARGES.



   No free service shall be furnished to any user of the system, and there
shall be no waiver or forgiveness of charges levied pursuant to this
chapter.  However, any resident eligible for deferment of payment of such
fees pursuant to the laws of the state shall be permitted to request such
deferment or partial payment in accordance with applicable laws, rules and
regulations.



(Ord.  622,  passed  3-4-85;  Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 850,
passed 12-11-00)



§ 51.103  BILLING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   When utility charges are not timely paid, it is necessary to
re-bill, to undertake other procedures required by this chapter, to prepare
separate notices and accountings and undertake other tasks that are not
needed if such charges are timely paid.  In addition, the other system users
essentially subsidize the non-paying or late paying user's use of the
system.  The system is not established, operated or well-adapted to provide
financing services for its users.  Accordingly, charges are made to
compensate the system for the costs incurred due to untimely payments



   (B)   Billing for water and sewer charges shall be made monthly and
bills shall be sent to consumers monthly. A late payment charge of 5% of the
total monthly bill shall be added if the bill is not paid by the fifteenth
day of the month. Each subsequent month an additional 1% will be added until
payment is made.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 527, passed 8-15-77; Am. Ord. 558, passed
4-16-79; Am. Ord. 778, passed 10-9-95; Am. Ord. 850, passed 12-11-00)



§ 51.104  ENFORCEMENT OF CHARGES.



   (A)   Nonpayment of special assessment and/or connection and
operation maintenance, and replacement charges.  Nonpayment of any special
assessment for sewer service or connection charges for connection to the
system shall subject the property owner to a liability for such charges and
penalties as provided for a late or delayed connection.



   (B)   Nonpayment of service charge.



      (1)   Discontinuance of service.  If a service charge
established pursuant to this chapter remains delinquent for a period of 45
days, the city may shut off and discontinue water and/or sewer service to
such premises.  Such service shall not be re-established until all
delinquent charges, penalties and a charge for the re-establishment of such
service shall be paid.  The turn-on charge shall be established by
resolution of the City Commission.



      (2)   Collection by litigation.  In addition to discontinuing
service, the city shall have the option of collecting all such delinquencies
and penalties due pursuant to this chapter by legal proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction.



      (3)   Collection by enforcement of lien.  Service,
installation, inspection, use and material charges and fees, including
penalties and interest due thereon, shall constitute a lien on the premises
served from the date of such service, unless the city is served with written
notice that a tenant is responsible for such charges.  The city official or
officials in charge of the collection annually, not later than May 1 of each
year, shall certify to the tax assessing officer the fact and the amount of
such delinquency.  The charge shall then be entered by the tax assessing
officer of the city upon the next tax roll as a charge against the premises,
and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as
general taxes against such premises are collected and tax liens enforced. 
If the city is provided with notice in writing, including a copy of the lease
of the affected premises, that a tenant is responsible for the sewer charge,
the city may require, as a condition to rendering sewer services to such
premises, a cash deposit equal to service charges at current rates for three
months as security for the payment of service charges.



      (4)   Collection of an administrative fee.   The city may
collect an administrative fee to offset the cost of attaching liens and
collecting delinquent services charges pursuant to § 51.104(B)(3).  Such
fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Commission, and shall not exceed the cost incurred administering and
collecting such liens.



   (C)   Disconnection for late payment.



      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility
service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city's form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in
charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provision to the
effect:



         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before
the date set forth on the bill.



         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before the
date, a shut off notice will be mailed, containing a cutoff notice that if
the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of
his/her bill shall have the right to a hearing, at which time he/she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his/her choosing,
and may present, orally or in writing, his/her complaint and contentions to
the city official in charge of utility billing.  This official shall be
authorized to order that the customer's service not be discontinued, and
shall have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's
complaint.



      (2)   Requests for waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered.  In the
absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure
provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in
no event until the charge have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.



      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for delinquent service have been paid, along
with a turn-on charge to be established by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord.  622,  passed  3-4-85; Am. Ord. 704, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 850,
passed 12-11-00; Am. Ord. 979, passed 5-28-13)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.125  RESPONSIBILITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   The Director of the Division of Public Works of the city is charged
with the responsibility of administering the system and causing the
enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.126  SANITARY SEWER BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation of Board. A Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals is hereby
created to hear and consider all properly submitted appeals.



   (B)   Meetings and membership of Board. The Sanitary Sewer Board of
Appeals shall meet as frequently as is necessary to hear all appeals properly
submitted to it. All other matters relating to the meetings, qualifications
for membership, appointment to office, term of office, and all other
organizational matters of said Board shall be determined by resolution of the
Commission.



   (C)   Authority of Board. The Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals shall
hear, consider, and make recommendations to the city of the following matters:



      (1)   Appeals pursuant to § 51.060(B) of this chapter to
allow the property owner additional time in which to connect to the system,
without penalty or legal action, because of adverse weather conditions.



      (2)   Appeals pursuant to § 51.101(C) of this chapter to
review the equivalent unit factor assigned a property owner; and



      (3)   Applications for deferring partial or total payment of
connection charges in the cases of undue hardship pursuant to § 51.102 of
this chapter.



   (D)   Final action. After hearing and considering an appeal, the
Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals shall submit its recommendations as to the
granting, denying, or modification of the decision appealed or relief being
sought to the Commission, and the decision of the Commission on the matter
shall be final.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 1019, passed 11-14-16)



§ 51.127  RIGHT OF ENTRY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Right of entry. Agents of the city, the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall have the
right to enter all properties for the purpose of inspecting, measuring,
sampling and testing the wastewater discharge as well as reviewing and
copying all relevant records.



   (B)   Power and authority of inspectors.



      (1)   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Inspectors
shall be allowed to inspect and copy all relevant records.



      (2)   Duly authorized employees of the city may enter at all
reasonable times in or upon private or public property for the purpose of
inspecting and investigating conditions or practices which may be in
violation of this chapter or detrimental to the system.



      (3)   Duly authorized employees of the city shall inspect the
on-site work occurring by reason of any system permit. Such person shall have
the right to issue a cease and desist order on the site upon finding a
violation of said permit or this chapter. The order shall contain a statement
of the specific violation and the appropriate means of correcting the same
and the time within which correction shall be made.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85)



§ 51.128  SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.



   The city reserves the right to immediately and effectively halt or
prevent any discharge to the POTW (after informal notice to the discharger)
which reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 689, passed 4-10-89; Am. Ord. 704, passed
4-11-91; Am. Ord. 727, passed 6-27-91)



§ 51.129  FISCAL YEAR, RECORDS AND FUNDS.



   (A)   Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the system shall commence on
January 1 and end on December 31 in each year.



   (B)   Records and accounts. The city shall keep and maintain proper
books and records and accounts separate from all other records and accounts
of the city in which shall be made full and correct entries of all
transactions relating to the system. The city shall cause an annual audit of
such books and records and accounts of the preceding operating year to be
made by a recognized independent certified public accountant and will supply
such audit to authorized public officials upon proper request. The city shall
use the results of the audit to make adjustments in funds, with deficiencies
or surpluses. Any adjustments necessary for operation and maintenance costs
shall be passed on to users of the systems



   (C)   Establishment of funds.



      (1)   Receiving funds. The revenues of the system shall be set
aside as collected and deposited in a separate depository account at a bank
qualified to do business in the state and designated by resolution of the
Commission. Said account shall be designated as the “Receiving Fund” and
the revenues so deposited shall be transferred from the receiving fund
periodically in the manner and at the times hereinafter specified.



      (2)   Operation and Maintenance Funds (O & M Funds). Out of
the revenues of the receiving fund there shall be first set aside a fund
designated as the “Operation and Maintenance Fund” a sum sufficient to
provide for the next succeeding period of all current expenses for
maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in good repair
and working order.



      (3)   Debt retirement fund.  Revenues from the system are not
generally to debt retirement since the improvements are being financed from
general obligation bonds. Due, however, to the inclusion of a debt retirement
component on the charges to non-taxpaying users, there shall be established a
debt retirement fund. There shall be deposited into this fund sufficient
revenues to cover the pro-rata share of debt retirement allocated to
non-taxpaying customers.



      (4)   Replacement fund. There shall be established and
maintained a fund designated as “Wastewater Plant Replacement Fund” which
shall be used solely for replacement of equipment at the wastewater plant and
pumping stations. The amount set aside each year shall conform to the
established schedule. The replacement fund shall be collected and deposited
in a depository bank account separate from the receiving fund account.



      (5)   Improvement fund. There shall be next established and
maintained a fund designated as the “Improvement Fund” which shall be
used solely for the purpose of making improvements, extensions and
enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited into said fund such
revenues as collected from the Improvement Fund charges. Such charges shall
be determined by the Commission.



      (6)   Surplus fund. Monies remaining in the receiving fund at
the end of any operating year after full satisfaction of the foregoing funds,
shall be hereafter used in connection with any other project of the city
directly related to the purposes of the system. This shall not apply to all
excess revenues collected from a class of users for operation and
maintenance. Such excess revenues shall be applied to the cost of operation
and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year, and that user
class rate shall be adjusted accordingly.



      (7)   Bank accounts. All monies belonging to any of the
foregoing funds or accounts may be kept in one bank account in which event
the money shall be allocated on the books and records of the city within the
single bank account in the manner set forth above.



      (8)   Deficiencies in funds. In the event the monies in the
receiving fund are insufficient to provide the current requirements of the
Operation and Maintenance Fund or Contract Payment Fund, any monies and/or
securities or other funds of the system may be transferred to such fund, to
the extent of any deficiency therein. All borrowed (transferred) funds shall
be paid back to the funds or securities from which it was borrowed by raising
the rates of that class, or classes, for which monies received were
insufficient to provide for the current requirements of operation and
maintenance.



      (9)   Investment of funds. Monies in any fund or account
established by the provisions of this chapter may be invested or deposited in
any lawful investments or deposits and may be invested in obligations of the
United States of America in a manner and subject to any limitations set forth
in the laws of the state. Income received from such investments shall be
credited to the fund from which said investments were made, or pro rata in
the case of a single bank account.



      (10)   Insurance. The city shall maintain and carry insurance
on all physical properties of the system, of a kind and in the amounts
normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in
the operation of sanitary sewage disposal systems. All monies received from
losses under such insurance policy shall be applied solely to the replacement
and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed.



   (D)   Signatures.  All reports and documents required of the user
by the POTW must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and
are subject to federal and state regulations governing fraud and false
statements.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 727, passed 4-29-91)



§ 51.130  VIOLATIONS; CIVIL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   What constitutes a violation. Whenever, by the provisions of
this chapter, the performance of any act is required or the performance of
any act is prohibited, a failure to comply with such provisions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. In addition, the failure, neglect or
refusal to comply with a cease and desist order of the enforcing agency shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Civil proceedings to compel compliance. When any violation of
this chapter shall be deemed to be a nuisance per se, the city may bring a
civil proceeding for a mandatory injunction or injunctive order or for such
other remedial relief as will correct or remedy the violation, including
damages for the costs or expenses thereof. The city may join in such action
or actions any number of property owners or users of the system. The
provision of such civil procedures shall be in addition to any criminal
penalties provided herein above.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 727, passed 4-29-91)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
held responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in
accordance with the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance. The fine for
violation of a municipal civil infraction under this chapter shall be not
less than $300 and costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation of this
chapter is continued or is permitted to continue to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 727, passed 4-29-91)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36




APPENDIX:  TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS




 

Meter Size
Inches
 
Maximum Range
Gallons Per Minute
 
Dwelling Unit
Equivalents




5/8
 
20
 
1


3/4
 
50
 
2.5


1-1/2
 
100
 
5


2
 
160
 
8


3
 
320
 
16


4
 
500
 
25


6
 
1,000
 
50


8
 
1,600
 
80










(Ord. 622, passed 3-4-85; Am. Ord. 866, passed 11-26-01)




CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section




General Use Regulations




   52.01   Water system connections; permit required



   52.02   Application for permit; tapping fees



   52.03   Closing of water connection trenches



   52.04   Water use restriction



   52.05   Service pipe connections and regulations



   52.06   Use of one connection; limitation



   52.07   Lawn sprinkling regulations



   52.08   Fire prevention connections



   52.09   Damage to meters



   52.10   Water main construction



   52.11   Water wells



   52.12   Cross connections




Administration and Enforcement




   52.25   Water rates



   52.26   No free service



   52.27   Enforcement of charges



   52.28   City not liable for disruption of service



   52.29   Right of entry of city employees



   52.30   Lien; security deposits



   52.31   Water funds; records



   52.32   Director's authority as to emergency use of water



   52.33   Commission may adopt regulations



   52.34   Addition of substances to water supply



   52.35   Fluoridation



Geothermal Systems



   52.51   Geothermal systems



 



   52.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Utilities, see Charter Art. XII



GENERAL USE REGULATIONS



§ 52.01  WATER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall tap any water main or distribution pipe of the
waterworks system or insert any corporation cock, stop cock or any other
fixture or appliance, or alter or disturb any service pipe, corporation stop,
curb stop, gate valve, hydrant, water meter or any other attachment, being
part of the waterworks system. No person shall install any water service pipe
with or from the mains or distribution pipes of the waterworks system, nor
with or from any other service pipe or main connected with the system, nor
make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any such service pipe, tap,
stop cock, hydrant, or other fixture or attachments connected with any such
service pipe or main, without first procuring a permit from the Division of
Public Works.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 899, passed 7-26-04)  Penalty, see §
52.99



§ 52.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; TAPPING FEES.



   (A)   Before any service connection shall be made to any part of the
waterworks system, or any work performed upon old or new connections, a
permit shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works. Such permit shall
be issued upon written application on forms obtainable from the Director of
Public Works. Applicants for water service shall furnish, lay and install all
that portion of the service not provided by the city at their own expense,
subject, however, to the supervision and inspection of the city.



   (B)   Upon filing an application for a permit to connect with any
water main or distribution pipe of the waterworks system, there shall be paid
such tapping fee as shall be prescribed by the regulations governing the
waterworks system. Such fees shall include all the costs of tapping the main,
installing the corporation cock, furnishing and laying the service pipe to
the property line, and installing stop cock and shutoff box; all such
materials shall be the property of the city water system.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.03  CLOSING OF WATER CONNECTION TRENCHES.



   The Division of Public Works, upon completion of water connection
installations from the main to a point at or near the curb line, shall
completely fill the trenches throughout their entire length so that they
shall be safe for public travel. If, however, the plumber, property owner, or
other person responsible for installation of the water extension wishes to
have the city leave a portion of the connection trench unfilled to facilitate
construction of the extension system, he/she may notify the city foreperson
on the job to that effect and the foreperson shall leave that portion of the
trench unfilled. The person responsible for the extension installation shall
then become fully responsible for protecting the public, day and night,
against any harm or damage arising from the opening in the street. Such
person shall provide warning lights and other protective devices prescribed
by law without cost to the city.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.04  WATER USE RESTRICTION.



   The owner or occupant of any building or premises entitled to the use
of water from the system shall not supply water to any other person except
upon written permission of the Director of Public Works, nor shall he/she
permit unnecessary waste of water.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.05  SERVICE PIPE CONNECTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall remove water from any fire hydrant, or turn
the water from any main or distribution pipe into any service pipe without a
permit from the Division of Public Works.



   (B)   All service pipe connecting with the distribution mains of the
waterworks system from the city curb stop to inside the building shall be
laid in accordance with the regulations governing the County Plumbing Code.



   (C)   Whenever the service pipes from the curb stop located near the
curb or property line to the meter or the valves on the pipe at the meter
require repair or replacement to insure proper delivery of water to permit
changing the meter, prevent waste of water, or for any other cause, the
property owner shall be notified to make such replacement or repair, and if
such replacement or repair is not made within seven days, the water service
may be discontinued.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 865, passed 11-12-01; Am. Ord. 899,
passed 7-26-04)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.06  USE OF ONE CONNECTION; LIMITATION.



   (A)   Each water service shall supply no more than one building. If
separate city water meters are installed to serve units within the building,
each meter must have a shutoff accessible to the city 24 hours a day. The
building owner shall provide the shutoff for each meter in one of the
following ways:



      (1)   Install a branch with a stop cock for each branch
outside the line of the unit to be supplied. Locking mechanisms shall be
provided where multiple branches are served by a single meter. Lockouts and
meters must be located in a central meter room location within each building.
The lockset to the meter room must be keyed to match the city standard meter
room key. This is required to allow 24-hour access by city employees; or



      (2)   Install buried service line branches for each unit with
a city standard direct burial curbstop and riser outside the line of each
unit to be supplied. Individual unit shutoff boxes shall not be installed in
the right-of-way. The location of the shutoffs shall be provided to the city
using accurate dimensions from the building.



   (B)   All existing buildings that currently do not meet the
requirements of this section must meet these requirements whenever
alterations, repairs, or additions requiring a building permit occur with a
dollar value to $5,000 or more, or when the existing water service is
replaced. Compliance with the requirements of this section must occur within
90 days of either of these two events.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.07  LAWN SPRINKLING REGULATIONS.



   The use of water for sprinkling lawns and gardens, and the hours for
such use, may be prescribed by regulations adopted by the Director of Public
Works.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)



§ 52.08  FIRE PREVENTION CONNECTIONS.



   The owner or occupant of any building desiring to install large pipes
with hydrant and hose couplings to be used only in case of fire, will be
permitted to make connection with the street main at its own expense upon
application to the Director of Public Works.  Maintenance of all fire
hydrants within the city is the responsibility of the city water department.
The owner of fire hydrants located on non-city owned water mains shall pay
the city for the maintenance cost of their hydrants. The applicant shall pay
all charges for the hydrant installation and maintenance as prescribed by the
Commission and such connection shall be made in accordance with the
specifications of the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 899, passed 7-26-04)



§ 52.09  DAMAGE TO METERS.



   Water meters may be installed upon any premise supplied with water and
any damage to the meter resulting from the failure of the owner or occupant
to properly protect the meter shall be assessed against such owner or
occupant. No person shall tamper with or remove the meter or interfere with
the reading of the meter. A meter bypass will only be allowed for hospitals,
schools, nursing homes or other medical facilities that can demonstrate the
need for uninterrupted service.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.10  WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION.



   When a water main is constructed in a public right-of-way or easement
by means of financing other than by the developer or subdivider as provided
in Ordinance No. 492, Subdivision Regulations Ordinance (see Chapter 153), or
by charges against the adjacent property owner (voluntary charges or special
assessments) and the property being connected was annexed to the city after
January 1, 1972, the following procedures shall apply:



   (A)   At such time as the owner of adjacent property wishes to make
use of the water main, a connection fee must be paid to the city prior to the
issuance of a permit to connect into the main. The amount of the connection
fee shall be determined annually by resolution of the Commission and shall be
increased or decreased to reflect typical current construction costs reported
by the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, FRONTAGE shall be defined as the
width of a platted lot or lots on which development is taking place. For lots
adjacent to two or more streets, FRONTAGE shall be the lesser lot dimension
or one-half the longer dimension, whichever is greater.



   (C)   For unplatted property the lot frontage shall be determined by
the City Manager after consultation with the property owner. Unless approved
by the Commission, the unplatted frontage of a single-family dwelling shall
not be computed to be greater than 125 feet.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)



§ 52.11  WATER WELLS.



   (A)   This section prohibits the installation of water wells within
the city, except for lawn irrigation wells.



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   LAWN IRRIGATION WELL.  Any well drilled solely for
thepurpose of taking water for the irrigation of lawns, gardens, shrubbery,
trees, or other landscaping within the city.



      (2)   WELL.  A well drilled  for the purpose of taking water
within the city.



   (C)   Well construction.  No well may be drilled within the city,
except for lawn irrigation wells as defined above. Lawn irrigation wells may
not be constructed so that piping is installed in any structure or building
that also contains water supply piping connected to the municipal water
system of the city.  A lawn irrigation well may not be drilled so that the
well is capable of drawing water from any aquifer which the city uses to
supply water to the municipal water supply system of the city.



   (D)   Application fee.  A person desiring to drill a lawn
irrigation well shall make application to the City Manager or designee. The
application shall be in writing and shall contain all pertinent information
concerning the size, depth, and location of the proposed well, and a
statement of the purpose(s) for which water will be used. Such application
shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by resolution
of the Commission.



   (E)   Compliance. Before a permit will be issued, the applicant must
establish that the lawn irrigation well will comply with this chapter and all
other applicable governmental regulations.



   (F)   Hearing. If an applicant is denied a permit to drill a lawn
irrigation well, the applicant may request a hearing with the Commission. The
Commission shall hold a hearing on the application as it may deem necessary
and may grant or deny issuance of a permit to construct a lawn irrigation
well. If granted, the permit shall contain such reasonable terms and
conditions as the Commission may deem necessary. These requirements may
relate to the relative depth or size of the lawn irrigation well, the use and
disposal of water taken, and the construction and testing requirements for
the operation of the well.



   (G)   Regulations. 



      (1)   When any permit is granted for drilling a lawn
irrigation well, the well shall be drilled within strict conformity and in
compliance with the regulations contained in the permit. The well shall be
subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the Water Department of the
city.



      (2)   If piping interconnections to the city water system are
identified in conjunction with any well, the city has the right to
immediately disconnect the city water supply from the property. The water
supply will not be reinstalled until the interconnection is eliminated.



   (H)   Deposition of waste.  No water from lawn irrigation wells
within the city shall be permitted to enter the sewer system of the city
unless the water first passes through a meter approved by the Water
Department and installed on the water well.



   (I)   Sewer charges.  Water from lawn irrigation wells deposited in
the sewer system of the city shall be subject to the same charges as are
provided for sewage treatment of water from the city water system.



   (J)   Revocation.  Any permit granted under this section shall be
revocable upon the violation of any of the permit requirements. Prior to
revoking such permit, the city shall give to the owner or operator of such
lawn irrigation well at least 30 days' written notice of its intent to revoke
the permit. The notice shall be deemed sufficient if served upon the owner
personally, or by registered mail or regular mail and by posting a copy on
the premises where the lawn irrigation well is located, in the event that
personal service is not made. Use of water shall be discontinued upon
revocation of the permit, and the well shall be capped or otherwise treated
as required by applicable law.



   (K)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide for and
protect the general public health and welfare of the people of the city.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 899, passed 7-26-04)  Penalty, see §
52.99



§ 52.12  CROSS CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Cross connections within the public water supply system are
defined as a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through
which water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants can enter
the public water supply system.



   (B)   Adoption of rules.  The water supply cross connection rules
of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality being R325.11401 to
R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code and any amendments thereto are
hereby adopted by reference.



   (C)   Inspections.  Inspections shall be made of all properties
served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public
water supply are deemed possible.  The frequency of inspections and
re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the Water Department and as approved by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality.



   (D)   Discontinuance of water service.  The Water Department is
hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable
notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section
exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. 
Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross
connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this
section.



   (E)   Posting “Water Unsafe for Drinking.”  The potable water
supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply
system shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and by the state and city
plumbing codes.  Any water outlet which could be used for potable or
domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be
labeled in a conspicuous manner as:




WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING




   (F)   This section does not supersede the state and city plumbing
codes, but is supplementary to them.



(Ord. 899, passed 7-26-04)  Penalty, see § 52.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.25  WATER RATES.



   (A)   Rationale.  It is recognized that use of the waterworks
system requires payment of costs ofproviding the services of the waterworks
system.  Such costs include not only the day-to-day operation and
maintenance costs, but also the costs incurred to construct and install the
waterworks system components, the cost to undertake reasonably foreseeable
repairs and replacement, and the like. When the waterworks system components
were designed and constructed, they necessarily needed to be sized to
accommodate all foreseeable possible usage of the waterworks system from a
premises so the waterworks system is available to accommodate such reasonably
foreseeable usage. Accordingly, certain charges are imposed regardless of
actual usage, while other charges recognize that those who actually make more
use of the waterworks system should pay more.



   (B)   Establishing rates, fees and charges.  Rates, fees and
charges for connection to and use of the waterworks system shall be in
amounts established from time to time by resolution of the City Commission,
based on the following:



      (1)   All users within the city shall pay user rates and
charges based on the cost of providing water service in accordance with
following:



         (a)   A service charge based on water meter size for
each meter on the premises. The service charge shall be the minimum charge to
a user, regardless of actual water or sanitary sewer use.



         (b)   A consumption charge per gallon  of water used
from the city waterworks system. This volume or commodity charge shall be in
addition to the service charge.



         (c)   For any premises not currently metered, there
shall be a meter charge to defray the cost of the meter and its installation,
which shall be the current charge established under the water ordinance
provisions of the City Code.



         (d)   A connection fee or fees shall be levied for all
connections to the waterworks system.  Such fees shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the City Commission. Such fees include the cost
of tapping the main, installing the corporation cock, furnishing and laying
the service pipe to the property line, and installing stop cock and shutoff
box.



         (e)   Rates shall be established by resolution of the
City Commission and shall be revised from time to time as required to
maintain the fiscal integrity of the waterworks system, and the same may be
revised and taxed by resolution of the City Commission as may be necessary to
produce the amounts required to pay such charges and expenditures, and
provide the funds necessary for the maintenance of the financial integrity of
the waterworks system.



   (C)   Special assessments.  Nothing in this section shall be
construed as limiting, modifying or amending any special assessments levied
against certain properties within the city in connection with the
construction of sanitary sewers.



   (D)   Multiple meters.  For customers with multiple meters, each
meter shall be treated as a separate customer for calculation of charges.



   (E)   Water service outside the city limits.  Rates and charges for
water service outside the city limitsshall be determined by multiplying by
1.325 the rates established in division (B) of this section.



   (F)   Contractual rates.  Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the
city and its consumers.



   (G)   Billing procedures,



      (1)   When utility charges are not timely paid, it is
necessary to re-bill, to undertake other procedures required by this chapter,
to prepare separate notices and accountings and undertake other tasks that
are not needed if such charges are timely paid. In addition, the other
waterworks system users essentially subsidize the nonpaying or late paying
user's use of the waterworks system. The waterworks system is not
established, operated or well-adapted to provide financing services for its
users. Accordingly, charges are made to compensate the waterworks system for
the costs incurred due to untimely payments.



      (2)   Billing for water charges shall be made monthly and
bills shall be sent to consumers monthly, based on either an actual reading
of the meter or a reasonable estimate of the reading. A late payment charge
of 5% of the total monthly bill shall be added if the bill is not paid by the
fifteenth day of the month.  Each subsequent month an additional 1% will be
added until payment is made.



      (3)   The city may collect an administrative fee to offset the
cost of attaching liens and collecting delinquent services charges pursuant
to § 52.27(B)(3).  Such fee shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Commission, and shall not exceed the cost incurred
administering and collecting such liens.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 865, passed 11-12-01; Am. Ord. 899,
passed 7-26-04; Am. Ord. 979, passed 5-28-13)



§ 52.26  NO FREE SERVICE.



   Free service shall not be furnished to the city, any person, or any
public or private agency.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 899, passed 7-26-04)



§ 52.27  ENFORCEMENT OF CHARGES.



   (A)   Nonpayment of special assessment and/or connection and
operation maintenance, private hydrant and replacement charges.  Nonpayment
of any special assessment for water service or connection charges for
connection to the waterworks system, private hydrants and repair charges
shall subject the property owner to a liability for such charges and
penalties as provided for a late or delayed connection.



   (B)   Nonpayment of service charge.



      (1)   Discontinuance of service.  If a service charge
established pursuant to this chapter remains delinquent for a period of 45
days, the city may shut-off and discontinue water and/or sewer service to
such premises. Such service shall not be re-established until all delinquent
charges, penalties and a charge for the re-establishment of such service
shall be paid. The turn-on charge shall be established by resolution of the
City Commission.



      (2)   Collection by litigation.  In addition to discontinuing
service, the city shall have the option of collecting all such delinquencies
and penalties due pursuant to this chapter by legal proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction.



      (3)   Collection by enforcement of lien. Service,
installation, inspection, use, material, repair and private hydrant charges
and fees, including penalties and interest due thereon shall constitute a
lien on the premises served from the date of such service, unless the city is
served with written notice that a tenant is responsible for such charges. The
city official or officials in charge of the collection annually, not later
than May 1 of each year, shall certify to the tax assessing officer the fact
and the amount of such delinquency. The charge shall then be entered by the
tax assessing officer of the city upon the next tax roll as a charge against
the premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same
manner as general taxes against such premises are collected and tax liens
enforced. If the city is provided with notice in writing, including a copy of
the lease of the affected premises, that a tenant is responsible for the
water charge, the city may require as a condition to rendering water services
to such premises a cash deposit equal to service charges at current rates for
three months as security for the payment of service charges.



   (C)   Disconnection for late payment.



      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility
service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in
charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provision to the
effect:



         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before
the date set forth on the bill.



         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before the
date, a shut off notice will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the
bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and



         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of
his/her bill shall have the right to a hearing at which time he or she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official
shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be discontinued
and shall have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's
complaint.



      (2)   Requests for waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the
absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure
provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in
no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.



      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for delinquent service have been paid, along
with a turn-on charge to be established by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 865, passed 11-12-01; Am. Ord. 899,
passed 7-26-04)



§ 52.28  CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DISRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   The city shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the
supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting off the water to
make necessary repairs or connections or for any other cause.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)



§ 52.29  RIGHT OF ENTRY OF CITY EMPLOYEES.



   The inspectors and employees of the Division of Public Works shall have
power and authority at all reasonable hours to enter upon any premises where
water is furnished from the city waterworks system for the purpose of reading
meters or the inspection of all pipes and fixtures connected with said
waterworks system, and they shall have authority to require any defective
pipes or fixtures to be repaired, removed or replaced if such fixtures are
not in compliance with the provisions of the regulations pertaining to the
waterworks system. Any person refusing or neglecting to make such repairs
shall be in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.30  LIEN; SECURITY DEPOSITS.



   (A)   The city shall have, as security for the collection of any
water rates or any assessments, charges, fees, materials or rentals due or to
become due for the use or consumption of water supplied to any property, a
lien upon the property to which such water was supplied. The lien shall
become effective immediately upon the distribution of the water to the
property supplied, but shall not be enforceable for more than three years.
The lien may be enforced by the city in the manner prescribed by the general
laws of this state providing for the enforcement of tax liens, provided that
the provisions of this section shall not be construed as preventing the city
from suing such owner by action in the name of the city for the amount due to
it, or from preventing the city from cutting off such water services from the
property at any time such water charges have not been paid as subject to the
provisions of division (E) of this section.



   (B)   The Water Department will apply interest to the deposit
accounts of all users with security deposits over $50. For deposits exceeding
$50, the federal funds rate per annum as set from time to time shall be
credited to the customer's account, to be computed annually on all sums that
have remained on deposit for six months and to be credited semi-annually.
Accrued interest due shall be paid at the time the deposit is refunded.



   (C)   When a tenant is responsible for payment of water and/or sewer
bills and a lease has been executed containing a provision that the lessor
not be liable for water and/or sewer charges, it shall be the responsibility
of the lessor to notify the Water Department office with an appropriate
affidavit signed by both parties requesting a waiver of lien.



      (1)   The affidavit must state:  “The tenant is totally
responsible for all charges for water and/or sewer service furnished to the
premises by the City of Mount Pleasant. The tenant understands that no
service shall be commenced to the above address until there has been
deposited with the city a sum as set forth by resolution adopted by the
Commission, and a copy of the lease including this affidavit furnished to the
city. The tenant further understands that payment of charges for water and/or
sewer service may be enforced by discontinuing the services to the
premises.” The affidavit shall state the expiration date of the lease.



      (2)   Upon receipt of notification, the city will waive its
lien pursuant to Public Act 178 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. § 123.165, as
amended, and the water and sewer bills to the lessee within the term of the
lease shall not be a lien against the property. Upon expiration of the lease,
a new affidavit must be submitted:  Without such notification, water and/or
sewer bills will be a lien against the property served regardless of any
lease provisions between the parties. A 20-day notice shall be given to the
city by the lessor of any cancellation, change or termination of the lease.
The water and/or sewer bills shall be in the name of the premises except as
provided by this section concerning tenants.



   (D)   When the Water Department has received and approved a request
from the property owner for a waiver of lien, a cash deposit will be required
of the lessee as security for payment of all water and/or sewer charges. The
amount of the deposit shall be set by resolution of the Commission.



   (E)   Disconnection for late payment.



      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility
service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in
charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the
effect:



         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before
the date set forth on the bill;



         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that
date, a shut off notice will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the
bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and



         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of
his/her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he/she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his/her choosing
and may present orally or in writing his/her complaint and contentions to the
city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized
to order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.



      (2)   Requests for waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct



billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or
resort to the hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued
at the time specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and
unpaid for at least 30 days.



      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue
utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for delinquent service have been paid, along
with a turn-on charge to be established by resolution of the Commission.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 899, passed 7-26-04)



§ 52.31  WATER FUNDS; RECORDS.



   All water funds shall be kept separate from other funds of the city,
and an accurate separate record shall be kept of all receipts and
disbursements.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)



§ 52.32  DIRECTOR'S AUTHORITY AS TO EMERGENCY USE OF WATER.



   The Director of Public Works shall have the discretion to restrict the
volume of water from the distribution system of the city if the public's
health, safety and general welfare are likely to be endangered by prescribing
rules and regulations to conserve the water supply during such emergency.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 899, passed 7-26-04)



§ 52.33  COMMISSION MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS.



   The Commission shall from time to time adopt such regulations for the
operation and use of the water system and the supplying of water to consumers
as the Commission shall deem expedient and necessary, and such regulations
when adopted shall be and become a part of this chapter and the penalties
prescribed shall apply to the violation of any such regulations.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)



§ 52.34 ADDITION OF SUBSTANCES TO WATER SUPPLY.



   In order to ensure the safety of Mt. Pleasant public water, it shall be
unlawful and a public nuisance for any person, agent, or water treatment
system to add any substance to the public water supply for the purpose of
affecting the physical or mental functions of any person, except to make the
water safe or potable such as in the use of chlorine, unless the substance
meets the following criteria:



   (A)   The substance must have been specifically approved by the U.S.
FDA for safety and effectiveness with a safety margin protective for all
adverse health and cosmetic effects.



   (B)   The substance, when measured at maximum use levels, must
contain no contaminants or concentrations exceeding U.S. Maximum Contaminant
Level Goals or Michigan Public Health Goals, whichever is more protective.



(Ord. –, passed 11-4-04)



Cross-reference:



   Deposit of unwholesome substances, § 96.06



   Nuisances, see Chapter 96



§ 52.35  FLUORIDATION.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 52.34, the Water
Department is hereby authorized and directed to provide the means and to
proceed with the introduction of sufficient sodium fluoride to raise the
total fluoride concentration in the finished public water supply to
approximately one part of fluoride to every 1,000,000 parts of water being
distributed in the public water supply system of the city, and the Commission
by resolution shall have the authority, from time to time, to change the
proportions thereof.



   (B)   In no event shall the amount of total fluoride concentration
in the finished public water supply exceed the limits established by
applicable state and federal regulations.



(Ord. –, passed 11-8-05)



GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS



§ 52.51  GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Purpose. This section is intended to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare by protecting groundwater from pollution
or depletion resulting from construction, reconstruction, repair, or
abandonment of geothermal systems. An open loop geothermal system that
penetrates and/or draws water from an aquifer can deplete or pollute
groundwater. An improperly constructed or maintained closed loop geothermal
system can also pollute the city's groundwater.



   (B)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this
section unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ANNULAR SPACE. The space between the casing or well screen and
the wall of the borehole, or between drilling pipe and casing, or between two
separate strings of casing.



      AQUIFER. A subsurface water-bearing layer of soil, sand, gravel,
or rock that will yield usable quantities of water to a well.



      BOREHOLE. A hole drilled or bored into the earth, usually for
exploratory or economic purposes; a hole into which casing, screen, and other
materials may be installed to construct a well.



      CASING. An impervious, durable pipe placed in a borehole to
prevent the walls of the borehole from caving, and to seal off surface
drainage or undesirable water, gas, or other fluids and prevent entrance into
a well.



      CLOSED HORIZONTAL LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM.  A geothermal system
that consists of the following basic elements: underground loops of piping;
heat transfer fluid; a heat pump, and an air distribution system. An opening
is made in the earth. A series of pipes are installed into the opening and
connected to a heat exchange system in the building. The pipes form a "closed
loop" and are filled with a heat transfer fluid. The fluid is circulated
through the piping from the opening into the heat exchanger and back. The
system functions in the same manner as the open loop system except there is
no pumping of groundwater. A horizontal closed loop geothermal system shall
be no more than 20 feet deep.



      CLOSED VERTICAL LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. A geothermal system in
which a borehole extends beneath the surface. Pipes are installed with
U-bends at the bottom of the borehole. The pipes are connected to the heat
exchanger and heat transfer fluid is circulated through the pipes.



      DRINKING WATER. Water which is intended for human consumption and
other domestic uses, and is considered to be free of harmful chemicals and
disease-causing microorganisms.



      GEOTHERMAL BOREHOLE. A hole drilled or bored into the earth into
which piping is inserted for use in a geothermal system.



      GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. A system for heating and/or cooling buildings
using the earth's thermal properties in conjunction with electricity.



      GROUNDWATER. Water beneath the earth's surface that is located
between saturated soil and rock that supplies wells and springs.



      GROUT.  A low permeability material that is emplaced in the
space between the wall of the borehole and the casing of a well end, or
placed in the annular space of the borehole. The emplacement of grout is to
prevent the migration of water or fluid contaminants into and through the
borehole. Grout shall consist of neat cement, high solids bentonite slurry,
or hydrated bentonite chips.



      HEAT TRANSFER FLUID. Any liquid used especially for the purpose
of transferring thermal energy from the heat source to another location.



      OPEN LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. A geothermal system in which
groundwater is pumped from a well into a heat exchanger located in a surface
building. The water drawn from the earth is then pumped back into the aquifer
through a different well or in some cases the same well (commonly referred to
as "re-injection"). Alternatively, the groundwater could be discharged to a
surface water body (also known as "pump and dump"). In the heating mode,
cooler water is returned to the earth, while in the cooling mode, warmer
water is returned to the surface water body.



      PERMEABILITY. The propensity of a material to allow fluid to move
through its pores or interstices. Permeability is an important soil parameter
when flow of water through soil or rock is a matter of concern.



      SEPARATION/ISOLATION DISTANCES. The distance of a source of
contamination from a surface drinking water source, a groundwater source
supply well, or any type of borehole.



      WATER SUPPLY WELL. A well used for extracting groundwater for
human consumption.



      WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, driven, dug, bored,
augured, jetted, washed, or otherwise constructed for the purpose of
exploring for groundwater, monitoring groundwater, utilizing the geothermal
properties of the ground, or extracting water from or injecting water into an
aquifer. WELL does not include an open ditch, drain tiles, an excavation made
for obtaining or prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals, or products
mined or quarried, lateral geothermal heat exchange systems less than 20 feet
deep, nor temporary dewatering wells such as those used during the
construction of subsurface facilities only for the duration of the
construction.



   (C)   Permit required.



      (1)   No person shall:



         (a)   Construct or install a geothermal system;



         (b)   Dig, bore, drill, replace, modify, repair, or
destroy a well that is, is intended to be, or was part of a geothermal
system; or



         (c)   Make any other excavation that may intersect
groundwater without first obtaining a permit from the city and, for
construction of a well, the Central Michigan Health Department.



      (2)   A permit is required for any closed loop horizontal and
closed loop vertical geothermal system. (No permit shall be issued for any
open loop geothermal system because such systems are prohibited by division
(I) below.)



   (D)   Application procedure.  Applications for city permits shall
be made to the city DPW on approved forms and shall contain the information
required on the form. Permits shall be issued for the particular parcel of
property on which the geothermal system is to be constructed and/or
installed. The application may be made by the property owner, a
representative of the property owner authorized in writing by the property
owner such as a tenant authorized under a lease, or the well driller, and
shall be accompanied by the required filing fee. The locations of the loops
that are part of any closed loop geothermal system shall be completely
located within the property's boundaries.



   (E)   Well permits. All wells must be permitted by the Central
Michigan District Health Department (or its successor agency) and must comply
with the Michigan Water Well Construction and Pump Installation Code,
Groundwater Quality Control, Part 127, 1978 P.A. 368, as amended, and all
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or any replacing statute
and regulations. A site plan showing the generally proposed location, number
of wells, and location of loops must be submitted to the City Engineer for
review and approval. The plan must include the calculated, anticipated volume
of grout that will be needed.



   (F)   Permit requirements.



      (1)   Permits may be issued only for closed loop geothermal
systems.



      (2)   Boreholes shall be drilled by Michigan
registered/licensed water well drillers.



      (3)   The property owner shall maintain a well log of the
borehole and "as built" plans showing the location and specifications of
closed loop geothermal system components.



      (4)   Borehole piping shall be high density polyethylene as
specified in International Ground Source Heat Pump Association standards for
closed loop heat pumps.



      (5)   The annular space of the boreholes must be grouted for
the full depth of the borehole using high solid bentonite grout.



      (6)   Heat transfer fluids must be Environol 2000 manufactured
by Water Furnace Company or another non-toxic, environmentally safe material
approved by the City Engineer.



   (G)   Permit fee. The geothermal system permit fee shall be in the
amount established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Commission and
shall be paid when the application is filed.



   (H)   Permit revocation.



      (1)   The City Engineer may revoke a permit if:



         (a)   Any action or any geothermal system violates a
provision of this section; or



         (b)   There are factual inaccuracies in a permit
application or the documents supporting it.



      (2)   The City Engineer shall notify the property owner and
occupant in writing of a permit revocation.



      (3)    The property owner or occupant may appeal a revocation
to the City Manager who shall hold a hearing on that revocation to allow the
appellant to prove the geothermal system complies with this section or that
the statements in the application and supporting documents are true. Further
appeals shall be to the Isabella County Circuit Court.



      (4)   When a permit is revoked, the property owner shall
immediately abandon the geothermal system as required by this section. Except
in cases where the City Engineer reasonably determines that groundwater
contamination is an imminent risk, the obligation to abandon the geothermal
system after revocation shall be stayed while any appeal is pending.



   (I)   Open loop systems prohibited. Open loop geothermal systems are
prohibited.



   (J)   System testing.  Pipes for geothermal system permitted under
this section shall be tested hydrostatically at one and one-half times the
maximum system design pressure, but not less than 100 psi (689 kPa), for a
duration of not less than 15 minutes. All geothermal systems must be pressure
checked by a licensed geothermal system contractor every five years from the
date of its initial successful test. Results shall be filed with the City
Engineer. If the test results show the system fails to meet these
requirements, system shutdown and repairs shall be made at the direction of
the City Engineer.



   (K)   System abandonment. Abandonment of a geothermal system shall
comply with the laws, rules and regulations applicable to abandonment of
water supply wells. Heat transfer fluid must be removed by displacement with
grout. The top of the borehole must be uncovered and capped with grout.



   (L)   Conflict with other regulations. If any provision of this
section conflicts with any applicable state or federal law, rule or
regulation which is more strict or which is determined to preempt a provision
of this section, the applicable state or federal requirement shall control.



   (M)   Violation and penalty.  Regardless of § 52.99 which applies
to violations of other sections of this chapter, any violation of any
provision of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a civil fine of up to $5,000.  Each day of that a condition
exists that violates any provision of this sections shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 952, passed 8-24-09)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be held
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in accordance
with the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance. The fine for violation of a
municipal civil infraction under this chapter shall be $50; the second
violation, $100; and the third or any subsequent violation within any one
calendar year, $250. In addition, the city shall be reimbursed for any costs
incurred by the city in causing any work to be performed which the respondent
has failed to perform. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 774, passed 8-28-95)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 53:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 54:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



Section



   54.01   Introduction



   54.02   General definitions



   54.03   Permit applications for single-family and two-family
dwellings



   54.04   Pre-application procedure and waiver requests for
development and redevelopment projects.



   54.05   Application submittal requirements for development and
redevelopment projects



   54.06   Permit application review for development and redevelopment
projects



   54.07   Permittee compliance during and after construction



   54.08   Inspection requirements



   54.09   Minimum design requirements for storm drainage systems



   54.10   Variations from design requirements



   54.11   Appeals



   54.12   Penalties and enforcement



   54.13   Other permits and approvals



§ 54.01  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   This chapter has been prepared as a collaborative effort by
the Isabella County Drain Commissioner’s office and the municipal entities
of the Charter Township of Union, Chippewa Township, and the City of Mt.
Pleasant.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general compliance
requirements for storm water management practices. This chapter establishes
the framework through which detention and/or retention measures will be
implemented and details the process that must be followed to gain approval
for new developments and redevelopment drainage systems and maintenance of
storm water systems. Except as provided in § 54.03, the standards,
procedures, and permitting requirements set forth in this chapter apply only
to development and redevelopment projects (as defined below), and not to
projects involving the construction of one-family or two-family dwellings, or
to projects involving additions, extensions, or modifications to such
dwellings or the parcels on which they are located.



   (C)   The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish, among others,
the following objectives:



      (1)   Reduce artificially induced flood damage;



      (2)   Minimize increased storm water runoff rates and volumes
from identified new land development;



      (3)   Minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses,
culverts and bridges, and other structures;



      (4)   Encourage water recharge into the ground where
geologically favorable conditions exist;



      (5)   Reduce non-point source pollution;



      (6)   Maintain the integrity of stream channels for their
biological functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes;



      (7)   Minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and
streambed stability;



      (8)   Reduce erosion from development or construction projects;



      (9)   Preserve and protect water supply facilities and water
resources by means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion,
and runoff pollution;



      (10)   Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil
erosion, and non-point source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands
that were developed without storm water management controls meeting the
purposes and standards of this chapter; and



      (11)   Reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water
bodies and, to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to
protect water bodies from degradation resulting from changing land use where
there are insufficient storm water management controls.



   (D)   This chapter covers the following topics:



      (1)   A summary of the procedures to be followed under this
chapter, including requirements, review procedures, inspection requirements
and other agency requirements;



      (2)   A description of design requirements and engineering
calculations; and



      (3)   A description of minimum design criteria and rules to be
followed for design of new drainage systems, and the maintenance of those
systems.



(Ord. 992.  Passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.02  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (“AHJ”). An AHJ is a political
subdivision or other entity (i.e., a city, township, or the Isabella County
Drain Commissioner) authorized to issue a storm water permit for a given
project. Any political subdivision or entity with infrastructure that is
potentially affected by water runoff from the subject site shall be an AHJ
with respect to the project, and a separate storm water permit shall be
required from each. A property owner in the city wishing to conduct
activities subject to the requirements in this chapter shall first contact
the City of Mt. Pleasant’s Department of Public Works, which shall
administer the permitting requirements of this chapter on behalf of the city
and refer the applicant to all other appropriate AHJs. When an AHJ other than
the city is exercising jurisdiction over a project located in the city, the
terms of this chapter adopted by that particular AHJ shall apply.



   ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE. The restricted discharge from a site after
development or redevelopment as calculated in accordance with this chapter.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of surface water from a flood that
has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. The
base flood elevation is shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs).



   BASE FLOODPLAIN. The area inundated by the base flood.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). A practice, or combination of
practices and design criteria that comply with the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality’s Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan Watersheds,
(including, but not limited to minimizing storm water runoff and preventing
the discharge of pollutants into storm water) as determined by the AHJ and/or
designer.



   BIO-RETENTION AREAS. Areas designed to use soil and plant material to
mimic natural processes and store, filter and infiltrate storm water into the
ground. These areas may be used anywhere to achieve a degree of storm water
treatment.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC §§
1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated
thereunder.



   CONDUIT. Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or
movement of water whether open or closed.



   CONSTRUCTION SITE STORM WATER RUNOFF. Storm water runoff from a
development site following an earth change.



   CONTROL ELEVATION. Contour lines and points of predetermined elevation
used to denote a detention storm area on a plat or site drawing.



   DESIGNEE. The engineer formally designated by the AHJ or its appointee
to act as its engineer.



   DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. Design professional responsible for the design of
a drainage plan, who must have appropriate qualifications and licenses to
produce types of plans and perform the types of calculations required under
this chapter.



   DETENTION. The capture of storm water and release over a given period
of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate.



   DETENTION FACILITY. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the
flow of storm water to a prescribed maximum rate and to concurrently detain
the excess waters that accumulate behind the outlet.



   DETENTION STORAGE. The temporary detaining or storage of storm water in
storage basin, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots, school yards, parks,
open space, or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions,
with the rate of drainage regulated by appropriately installed devices.



   DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT. The installation or construction of
impervious surfaces on a development site that requires, pursuant to state
law or local ordinance, the AHJ’s approval of a site plan, plat, site
condominium, special land use, planned unit development, or the erection of
buildings or structures; provided, however, the terms DEVELOPED or
DEVELOPMENT do not refer to individual one-family or two-family dwellings or
projects involving the construction of such a dwelling, or to projects
involving an addition, extension or modification to such dwelling or the
parcel on which it is located (since projects requiring a building permit on
the site of a one-family or two-family dwelling are subject to the
requirements in § 54.03 of this chapter).



   DEVELOPER. Any person proposing or implementing the development of land.



   DEVELOPMENT SITE. Any land that is being or has been developed, or that
a developer proposes for development.



   DISCHARGE. The release or outflow of water from any source.



   DISCHARGER. Any person or entity that directly or indirectly discharges
storm water from any property. DISCHARGER also means any employee, officer,
director, partner, contractor, or other person who participates in, or is
legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission that is or results
in a violation of this chapter.



   DRAIN. Any drain as defined in the Drain Code of 1956, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 280.1et seq., other than an established county or
intercounty drain.



   DRAINAGE. The collection, conveyance, or discharge or groundwater
and/or surface water.



   DRAINAGE AREA. The area from which storm water runoff is conveyed to a
single outlet (i.e., a watershed or catchment area).



   DRAINAGE WAY. The area within which surface water or groundwater is
carried from one part of the lot or parcel to another part of the lot or
parcel or to adjacent land.



   DRAIN COMMISSIONER. The Isabella County Drain Commissioner or his or
her designee.



   DRAINAGE DISTRICT/WATERSHED. All drainage areas contributing surface
water runoff upstream of a discharge location of the proposed development.



   DRAINS (PRIVATELY-OWNED). Those drains under private ownership and not
under the control of the Drain Commissioner’s office or any other public
entity.



   EARTH CHANGE. Any human activity, which removes groundcover, changes
the slope or contours of the land, or exposes the soil surface to the actions
of wind and rain. EARTH CHANGE includes, but is not limited to, any
excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative
roots.



   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   EROSION. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action
of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.



   EXCESS STORM WATER RUNOFF. The volume and rate of flow of storm water
discharged from a drainage area, which is in excess of the allowable drainage.



   EXEMPTED DISCHARGES. Discharges other than storm water.



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency of the federal
government charged with emergency management.



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of
water bodies or the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff
from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood
waters from any source.



   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate
the risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, or structures with their contents.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved to carry and discharge a base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water service elevation more than one-tenth of a
foot due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage.



   FLOODWAY OPENING. Any opening of a solid wall such as a window or door,
through which floodwaters could penetrate within the floodway.



   FOREBAY. These are manmade surface waters used as pretreatment systems.
They are designed to temporarily store the first flush of runoff from a storm
event and provide for pollutant removal through settling. A FOREBAY or other
pretreatment system is recommended at each inlet to a detention system or
retention basin.



   FOREBAY OUTLETS. Outlets that convey flow from a forebay into detention
systems and retention basins. They must include a flow restrictor for
restricted flow and a weir for unrestricted flow.



   FREEBOARD. A volume of additional storage designed with a detention
basin. A safety factor within a storm water detention system that is based on
a minimum of one foot detention volume above the proposed high water
elevation of a detention pond. This volume provides additional storm water
detention in the event that a storm exceeds the design capacity.



   GRADING. Any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or
any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition.



   GREEN ROOFS. The roofs are constructed of a lightweight soil medium,
layered over a waterproofing membrane. The soil is planted with a specialized
mix of plants that can thrive in a roof environment. These types of roofs are
also known as VEGETATED ROOF COVERS, ECO-ROOFS, or NATURE ROOFS.



   ICDC. The Isabella County Drain Commissioner.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any method or means for conveying an illicit
discharge into water bodies or the county’s storm water system.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to water bodies that does not consist
entirely of storm water, discharges pursuant to the terms of an NPDES permit,
or exempted discharges as defined in this chapter.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Surface that does not allow storm water runoff to
percolate into the ground.



   INFILTRATION. A process whereby precipitation or groundwater seeps into
the ground.



   INFILTRATION TRENCH. Also known as a PERCOLATION TRENCH, is a shallow
excavated trench, filled with gravel or crushed stone, designed to infiltrate
storm water through permeable soils into the ground water aquifer. This type
of trench is not considered a preferred means of discharging storm water.



   LEACHING BASIN. A catch basin that is fabricated of barrel and riser
sections that permit runoff into the ground. This type of basin is not
considered an effective means of controlling and treating storm water runoff.



   LOCAL BOARD OF APPEALS. The appeals board, if any, designated by the
AHJ to review appeals under this chapter. When the city acts as AHJ, the
local board of appeals shall be the city’s Building Board of Appeals.



   LOW-IMPACT DESIGN (LID). A storm water management strategy that aims to
control water, both rainfall and storm water runoff, at the source.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including a
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
requirements.



   MDEQ. The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.



   MINIMAL FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus
one foot at any given location. That elevation which provides reliable flood
protection above the base flood protection, no less than one foot.



   NPDES. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.



   NREPA. The Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451,
of 1994, as amended.



   O & M PLAN. An operations and maintenance plan, which describes
resource organization, responsibilities, policies, and general procedures.



   ONE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building used exclusively for one-family
occupancy.



   OVERLAND FLOW-WAY. Surface area that conveys a concentrated flow of
storm water runoff.



   OWNER. Any person or entity having legal or equitable title to
property, or any person or entity having or exercising care, custody, or
control over any property.



   PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum volume of discharge of storm water runoff
at a given location.



   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of storm water runoff at a given
location.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or
private corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or any other legal
entity.



   PERVIOUS PAVEMENT. A porous surface that allows rainwater to pass
directly through into the soil naturally.



   POLLUTANT. A substance discharged, which includes, but is not limited
to, the following. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard
wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial and
agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a
pollutant under the Clean Water Act.



   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person having legal or equitable title to property,
or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any
property.



   RAIN GARDEN. A landscaping feature planted with perennial native
plants. It is a bowl-shaped or saucer-shaped garden designed to absorb storm
water runoff from impervious surfaces such as roofs and parking lots.



   REDEVELOPMENT. Altering, improving, or otherwise changing the use of an
existing developed property, including, but not limited to, roof, pavement,
or any other impervious surface. Ordinary maintenance of impervious surfaces
to address the effects of weathering (including, for example, pot hole repair
or overlays, crack seal, and seal coating to address pavement defects) does
not constitute REDEVELOPMENT. However, crush and shape projects affecting
pavement base materials shall constitute REDEVELOPMENT.



   RETENTION. The capture and containment of storm water until it
infiltrates the soil and/or evaporates.



   SOIL EROSION. The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land,
creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling
formation of new sedimentary deposits.



   STATE OF MICHIGAN WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. All applicable state rules,
regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions
of Section 3106 of Part 31 of 1994 PA 451, as amended.



   STORM DRAIN. A system of open or enclosed conduits and appurtenant
structures intended to convey or manage storm water runoff, groundwater and
drainage.



   STORM WATER PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter.



   STORM WATER CONTROL PLAN. Written narratives, specifications, drawings,
sketches, written standards, operating procedures, or any combination of
these.



   STORM WATER RUNOFF. The water from a rain storm, snow melt or other
natural event or process, which flows over the surface of the ground or is
collected in a drainage system.



   STORM WATER RUNOFF FACILITY. The method, structure, area, system, or
other equipment or measures designed to receive, control, store, or convey
storm water.



   STREAM. A river, stream or creek, which may or may not be serving as a
drain, or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed, and visible
evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water.



   TAP-IN. Out-letting to an open or closed county drain or municipal
storm sewer.



   TIME OF CONCENTRATION. The elapsed time for storm water runoff to flow
from the most distant point in a drainage area to the outlet or other
predetermined point.



   TWENTY-FIVE YEAR, 24-FOUR HOUR STORM EVENT. The maximum 24-hour
precipitation event with a probable recurrence interval of once in 25 years,
as defined by the National Weather Service.



   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building used exclusively for the occupancy of
two individual families living independently of each other.



   UNDERGROUND DETENTION SYSTEMS. An underground system consisting of one
or more underground pipes or structures that are designed to provide the
required volumes for storage for a development project.



   UPLAND AREA. Land located in the upper portion of a watershed whose
surface drainage flows toward the area being considered for development.



   URBANIZATION. The development, change, or improvement of any parcel of
land consisting of one or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational, or public utility purposes.



   USACE. The United States Army Corps of Engineers, which is responsible
for investigating, developing and maintaining the nation’s water and
related resources.



   VEGETATED SWALES. Channels that are broad, shallow, and lined with
vegetation that slow and filter storm water runoff and promote infiltration.



   WATER BODY. A river, lake, stream, creek or other watercourse or
wetlands.



   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel,
ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, street,
roadway, swale, or wash in which water flows in a definite direction, either
continuously or intermittently.



   WATERSHED. A region draining into a water body.



   WEIR. A low dam built to raise the level of water upstream and regulate
its flow. The flow is frequently controlled by a notch through which water
flows. WEIR control may be a depression in the side of a tank, reservoir, or
channel, or it may be an overflow dam or other similar structure.



   WETLANDS. Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or aquatic life as
defined by the DEQ.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 10-9-17)



§ 54.03 PERMIT APPLICATIONS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   (A)   Owners shall apply for and obtain storm water permits before
commencing any project that requires a building permit on the site (or
proposed site) of a single-family or two-family dwelling, or any project that
involves an earth change of more than 200 square feet. Projects where there
are no earth changes, such as re-roof, new windows, siding, or the like shall
be exempt from the storm water permit requirement, even if a building permit
is required. However, property owners and/or constructors undertaking such
projects shall still be responsible for managing storm water runoff from
their projects.



   (B)   To apply for a storm water permit, the owner shall submit a
drawing to the AHJ, showing why the project will not adversely affect
neighboring properties or public infrastructure (e.g., lack of substantial
change in impervious surfaces, natural runoff into a storm water drain or
water body with sufficient capacity for receipt, grading alterations, or
installation of a retention system). Services of a design professional are
not required. The AHJ shall approve a storm water permit upon determining
that adverse effects are not likely to occur. If it determines that adverse
effects are likely to occur, the AHJ may require, as a condition of granting
a permit, that the applicant: (1) submit a suitable plan to manage storm
water by maintaining storm water on the property, or by directing its flow so
as not to adversely affect the neighboring property; and (2) enter a
maintenance agreement, as described in § 54.06(O) of this chapter, requiring
ongoing maintenance of the system to be installed.



   (C)   The governing body in the AHJ’s jurisdiction may establish a
fee for applications submitted under this section.



   (D)   Violations of this section are subject to the remedies
provided in § 54.12.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 10-9-17)



§ 54.04  PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND WAIVER REQUESTS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.



   (A)   Request for a waiver. Before preparing a permit application
for a development or redevelopment project in accordance with the
requirements in § 54.05, an owner/developer may submit a written request to
the AHJ for a waiver of the storm water design standards specified in this
chapter. To be accepted, the waiver must comply with all requirements in
either division (1) or division (2) below.



      (1)   It is for redevelopment of a parking lot within the
city, the city is the AHJ, and it includes a written statement and drawing
that together show each of the following about the project:



         (a)   It entails redevelopment of the parking lot only
within the footprint of the existing parking lot less than 2,600 square feet
in size, and it will not increase the total area of impervious surfaces on
the property;



         (b)   It will not include the construction of any new
structures or facilities, and will not impact any existing structures or
facilities;



         (c)   It will not increase storm water runoff onto
adjacent property or into the city storm water system;



         (d)   It will not require a change to the storm water
management drainage system;



         (e)   It will not accept additional storm water from
adjoining properties, buildings, or other structures;



         (f)   It will not eliminate or reduce the volume or
effectiveness of existing storm water structures, facilities, or measures;



         (g)   If regrading is involved, it will not result in a
change of drainage pattern; and



         (h)   It is not located within the A-17A drainage
district or Upton drain area, as shown in the drawing labeled “Area
Boundary Where no Parking Lot is Exempt from Storm Water Ordinance,” dated
9-20-2017, prepared by and on file with the Division of Public Works
Engineering Department (an exhibit attached to Ordinance No. 1028, passed
10-9-17, that is hereby incorporated by reference as part of § 54.04(A)(1)).



         The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an
amount established by a resolution of the City Commission.



      (2)   The waiver application includes a written statement and
a drawing that together show that no retention measures of any type are
needed in order to prevent adverse effects on neighboring properties or
public infrastructure, because:



         (a)   There will be no more than a de minimis increase
in impervious surfaces on the site;



         (b)   There will be no increase or only a de minimis
increase in storm water resulting from the project; and



         (c)   The amount of discharge at the project site has
historically been within the levels permitted under this chapter.



   (B)   Waiver approval. If the waiver satisfactorily meets one the
criteria in division (A), the AHJ shall waive all further requirements under
this chapter and grant a storm water permit. However, even when issuing a
waiver, the AHJ may require a maintenance agreement under this chapter if the
AHJ determines, in its discretion, that such agreement is needed to ensure
the future protection of public infrastructure.



   (C)   Pre-application meeting. It is highly recommended that the
owner/developer and the design engineer meet with the AHJ and/or its
designee, and applicable utility companies, where the project is proposed
prior to submitting a permit application. The intention of these meetings is
to obtain uniform direction and communication to minimize misdirection of
early construction and minimize costs to proprietors, developers, and
consultants.



   (D)   Permit application submittal. The owner/developer or the
engineer of record on behalf of the owner/developer shall submit permit
applications to the AHJ. Application for a permit shall be made prior to the
start of any work on the proposed development or redevelopment requiring a
permit under this chapter. Soil test borings, vegetative cutting solely for
land surveys, percolation tests, and normal maintenance shall not be
considered a start of work under this chapter.



   (E)   Sequential applications for phased projects. For projects on a
site which are so large or complex that a plan encompassing all phases of the
project cannot reasonably be prepared prior to initial work, sequential
applications on major construction activities may be allowed. Requests for
sequential applications shall be approved by the AHJ prior to submittal of
the initial permit application.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 10-9-17)



§ 54.05  APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.



   As part of the permit application, the owner/developer or design
professional shall submit two sets of storm water control (SWC) plans, two
sets of calculations (made pursuant to the calculation formulas attached in
the Appendix to Ordinance No. 992, passed 1-12-15 - a copy of the ordinance
is available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk during
normal business hours), and any other supporting information to the AHJ or
designee. The plans and calculations shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter. The checklist, design requirements, and design that will be
used during the review process of the drainage construction plans are
established by this chapter. The application materials shall include the
following items:



   (A)   An application fee in an amount established by the governing
body in the AHJ’s jurisdiction. The application fee may vary based on the
size and nature of the proposed development;



   (B)   A performance bond equal to 25% of the estimated construction
costs of the proposed storm water control facilities, as estimated by the
owner/developer or design professional and found to be reasonable by the AHJ;



   (C)   The location of the development site and water bodies that
will receive storm water runoff;



   (D)   The existing and proposed topography of the development site,
including the alignment and boundary of the natural drainage courses, with
contours having a maximum interval of one foot. The project location shall be
delineated on the pertinent Isabella County soil map;



   (E)   Baseline datum to be established, assumed datum are not
allowed. Contact the AHJ for datum information;



   (F)   The development tributary area to each point of discharge from
the development;



   (G)   Calculations for the final peak discharge rates;



   (H)   Calculations for any facility’s or structure’s size and
configuration;



   (I)   A drawing showing all proposed storm water runoff facilities
with existing and final grades;



   (J)   The sizes and locations of upstream and downstream culverts
serving the major drainage routes flowing into and out of the development
site. Any significant off-site and on-site drainage outlet restrictions other
than culverts should be noted on the drainage map;



   (K)   An implementation plan for construction and inspection of all
storm water runoff facilities necessary to the overall drainage plan,
including a schedule of the estimated dates of completing construction of the
storm water runoff facilities shown on the plan and an identification of the
proposed inspection procedures to ensure that the storm water runoff
facilities are constructed in accordance with the approved drainage plan;



   (L)   A plan to ensure the effective control of construction site
storm water runoff and sediment track-out onto roadways;



   (M)   Drawings, profiles, and specifications for the construction of
the storm water runoff facilities reasonably necessary to ensure that storm
water runoff will be drained, stored, or otherwise controlled in accordance
with this chapter;



   (N)   The name and place of employment of the design professional
that will inspect final construction of the storm water runoff facilities;



   (O)   A maintenance agreement, in form and substance acceptable to
the AHJ, shall be required for ensuring maintenance of any privately owned
storm water runoff facilities. The maintenance agreement shall include the
owner/developer’s written commitment to provide routine, emergency, and
long-term maintenance of the facilities and, in the event that the facilities
are not maintained in accordance with the approved drainage plan, the
agreement shall authorize the AHJ to maintain any onsite storm water runoff
facility as reasonably necessary, at the owner/developer’s expense. The
completed, signed, notarized recordable maintenance agreement shall be
submitted to the AHJ’s office. Copies of the maintenance agreement form are
available at the AHJ’s office.



   (P)   Any other information necessary for the AHJ to verify that the
drainage plan complies with this chapter. All design information must be
compatible for conversion to the AHJ’s Geographic Information System.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.06  PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW FOR DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT
PROJECTS.



   (A)   General review procedure. The AHJ or designee will review all
plans, calculations, and other information for compliance with the design
requirements in § 54.09 of this chapter. All materials will be reviewed for
completeness. Calculations will be checked. The minimum design requirements
as outlined in this chapter will be used as a reference. The drainage plan
checklist will be reviewed. The AHJ shall approve, approve with conditions,
or disapprove an application within 21 days. The review period begins upon
the receipt of a completed application, plan and fees. Copies of the
approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval will be provided by the
AHJ. The AHJ and/or the AHJ’s agent or designee does not accept any
liability for the design or function of the storm water collection and
retention/detention system. The review is for compliance with the storm water
management standards in this chapter only. It is the registered design
professional that has signed and sealed the final plans and/or the
applicant’s responsibility for the functionality of the design.



   (B)   Approval or approval with conditions. Upon a determination by
the AHJ or designee that the permit application has met or obtained a waiver
of the design requirements of this chapter, the AHJ will issue a permit
specifying the work approved and any applicable permit conditions. A
waterproofed permit must be posted on the site in plain view, along with an
approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan permit, which must be
obtained from the Isabella County Community Development Office. The AHJ shall
notify the owner/developer of the approval, disapproval, or approval with
conditions. The owner will be emailed (or mailed hard copy) a final approval
letter upon completion of the project, prior to release of the bond.



   (C)   Disapproval. If the proposed drainage system is disapproved,
the AHJ will issue a report outlining the deficiencies. The applicant may
resubmit for review. Two sets of plans and calculations shall be resubmitted.



   (D)   Approval of sequential applications for phased projects. When
additional phases are planned, an approval with conditions will be given
addressing the overall storm water requirements of the site. The AHJ
encourages submittal of all phases of a multi-phased project at the onset of
a proposed project to the extent possible, but may authorize sequential
applications when necessary. The bond and permit will address only the
portions to be constructed during the phase to which the application pertains.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.07  PERMITEE COMPLIANCE DURING AND AFTER CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Changes to approved plan. Any proposed changes made to the
approved plan shall be submitted to the AHJ and/or designee for review and
approval and shall be subject to a revised-plan review fee in an amount
established by the governing body in the AHJ’s jurisdiction from time to
time. Changes made without approval may result in revocation of approval.
Revocation of a Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (SESC) permit may also
be considered. All changes in the approved plan authorized in the permit
shall be submitted to the AHJ for approval prior to any work on the system or
earth change.



   (B)   Storm water control plan - “as-built” drawings.
Construction record drawings with specific as-built information as required
by the AHJ, shall be submitted by the registered design professional to the
AHJ.



   (C)   Post-construction certification. A post-construction letter of
certification from a design professional certifying construction of the
system in compliance with the approved plans shall be submitted to the AHJ.
The AHJ is authorized to conduct inspections to ensure compliance in
accordance with the procedures in § 54.08.



   (D)   Permit expiration. Permits shall expire automatically upon the
project completion date provided on the permit. Permits shall also terminate
automatically if construction has not commenced within one year of the date
of issuance. The AHJ may extend a permit for a period not to exceed one year
upon the request of the owner/developer at the AHJ’s discretion.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.08  INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Developments and redevelopments. The design professional
responsible for the design of the storm water management system shall be
required to complete an inspection report, on a form acceptable to the AHJ
and certify that the system conforms with the design specified on the permit
application. The design professional shall also submit as-built drawings to
the AHJ. The AHJ may also require inspection of the system by AHJ personnel.
These inspections may occur during or after construction as determined
necessary by the AHJ or designee during the review process, and would be
outlined in the letter of approval. If inspection by the AHJ is required, the
owner/developer and/or design professional shall be informed at what stage of
construction these inspections will be required. Subsequent inspections may
be required if deficiencies exist.



   (B)   Inspection of facilities to be publicly owned. The (AHJ) may
agree to incorporate facilities constructed under this chapter as part of the
public drainage system upon request of the property owner. Any facilities
that are to become part of the public drainage system shall be inspected by
the AHJ at the time of installation. Any work which is concealed at the time
of inspection shall be exposed for approval.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.09  MINIMUM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.



   This section outlines the requirements for the design of storm water
management systems. Engineering judgment must be utilized to accomplish the
overall goals of this chapter.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Storm water detention requirements for any new
construction development, redevelopment, or land use change occurring within
Isabella County will be determined according to the storm water discharge
permit procedure.



      (2)    The peak runoff rate during a 25-year storm event from
a developed or redeveloped site shall not exceed the allowable discharge rate
(Qa). This rate is determined using the design impervious factor (IF). The
impervious factor of demolished sites is assumed undeveloped. Either
detention storage with a regulated discharge must be provided or all
impervious surfaces must be removed from the site.



      (3)   There shall be no detrimental effect on the floodway or
the floodplain elevation during a 25-year design storm upstream or downstream
of the proposed development area as a result of the proposed development. All
required detention volumes must be stored above the 100-year floodplain.



      (4)   The drainage area used for computation will be the total
area of land on the subject property that flows to the site outlet.
Extraneous flows from off-site upland areas shall be permitted to bypass or
pass through the storm water management system on the subject property.
Bypass or pass-through devices must be sized with sufficient capacity to
receive the flow generated by a ten-year storm from upland areas. The
applicant must provide engineering calculations showing compliance with this
division as part of the permit process.



      (5)   Engineering calculations must be submitted with the
storm water discharge permit application. The calculations shall follow the
procedures outlined in the Appendix to Ordinance No. 992, passed 1-12-15. (A
copy of the ordinance is available for public inspection in the office of the
City Clerk during normal business hours.)



      (6)   Roof drains may be connected to a storm sewer system if
the flow through the outlet to the AHJ's system is properly restricted.
Unrestricted runoff from roof drain will not be accepted; there are no
exemptions.



      (7)   In the case of a proposed subdivision, the AHJ and/or
designee shall make a determination as to those control elevations that shall
be entered on the final plat, or make a determination as to the necessity for
deed restrictions on any particular lot in the subdivision requiring the
preservation of mandatory drainage facilities. Where a non-subdivided parcel
of land is proposed for development, the AHJ and/or designee shall make a
determination as to the need for covenants to maintain responsibility for
mandatory drainage facilities. All the facilities in the subdivision shall be
located in easements dedicated to the public, and shall be subject to
continual inspection during the construction period. Detention facilities
within proposed subdivision or condominium developments may be established as
county drains under the Drain Code of 1956, M.C.L.A. §§ 280.1 et seq., as
amended.



      (8)   Proposed storm sewer enclosures must be designed so they
will not adversely impact any adjacent properties, upstream or downstream,
and must be designed to the impervious factors of the lands based upon future
land use, not necessarily existing conditions.



      (9)   SESC measures must be implemented.



   (B)   Allowable discharge (Qa)/detention requirements.



      (1)   The peak storm water discharge rate from any proposed
development or redevelopment site as required in this chapter shall be
restricted to an allowable discharge (Qa). The allowable discharge from the
proposed area of development or redevelopment cannot exceed the calculated
discharge from the proposed site based on one of the following methods. The
method resulting in the lowest allowable discharge from the site shall be
used in determining the required detention.



   0.15 cubic feet per second per acre of contributing area. <i.e. 0.15
cfs/acre*10 acre site = 1.5 cfs Qa.



      (2)   Excess storm water runoff must be detained on site.
Equations for determining the required volume of detention storage are
outlined in the Appendix to Ordinance No. 992, passed 1-12-15. (A copy of the
ordinance is available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk
during normal business hours.) Detention storage calculations must be
included with review submittals.



   (C)   Storm water detention requirements.



      (1)   The storm water detention storage required for a site is
to be calculated using the Appendix to Ordinance No. 992, passed 1-12-15. (A
copy of the ordinance is available for public inspection in the office of the
City Clerk during normal business hours.) This must meet the 25-year minimum
storage storm. The allowable discharge is a maximum of 0.15 cfs per acre.



      (2)   If there are known existing flooding problem areas that
will be impacted by a proposed development, the required detention volume
will be determined by the AHJ.



   (D)   Discharge restrictor requirements. Restrictors are required to
regulate the discharge of  storm water to the allowable discharge rate
established for a site. The circular in-line  restrictor is sized based on
the orifice formula. The minimum restrictor size shall be two inches.



   a = Qa/[0.62 (64.4(h))½]



   a - area of orifice (square feet).



   Ah = head differential from center of orifice to Hydraulic Grade Line
of detention pond at maximum capacity (feet).



   (E)   Storm sewer piping requirements.



      (1)   Proposed storm sewer shall be designed to have capacity
to pass the ten-year design storm runoff rate (Qd).



      (2)   All storm sewer materials must comply with the
construction standards adopted by the AHJ.



      (3)   Provide two feet of minimum cover over the storm
drainage system.



      (4)   Provide 18-inch vertical separation between all other
utilities, including sanitary sewers and water mains.



      (5)   Provide ten-foot horizontal separation from other
utilities.



      (6)   Manholes/catch basins shall be placed at a maximum
distance of 400 feet from any other manholes/catch basins for
access/maintenance purposes.



      (7)   Provide a sump discharge outlet for each individual lot
in all developments. This outlet shall be a catch basin (minimum four-foot
diameter) and/or provide a storm water lead to each lot. Manufactured cored
and booted wye leads, six-inch minimum, to each lot are acceptable.



      (8)   Minimum pipe grades must be such to produce minimum
scouring velocity of two and one-half feet per second when pipe is flowing
full without surcharging.



      (9)   For storm drainage systems, plastic pipe may be used.
This plastic pipe shall be either schedule 80 PVC, smooth walled HDPE, or SDR
35. If pipe is perforated, a manufacturer's "sock" shall be used over the
pipe.



      (10)   Minimum pipe diameter for catch basin leads is 12
inches.



      (11)   Minimum pipe size for storm sewer main is 12 inches.



      (12)   Pipe should be sized for a ten-year design storm
without surcharging when possible.



      (13)   When two pipes or more of different sizes come into a
structure, the 8/10th flow lines shall match when possible.



      (14)   Catch basins should have a minimum sump depth of 24
inches.



   (F)   Detention requirements.



      (1)   Proposed storm drainage detention facilities shall be
designed to have capacity to detain, at minimum, the 25-year recurrence
interval design storm runoff volume in excess of the allowable discharge from
the site. The detention requirement must be discussed with the AHJ and/or
designee.



      (2)   The maximum design storage elevation in a detention area
must be a minimum of one foot below the lowest ground elevation adjacent to
the detention area.



      (3)   The design maximum storage elevation in a detention area
must not be less than 12 inches below the minimum finish floor elevation of
the proposed structure(s) or existing facilities.



      (4)   Design of detention facilities will incorporate features
that facilitate their inspection and maintenance. The designer shall submit
an Operation and Maintenance (O & M) Plan and/or provide a maintenance
agreement, as necessary, for any detention facility prior to its acceptance
by the AHJ.



      (5)   Designs of detention facilities shall incorporate safety
features, particularly at inlets, outlets, on steep slopes, and at any
attractive nuisances. These features may include, but not be limited to,
fencing, handrails, lighting, steps, grills, signs, and other protective or
warning devices so as to restrict access. Liability for the detention
facilities will be the responsibility of the owner/developer.



      (6)   Side slopes and the bottom of detention basins shall be
top soiled, to a minimum of four inches, and seeded. Soil erosion control
blankets must be installed to protect slopes if adequate vegetation does not
exist between September 1 and May 1.



      (7)   The side slopes and bottom of the basins shall be shaped
with maximum slopes of one vertical to four horizontal to allow mowing of
these surfaces.



      (8)   Detention basins and restrictors shall be maintained as
necessary. The owner will have 30 days to complete necessary maintenance on a
detention basin that has not been maintained, or a restrictor that has been
removed or not maintained. If this maintenance is not completed, the AHJ will
have any necessary maintenance completed at the owner's expense, unless other
arrangements have been agreed to in writing in an executed maintenance
agreement.



      (9)   Detention basins shall be constructed with the top of
banks a minimum of five feet from any pedestrian walkway (i.e., public and
private sidewalks/bike paths).



      (10)   Underground storm water detention systems will be
accepted. Storm water cleaning structures will be required at the inlets of
these basins.



      (11)   Concrete walled systems will also be considered.



   (G)   Rear lot drainage requirements.



      (1)   Rear lot tile drains with contributing drainage areas up
to one-half acre shall have a minimum diameter of six inches and a minimum
pipe slope of 0.5%.



      (2)   Rear lot tile drains with contributing drainage areas
greater than one-half acre and less than one acre shall have a minimum
diameter of eight inches and a minimum pipe slope of 0.3%.



      (3)   Rear lot tile drains with a contributing area greater
than one acre shall be considered the main-line storm sewer and shall be
designed according to corresponding requirements. Calculations shall be
submitted to verify the rear lot drains have the capacity to pass the
ten-year design storm event.



      (4)   All lots must be provided with rear lot drainage.



      (5)   Rear lot drainage tiles shall have a minimum cover of
two feet.



      (6)   The AHJ and/or designee shall approve rear lot drainage
tile and catch basin material. The minimum diameter of a rear lot catch basin
shall be 24 inches.



      (7)   An easement must be granted for rear lot drainage
serving more than one owner. For drainage improvements from private property
across other private property, easements must be obtained from property
owners to assure perpetual drainage rights and maintenance commitments by
participants sufficient to assure perpetual maintenance of the system. Copies
of all executed easements and agreements must be submitted to the AHJ.



   (H)   General compliance guidelines. The following guidelines are
required minimum and maximum, unless written justification is provided and
approved.



      (1)   The minimum surface slopes for overland drainage are as
follows:



         (a)   For bituminous-paved surfaces, 1%.



         (b)   For concrete-paved surfaces, 1%.



         (c)   For concrete curb and gutter, 0.4%.



         (d)   For drainage swales and valley-shaped ditches,
0.5%.



         (e)   For rear lot drainage swales and valley-shaped
ditches, 0.5%.



         (f)   Landscape grading, 2%.



      (2)   The maximum surface slopes for overland drainage are as
follows:



         (a)   For bituminous, concrete-paved surfaces, 5%.



         (b)   For concrete curb and gutter, 5%.



         (c)   For drainage swales and valley-shaped ditches, 5%.



         (d)   For rear lot drainage swales and valley-shaped
ditches, 5%.



         (e)   Drainage swales and valley-shaped ditches shall
have maximum side slopes of four horizontal to one vertical.



         (f)   Landscape grading, one vertical to four horizontal.



      (3)   Site designer is responsible to meet all ADA
requirements.



(Ord. 922, passed 1-12-15; Am. Ord. 1010, passed 5-23-16; Am. Ord. 1028,
passed 10-9-17)



§ 54.10  VARIATIONS FROM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   The AHJ may issue a storm water discharge permit that waives storm
water management requirements. Variation from these requirements shall
require the written approval of the AHJ, whose actions shall be conditioned
upon the following:



   (A)   The AHJ has determined that the overall storm water management
for drainage system is best suited to allow the site to drain unrestricted so
that the timing of the discharge will not adversely impact upstream lands;



   (B)   The owner/developer shall provide evidence in writing
outlining in detail the rationale for the proposed design changes including
hydraulic and or hydrologic computations. This document must be signed and
sealed by a licensed professional engineer; and



   (C)   Granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the territory in
which said property is located.



(Ord. 922, passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.11  APPEALS.



   Any person to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied,
including, but not limited to, an owner/developer who has been denied a storm
water permit, may appeal in writing to the AHJ not later than 30 days after
the action or decision being appealed. Such appeal shall identify the matter
being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The Local Board of Appeals
shall consider the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects, or
modifies the action being appealed. In the event that there is another local
governmental entity(s) within the drainage district at issue, such entity(s)
shall be notified of the request. In considering any such appeal, the Local
Board of Appeals may consider the recommendations of the AHJ and the comments
of other persons having knowledge or expertise regarding the matter. The
Local Board of Appeals may overturn the determination of the AHJ upon
determining that the AHJ has wrongfully interpreted or applied the standards
in this chapter. When the Drain Commissioner is the AHJ, the decision of the
Drain Commissioner is final.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.12  PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Denial and revocation of certificate of use and occupancy. The
AHJ’s building official shall deny or revoke a certificate of use and
occupancy for any building or structure without a valid storm water permit,
where such permit is required under this chapter.



   (B)   Storm water permit revocation. Any storm water permit issued
under this chapter may be revoked or suspended if there is a violation of the
conditions of the permit or if there is a misrepresentation or failure to
disclose relevant facts in the application submittal. The AHJ will provide
the owner/developer notice of its intent to revoke or suspend the permit via
email followed by an original copy by USPS first class mail.



   (C)   Municipal civil infraction base fines. Notwithstanding any
other provision in this Code of Ordinances, a person who violates any
provision of this chapter or any notice, order, permit, decision or
determination promulgated, issued or made by the AHJ under this chapter, or
any person who aids or abets such activity or knowingly submits false
information to the AHJ, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
subject to payment of a civil fine up to $1,000 per day for each infraction,
plus costs and other sanctions. Each day that a violation occurs and each
provision that a given act or failure to act violates shall be a separate
offense.



   (D)   Increased fines. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
Code of Ordinances, increased fines may be imposed for repeat offenses. As
used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any subsequent)
municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of
this chapter (i) committed by a person within any 12-month period and (ii)
for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be
responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this chapter shall
be as follows:



      (1)   The fine for any offense that is a first repeat offense
shall be not less than $2,500, plus costs.



      (2)   The fine for any offense that is a second repeat offense
or any subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000, plus costs.



   (E)   Additional court remedies. In addition to the other remedies
specified in this section, the court may order compliance with this chapter
and order other such relief as is appropriate to assure compliance with this
chapter. In addition, the AHJ may seek injunctive or other relief to
conditions in violation of this chapter and take such other actions as are
provided in this chapter or in other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
The election of one remedy shall not prevent the simultaneous or subsequent
pursuit of other remedies all of which are cumulative.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15)



§ 54.13  OTHER PERMITS AND APPROVALS.



   The granting of a storm water permit only authorizes the discharge of
storm water from the development for which the permit is required, subject to
the terms of the permit. It shall not be deemed to approve other development,
other land use activities, or replace other required permits. Examples of
other permits or approvals that may be required include:



   (A)   The AHJ requires that property owners seek and obtain approval
before tapping in to existing open drain or storm sewer. Approval must be
requested at least 72-hours prior to tap-in.



   (B)   Site plan approval is required for certain activities under
the AHJ’s zoning ordinance.



   (C)   The Isabella County Department of Community Development
Permits Office is the county enforcing agent for Isabella County, and a
permit must be obtained when applicable for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control (SESC).



   (D)   The Isabella County Road Commission has or shares jurisdiction
over drainage along county roads and county rights-of-way within Isabella
County. Sites located along county road rights-of-way and discharging to Road
Commission drainage systems must obtain a permit from the Road Commission.
When a crossing is installed over a county roadside drain, a permit must be
obtained from the Road Commission.



   (E)   The Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) has or shares
jurisdiction over drainage along state highways and state rights-of-way
within Isabella County. Sites located along MDOT rights-of-way and
discharging to MDOT drainage systems must obtain a permit from MDOT.



   (F)   The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) has
jurisdiction over proposed work within the 100-year floodplain, inland lake
and stream areas, and wetland areas. A permit must be obtained for work
proposed in these areas. In addition, the MDEQ is responsible for
implementing the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
storm water permitting program.



(Ord. 992, passed 1-12-15)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



   72.   BICYCLES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Uniform Traffic Code adopted



   70.02   Changes in code



   70.03   Operating while intoxicated, operating when visibly
impaired, and zero tolerance



   70.04   Driving while license suspended



   70.05   Driving while license suspended; FAC/FCJ



   70.06   Production of evidence of insurance; certificate of
insurance; violations and penalties; renewal, transfer, or replacement of
registration plate; points; exemptions



   70.07   Driving under influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled
substance; preliminary chemical breath analysis, administration; evidence,
presumptions



   70.08   Michigan Vehicle Code



Cross-reference:



   Driving on sidewalks prohibited, see § 98.36



§ 70.01  UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages
and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they
are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference.



   (B)   References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan cities,
townships and villages referring to governmental unit shall mean the City of
Mount Pleasant.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner
required by law and shall at the same time publish a supplementary notice
setting forth the purpose of the said Uniform Traffic Code and that of the
fact that complete copies of the code are available at the office of the City
Clerk for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times.



(Ord. 523, passed 5-16-77; Am. Ord. 911, passed 9-12-05)



§ 70.02  CHANGES IN CODE.



   The following sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code for
cities, townships and villages are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and
additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent
section numbers used in this ordinance shall refer to the like numbered
sections of the Uniform Traffic Code.



Sec. 2.54  Clerk.



   Delete section entirely.



Sec. 2.55  Clerk to Issue Permit for Loading or Unloading at an Angle to
Curb.



   Delete section entirely.



Sec. 2.56  Clerk to Issue Permit for Curb Loading Zone.



   Delete section entirely.



Sec. 2.57  Clerk to Provide Traffic Citation Forms.



   Delete section entirely.



Sec. 2.58  Records to be kept.



   Delete section entirely.



Sec. 4.21  Bicycle Path; vehicles prohibited; snowmobiles permitted under
certain conditions. Section amended to read:



   Sec. 4.21 “Bicycle paths”; vehicles prohibited.



   1.   A person shall not operate a vehicle upon or across a bicycle
path except to enter or leave adjacent property.



   2.   A person shall not park a vehicle upon a bicycle path.



   3.   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor.



Sec. 5.16(c)  Consumption of Liquor on highways or on property open to
public.



Delete section entirely.



Sec. 6.5  Bicycle dealers.



   Delete section entirely.



Sec. 6.21  Bicycle; bell, siren whistle.



   Delete section entirely.



Chapter 10, Snowmobiles, Sec. 10.1 - 10.75.



   Delete Chapter and Sections entirely.



(Ord. 523, passed 5-16-77; Am. Ord. 568, passed 4-17-80; Am. Ord. 603, passed
5-2-83; Am. Ord. 666, passed 4-4-88; Am. Ord. 804, passed 8-25-97)



§ 70.03  OPERATING WHILE INTOXICATED, OPERATING WHEN VISIBLY IMPAIRED, AND
ZERO TOLERANCE.



   (A)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle
upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
vehicles, within this state if the person is operating while intoxicated. 
As used in this section OPERATING WHILE INTOXICATED means any of the
following:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a
controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance.



      (2)   The person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more
per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters
of urine, or beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an alcohol content of
0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
per 67 milliliters of urine.



      (3)   The person has an alcohol content of 0.17 grams or more
per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters
of urine.



   (B)   The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of
a vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated
upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
motor vehicles, within this state by a person if any of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a
controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance.



      (2)   The person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more
per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters
of urine, or beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an alcohol content of
0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
per 67 milliliters of urine.



      (3)   The person's ability to operate the motor vehicle is
visibly impaired due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor, a controlled
substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance.



   (C)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle
upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
vehicles, within this state when, due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor,
a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance, the person's ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired.
If a person is charged with violating division (A), a finding of guilty under
this division may be rendered.



   (D)   A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or
not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the
general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state if the person has
any bodily alcohol content. As used in this division, ANY BODILY ALCOHOL
CONTENT means either of the following:



      (1)   An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more
than 0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
per 67 milliliters of urine, or beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an
alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more but less than 0.10 grams
per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters
of urine.



      (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting
from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.



   (E)   A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle
upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
vehicles, within this state if the person has in his or her body any amount
of a controlled substance listed in schedule 1 under section 7212 of the
public health code, 1978 PA 368, as amended, M.C.L.A. § 333.7212, or a rule
promulgated under that section, or of a controlled substance described in
section 7214(a)(iv) of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, as amended,
M.C.L.A. § 333.7214.



   (F)   If a person is convicted of violating division (A)(1), (2) or
(E), all of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one
or more of the following:



         (a)   Community service for not more than 360 hours.



         (b)   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.



         (c)   A fine not less than $100 or more than $500.



   (G)   If a person is convicted of violating division (A)(3), all of
the following apply:



      (1)   The person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one
or more of the following:



         (a)   Community service for not more than 360 hours.



         (b)   Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.



         (c)   A fine not less than $200 or more than $700.



   (H)   A person who is convicted of violating division (B) is guilty
of a crime as follows:



      (1)   A misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, or both.



   (I)   If a person is convicted of violating division (C), all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one
or more of the following:



         (a)   Community service for not more than 360 hours.



         (b)   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.



         (c)   A fine of not more than $300.



   (J)   In the judgment of sentence under division (A) or (C), the
court may order vehicle immobilization as provided in  M.C.L.A. § 257.904d.



   (K)   If a person is convicted of violating division (D), all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one
or both of the following:



         (a)   Community service for not more than 360 hours.



         (b)   A fine of not more than $250.



      (2)   If the violation occurs within seven years of one or
more convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or more of the following:



         (a)   Community service for not more than 60 days.



         (b)   A fine of not more than $500.00.



         (c)   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.



   (L)   In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under this
section, the city make seek, and the court may order the person to pay the
costs of the prosecution under the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175,
M.C.L.A. §§ 760.1 to 777.69.



   (M)   A person sentenced to perform community service under this
section shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the state or
appropriate local unit of government for the cost of supervision incurred by
the state or local unit of government as a result of the person’s
activities in that service.



   (N)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (A), (C),
or (E), the court shall not permit the defendant to enter a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere to a charge of violating division (D) in exchange for
dismissal of the original charge. This division (N) does not prohibit the
court from dismissing the charge upon the prosecuting attorney’s motion.



   (O)   Except as otherwise provided in division (Q), if a person is
charged with operating a vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance in
violation of division (A), the court shall require the jury to return a
special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts
the person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the
court shall make a finding as to whether the person was under the influence
of a controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a
controlled substance at the time of the violation.



   (P)   Except as otherwise provided in division (Q), if a person is
charged with operating a vehicle while his or her ability to operate the
vehicle was visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance in
violation of division (C), the court shall require the jury to return a
special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts
the person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the
court shall make a finding as to whether, due to the consumption of a
controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance, the person’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was visibly
impaired at a time of the violation.



   (Q)   A special verdict described in divisions (O) and (P) is not
required if a jury is instructed to make a finding solely as to either of the
following:



      (1)   Whether the defendant was under the influence of a
controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance at the time of the violation.



      (2)   Whether the defendant was visibly impaired due to his or
her consumption of a controlled substance at the time of the violation.



   (R)   If a jury or court finds under division (O), (P), or (Q) that
the defendant operated a motor vehicle under the influence of or while
impaired due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of
a controlled substance and an alcoholic liquor, the court shall do both of
the following:



      (1)   Report the finding to the Secretary of State.



      (2)   On a form or forms prescribed by the state court
administrator, forward to the department of state police a record that
specifies the penalties imposed by the court, including any term of
imprisonment, and any sanction imposed under M.C.L.A. § 257.904d.



   (S)   The court may order as a condition of probation that a person
convicted of violating division (A) or (E), shall not operate a motor vehicle
unless the vehicle is equipped with an ignition interlock device approved,
certified, and installed as required by law.



   (T)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a record described in
(R)(2) is a public record and the department of state police shall retain the
information contained on that record for not less than seven years.



   (U)   In a prosecution for a violation of division (D), the
defendant bears the burden of proving that the consumption of alcoholic
liquor was a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by
a preponderance of the evidence.



(Ord. 827, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 896, passed 2-9-04; Am. Ord. 972, passed
6-11-12)



§ 70.04  DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED.



   (A)   A person whose operator's or chauffeur's license or
registration certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been
notified as provided in M.C.L.A. § 257.212 of that suspension or revocation,
whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a
license, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open
to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within this state.



   (B)   A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by
the person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general
public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state, by a person whose
license or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose
application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a
license, except as permitted under this act.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who
violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable as follows: For a first violation, by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both. Unless the vehicle was
stolen or used with the permission of a person who did not knowingly permit
an unlicensed driver to operate the vehicle, the registration plates of the
vehicle shall be canceled by the Secretary of State upon notification by a
peace officer.



   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who has one currently
effective suspension or denial on his or her Michigan driving record under
M.C.L.A. § 257.321a or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to
M.C.L.A. § 257.321a (failure to appear in court and/or failure to comply
with judgment) and has never been convicted of or received a civil infraction
determination for a violation that occurred during that suspension or denial.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, a person who never applied for a
license includes a person who applied for a license, was denied, and never
applied again.



(Ord. 839, passed 2-28-00)



§ 70.05  DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED; FAC/FCJ.



   A person who fails to answer a citation, or a notice to appear in court
for a violation reportable to the Secretary of State under M.C.L.A. §
257.732 or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a violation of a
law of this state reportable to the Secretary of State under M.C.L.A. §
257.732, or for any matter pending, or who fails to comply with an order or
judgment of the court, including, but not limited to, paying all fines,
costs, fees, and assessments, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or
both.



(Ord. 839, passed 2-28-00)



§ 70.06  PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE; CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE;
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; RENEWAL, TRANSFER, OR REPLACEMENT OF REGISTRATION
PLATE; POINTS; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The owner of a motor vehicle who operates or permits the
operation of the motor vehicle upon the highways of this state or the
operator of the motor vehicle shall produce, pursuant to division (B) of this
section, upon the request of a police officer, evidence that the motor
vehicle is insured under Chapter 31 of the insurance code of 1956, Public Act
218 of 1956, being M.C.L.A. §§ 500.3101 - 500.3179. An owner or operator of
a motor vehicle who fails to produce evidence of insurance under this
division when requested to produce that evidence, or who fails to have motor
vehicle insurance for the vehicle as required under Chapter 31 of Public Act
218 of 1956 is responsible for a civil infraction, the penalty for which is
$90. At the time the owner or operator is determined to be responsible for
this violation, if the owner or operator produces evidence that the vehicle,
at the time of the police officer's request, was insured as required under
Chapter 31 of Public Act 218 of 1956, but the proof of insurance was not
produced to the police officer, the penalty for the civil infraction shall be
$35.



   (B)   A certificate of insurance, if issued by an insurance company,
which certificate states that security which meets the requirements of
sections 3101 and 3102 of Public Act 218 of 1956, being M.C.L.A. §§
500.3101 and 500.3102, is in force shall be accepted as prima facie evidence
that insurance is in force for the motor vehicle described in the certificate
of insurance until the expiration date shown on the certificate. The
certificate, in addition to describing the motor vehicles for which insurance
is in effect, shall state the name of each person named on the policy, policy
declaration, or a declaration certificate whose operation of the vehicle
would cause the liability coverage of that insurance to become void.



   (C)   If an owner or operator of a motor vehicle is determined to be
responsible for a violation of division (A) of this section, the court in
which the civil infraction determination is entered may require the person to
surrender his or her operator's or chauffeur's license unless proof that the
vehicle has insurance meeting the requirements of sections 3101 and 3102 of
Public Act 218 of 1956, is submitted to the court. If the court requires the
license to be surrendered, the court shall order the Secretary of State to
suspend the person's license. The court shall immediately destroy the license
and shall forward to the Secretary of State an abstract of the court record
as required by M.C.L.A. § 257.732. Upon receipt of the abstract, the
Secretary of State shall suspend the person's license, beginning with the
date on which a person is determined to be responsible for the civil
infraction, for a period of 30 days or until proof of insurance which meets
the requirements of sections 3101 and 3102 of Public Act 218 of 1956 is
submitted to the Secretary of State, whichever occurs later. A person who
submits proof of insurance to the Secretary of State under this division
shall pay a service fee of $25 to the Secretary of State. The person shall
not be required to be examined as set forth in M.C.L.A. § 257.320c and shall
not be required to pay a replacement license fee.



   (D)   If an owner or operator of a motor vehicle is determined to be
responsible for a violation of division (A) of this section, the court in
which the civil infraction determination is entered shall notify the
Secretary of State of the vehicle registration number and the year and make
of the motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation. This
notification shall be made on the abstract or on a form approved by the
Supreme Court Administrator. Upon receipt, the Secretary of State shall
immediately enter this information in the records of the department. The
Secretary of State shall not renew, transfer, or replace the registration
plate of the vehicle involved in the violation or allow the purchase of a new
registration plate for the vehicle involved in the violation until the owner
meets the requirements of M.C.L.A. § 257.227a, or unless the vehicle
involved in the violation is transferred or sold to a person other than the
owner's spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, or child.



   (E)   Points shall not be entered on a driver's record pursuant to
M.C.L.A. § 257.320a for a violation of this section.



   (F)   This section does not apply to the owner or operator of a
motor vehicle that is registered in a state other than this state or a
foreign country or province.



(Ord. 839, passed 2-28-00)



§ 70.07  DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCE; PRELIMINARY CHEMICAL BREATH ANALYSIS, ADMINISTRATION; EVIDENCE,
PRESUMPTIONS.



   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was
operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public
or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for
the parking of vehicles within this state, and that the person, by the
consumption of intoxicating liquor, may have affected his or her ability to
operate a vehicle or reasonable cause to believe that a person who is less
than 21 years of age was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other
place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including
an area designated for the parking of vehicles within this state while the
person had any bodily alcohol content as that term is defined in M.C.L.A. §
257.625(6), may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. The following provisions apply with respect to a preliminary
chemical breath analysis administered under this section:



   (A)   A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part
upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.



   (B)   The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are
admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in M.C.L.A. §
257.625e(1), or in an administrative hearing for one or more of the following
purposes:



      (1)   To assist the court or hearing officer in determining a
challenge to the validity of an arrest. This division does not limit the
introduction of other competent evidence offered to establish the validity of
an arrest.



      (2)   As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content,
if offered by the defendant to rebut testimony elicited on cross-examination
of a defense witness that the defendant's breath alcohol content was higher
at the time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered
under M.C.L.A. § 257.625a(6).



      (3)   As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content,
if offered by the prosecution to rebut testimony elicited on
cross-examination of a prosecution witness that the defendant's breath
alcohol content was lower at the time of the charged offense than when a
chemical test was administered under M.C.L.A. § 257.625a(6).



   (C)   A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
remains subject to the requirements of M.C.L.A. §§ 257.625c, 257.625d,
257.625e, and 257.625f for purposes of chemical tests described in those
sections.



   (D)   Except for a person who was operating a commercial motor
vehicle, a person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil
infraction, the penalty for which is $180.



(Ord. 839, passed 2-28-00)



§ 70.08  MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE.



   (A)   The Michigan Vehicle Code 1949 PA 300, M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 to
257.923, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code
when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by
reference.



   (B)   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to LOCAL AUTHORITIES
shall mean the City of Mount Pleasant.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall publish this section in the manner
required by law and shall at the same time publish a supplementary notice
setting forth the purpose of the said Michigan Vehicle Code and that of the
fact that complete copies of the code are available at the office of the City
Clerk for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times.



   (D)   The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are
adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any
provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is greater than 93 days.



(Ord. 911, passed 9-12-05)



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section




Parking Meters




   71.01   Parking meter zones established



   71.02   Parking meter and space markings



   71.03   Operation of meter, coin required



   71.04   Overtime parking



   71.05   Use of slugs



   71.06   Tampering with parking meters



   71.07   Prima facie evidence




Trailer Coach Parking




   71.20   Definition



   71.21   Prohibited parking and use



   71.22   Parking on dwelling premises



   71.23   Permits



   71.24   Wastewater



   71.25   Removal of wheels or tires; occupancy limitation



   71.26   Inspection by Building Official



   71.27   Overnight parking prohibited



   71.28   Parking prohibited between curb and sidewalk



   71.29   Parking prohibited in side and front yards of residential
districts



   71.30   Time limits on parking in a business district



   71.31   Time limits on parking in a residential district



   71.32   Parking prohibited without a permit




Administration and Enforcement




   71.40   Parking Violations Bureau established



   71.41   Disposition of violations by Parking Violations Bureau



   71.42   Traffic tickets, notice of violation



   71.43   Use of parking boot



   71.44   Parking availability charge



   71.45   Schedule of violations



   71.46   Administrative fee



 



   71.99   Penalty



PARKING METERS



§ 71.01  PARKING METER ZONES ESTABLISHED.



   The Director of Public Safety or his/her designee is hereby empowered
to establish parking meter zones and limits on all public streets and
municipally owned or operated parking lots within the city.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 389, passed 11-16-64)



§ 71.02  PARKING METER AND SPACE MARKINGS.



   (A)   In every parking meter zone of the city, each parking meter
shall be installed and set to display upon the deposit therein of the proper
coin, or coins, of the United States as indicated by the instructions on said
meter a signal indicating legal parking or standing for that period of time
conforming to the limit of parking time which has been or may be established
for that area or zone of the street upon which said parking meter is
installed, and shall continue to operate from the time of the deposit of such
coin therein until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit for
the part of the street or lot upon which said meter is placed. Each meter
shall also be so regulated that upon the expiration of said legal parking
time it will display a signal indicating that the lawful parking period has
expired.



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety or his/her designee is directed
to mark off individual parking spaces adjacent to each parking meter by
placing lines upon the lot, street, or curb adjacent to such parking meter
for the purpose of designating the space for which said meter is to be used.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such manner that the said vehicle
shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. Any
damage caused to the parking meter shall be assessed against the owner and
driver of the vehicle and they shall be liable for same, jointly and
severally.



(Am. Ord. 956, passed 10-11-10)



§ 71.03  OPERATION OF METER, COIN REQUIRED.



   Whenever any vehicle shall be parked or placed in any space alongside
of or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of said vehicle,
upon entering the said parking space, shall immediately deposit or cause to
be deposited a coin or coins of United States currency as is indicated on the
parking meter for the desired parking time, in such parking meter and shall
place in operation said meter, and the said parking space then may be
lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking or standing
time which has been prescribed for the part of the street or lot on which
said parking space is located. If said vehicle shall remain parked or shall
remain standing in any such parking space beyond the parking or standing time
limit fixed for each parking space, the parking meter shall display a sign or
signal showing illegal parking or standing, and in that event such vehicle
shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking
or standing time, and the parking or standing of a vehicle where any such
meter is located shall be a violation of this subchapter and punishable as
herein set forth.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  OVERTIME PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer
any vehicle to stand or be parked overtime beyond the period of legal parking
or standing time established for any parking meter zone as herein described.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  USE OF SLUGS.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking
meter any slug, device, thing or substitute for any coin of the United States.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  TAMPERING WITH PARKING METERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with,
open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking
meter.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   In any proceeding for violation of the provisions of this subchapter,
the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall be prima facie
evidence that the owner of such motor vehicle was the person who parked or
placed such vehicle at the point where such violation occurred.



TRAILER COACH PARKING



§ 71.20  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TRAILER COACH.  Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its
being used as a dwelling or sleeping place, which is or may be mounted on
wheels, and is or may be propelled either by its own power or by another
vehicle to which it may be attached.



§ 71.21  PROHIBITED PARKING AND USE.



   (A)   No person shall park or cause to be parked any trailer coach
overnight on any street, alley, highway or other public place.



   (B)   No trailer coach shall at any time be parked between the
established setback line and the curb line of any lot.



   (C)   No trailer coach shall be used or occupied unless there is a
clear unoccupied space of at least ten feet on all sides thereof.



   (D)   No person shall park or permit the parking of any occupied
trailer coach or use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any trailer
coach on any site lot, field or tract of land not specifically licensed as a
trailer coach park, except only as provided in this subchapter.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.22  PARKING ON DWELLING PREMISES.



   Not more than one trailer coach may be parked, used or occupied on the
premises of any dwelling as hereinafter limited, provided the occupants of
the trailer coach have free access to and the unlimited use of the sanitary
facilities of the dwelling on said premises and the operator of such trailer
coach secures a permit as provided in this subchapter.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.23  PERMITS.



   (A)   Application for a permit to park, use and occupy a trailer
coach on the premises of a dwelling or parcel of land shall be made to the
Building Official of the city and shall state the name of the owner or
occupant in control thereof, the name and address of the owner or operator
and license number on such trailer coach. The consent in writing of the owner
in control of the dwelling premises or parcel of land to such parking, use
and occupancy and to the use of the sanitary facilities as herein provided
shall accompany the application or be indorsed thereon. Upon the filing of
such application the Building Official shall cause an inspection to be made
of such dwelling premises or parcel of land and trailer coach, and if he or
she finds that adequate facilities are afforded on the premises for the
disposal of waste and excreta and it appears that the parking, use and
occupancy of such trailer coach complies with the statutes of the state and
ordinances of the city, he or she shall approve such application. Upon the
filing thereof with the Building Official and payment of a fee to be
established by resolution of the Commission, the Building Official shall
issue a permit, which permit shall limit the time of such parking, use or
occupancy to a period not longer than six weeks from the date of the
application therefor. Not more than two permits shall be issued for any one
trailer coach or to any one trailer coach operator or occupant in any one
12-month period.



   (B)   Provided, that the Commission may issue a permit for a period
of one year, upon submission to said Commission of a petition favoring such
permit, signed by 75% of the owners, numerically, of the property within 500
feet of the approximate center of the lot or parcel of land on which such
trailer is proposed to be located. The issuance of said permit shall lie
within the sound discretion of the Commission regardless of the petition
above mentioned, and shall be issued only after hearing, preceded three days
by one notice by publication in a newspaper circulated in the city. Such
permit shall not be renewed except by compliance with this section. Every
permit shall be displayed in or on the trailer coach for which it is issued
on the side nearest to a public street in such a manner as to be readily
noticeable at all times.



   (C)   The Building Official may provide for the issuance of
temporary special events permit, for parking use and occupancy of trailer
coaches on public grounds owned or controlled by the municipality, on such
terms and conditions as the Commission shall, in their sole discretion,
determine to be just and reasonable, for a period of time not to exceed ten
days in any one calendar year.



§ 71.24  WASTEWATER.



   No person shall spill or drain any waste water or liquid waste of any
kind upon the ground or upon any paved area.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.25  REMOVAL OF WHEELS OR TIRES; OCCUPANCY LIMITATION.



   No person shall remove or cause to be removed the wheels or tires from
any trailer coach except for the purpose of repair, nor shall any person
elevate, block or stabilize any trailer coach other than with jacks,
designed, provided, and intended for that purpose. No parked trailer coach
shall be occupied for sleeping purposes by a greater number of persons than
said vehicle is designed and arranged to accommodate.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.26  INSPECTION BY BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   The Building Official or his or her authorized representative or any
member of the Police Department of the city shall have the authority to enter
and inspect at any reasonable time any premises upon which a trailer coach is
parked, used or occupied for the purpose of ascertaining that the owner,
operator or occupant thereof is complying with all statutes, ordinances, and
rules and regulations governing the same.



§ 71.27  OVERNIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person  shall  park  a vehicle  on any street or city
lot in the area described below between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
during any day of the year:



      (1)   West of the east side of Lansing Street;



      (2)   North of the south side of Illinois Street;



      (3)   East of the west side of Pine Street;



      (4)   South of the north side of Broadway Street;



      (5)   East of the west side of Main Street; and,



      (6)   South of the north side of Mosher Street.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no person
shall park a vehicle on any street or city lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m. any day from December 1 to April 1.



(Ord. 802, passed 7-17-97; Am. Ord. 844, passed 6-26-00; Am. Ord. 921, passed
10-9-06; Am. Ord. 997, passed 6-22-15)



§ 71.28  PARKING PROHIBITED BETWEEN CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   No person shall park a vehicle in the area between the curb and
sidewalk, or property line where no sidewalk exists, of any street at any
time except as provided in this section:



   (A)   A vehicle may be parked in the area between the curb and
sidewalk, or property line if no sidewalk exists, if such parking is done
within the area within the bounds of the street curb opening and the vehicle
does not protrude over or obstruct the use of any sidewalk.



   (B)   Parking areas between the curb and sidewalk which existed
prior to December 1, 1970, where the curb openings in the street have been
made to allow for this parking, may be continued to be used for parking as
long as it is determined by the Traffic Engineer that no safety hazard is
thereby created.



(Ord. 802, passed 7-17-97)



§ 71.29  PARKING PROHIBITED IN SIDE AND FRONT YARDS OF RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   The parking or storage of motor vehicles in front or side yards is
prohibited in residential districts.



   (A)   For the purposes of protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare, for the enhancement of the visual environment of the city
and for the purpose of preserving residential neighborhoods, the parking,
storage or leaving unattended of any motor vehicle in any front or side yard
of any residential district in the city is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the term FRONT YARD shall
mean that area measured by the full width of the front lot line to a depth
measured from said lot front lot line to the first supporting member of a
structure.  SIDE YARD shall mean an open space between a main building and a
side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of
which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line
to the nearest point of the main building.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parking of motor
vehicles upon driveways.  A driveway, for this purpose, shall be surfaced
with concrete, asphalt, gravel or similar material and shall lead from an
authorized curb out to a garage, car port or required parking space.



(Ord. 802, passed 7-17-97)



§ 71.30  TIME LIMITS ON PARKING IN  A BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   When signs limiting parking to a specific time period  are  erected 
adjacent  to  a  space marked for parking in any business district, no
person shall stop a vehicle in excess of the time period, as established by
official signs in such business district.



(Ord. 802, passed 7-17-97)



§ 71.31  TIME LIMITS ON PARKING IN A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   When signs limiting parking to a specific time period are erected
adjacent to a space marked for parking in any residential district, no person
shall stop a vehicle in excess of the time period as established by official
signs in such residential district.



(Ord. 802, passed 7-17-97)



§ 71.32 PARKING PROHIBITED WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   No person shall park in a space designated as permit parking only in a
parking lot in the Central Business District (CBD), as defined in § 71.44,
without obtaining and displaying a permit.



(Ord. 844, passed 6-26-00)  Penalty, see § 71.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 71.40  PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU ESTABLISHED.



   Pursuant to Public Act 154 of 1968, § 8395, being M.C.L.A. §
600.8395, a Parking Violations Bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged
parking violations within the city, is hereby established. The Parking
Violations Bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Manager.



(Ord. 422, passed 12-30-68)



§ 71.41  DISPOSITION OF VIOLATIONS BY PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   Only violations which are scheduled in § 71.45 of this
subchapter shall be disposed of by the Parking Violations Bureau. The fact
that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged
violator to disposition of the violation at the Bureau and in any case the
person in charge of such Bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation in
which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn
complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by
law.



   (B)   No violation may be settled at the Parking Violations Bureau
except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any
violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the
offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the Bureau
determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or
matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to
dispose of a parking violation at the Parking Violations Bureau and all
persons shall be entitled to have such violation processed before a court
having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any such
person to dispose of any violation at the Parking Violations Bureau shall not
prejudice him/her or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and
protection accorded to him/her by law.



(Ord. 422, passed 12-30-68)



§ 71.42  TRAFFIC TICKETS, NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police
officer of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. The
City Manager may delegate the power to other persons to issue and affix such
tickets or notices for parking violations, but no other power normally
exercised by a police officer in the exercise of his/her normal duties. Such
traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in
which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the Parking
Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the Bureau, the
hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled
for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for
the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such
a person fails to respond within the time limited.



(Ord. 422, passed 12-30-68; Am. Ord. 667, passed 4-4-88)



§ 71.43  USE OF PARKING BOOT.



   The immobilizing procedure known as booting is included as one method
of receiving payment of late parking fines in the city. The administrative
fee for removal of the parking boot shall be set by resolution the Commission.



(Ord. 747, passed 6-9-93)



§ 71.44  PARKING AVAILABILITY CHARGE.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section shall apply to all properties
and city-owned parking lots located within the central business district
described as follows:



   Commencing at the intersection of Illinois and Pine Streets, thence
east approximately 170 feet along Illinois Street to the alley in Block 30 of
the Original Plat of Mt. Pleasant, thence south to Wisconsin Street, thence
east along Wisconsin Street to Franklin Street, thence north to Illinois
Street, thence east on Illinois Street to Lansing Street, thence north to
Michigan Street, thence east on Michigan to a point 66 feet west of Fancher
Street, thence north on a line 66 feet west of the west line of Fancher
Street to Mosher Street, thence west along Mosher Street to Lansing Street,
thence north to Chippewa Street, thence west along Chippewa Street 420 feet
to the west line of the alley in Block 8, Original Plat, thence north 120.12
feet to the southeast corner of Lot 8, thence west 61 feet, thence south
120.12 feet, thence west along Chippewa Street to the easterly right-of-way
line of N. Main Street, thence south to the south right-of-way line of
Chippewa St., thence west along the southerly right-of-way line of Chippewa
Street extended to the Chippewa River, thence southwesterly along the river
to a point north of and approximately 150 feet east of the intersection of
Broadway and Pine Streets, thence south to Broadway Street, thence west to
Pine Street, thence south along Pine Street to the point of beginning.



   (B)   Purpose.  The availability of parking lots and on street
spaces located within the central business district provide a direct benefit
to properties located within the central business district. In order to
provide the necessary funds to finance the maintenance and enforcement of
existing parking lots located within the central business district and to
fund the replacement reserve for future parking lot expansion and
on-the-street parking in the central business district, a parking
availability fee shall be charged to owners of properties within the central
business district.



   (C)   Exempt properties.  All properties and portions of property
indicated on the tax assessment roll as homestead exempt and all properties
owned by governmental entities and charitable organizations and used for
public or charitable purposes shall be exempt from the charge established by
this section.



   (D)   Parking availability charge.  The parking availability charge
shall be established by resolution of the Commission.



   (E)   Billing.  The parking availability charge shall be billed on
a semi-annual basis on or before June 1 and December 1 of each calendar year
and shall be paid on or before June 15 and December 15 respectively. The
first parking availability charge shall be for the time period of January 1,
1996 through June 30, 1996.



   (F)   Funds; maintenance, records.  All parking funds collected
from the parking availability charge for the central business district shall
be kept separate from other funds the city and an accurate, separate record
shall be kept of all receipts and disbursements.



   (G)   Use of funds.  The funds collected from the parking
availability charge for the central business district shall be used for the
maintenance of the city-owned lots, for the expansion of such lots or
acquisition of additional lots, or expansion of on-street parking areas.



   (H)   Contracts with third parties.  Nothing contained within this
section shall prevent the city from contracting with a third party for the
routine maintenance of the parking lots and common areas in the central
business district.



   (I)   Penalty.  A penalty of 5% of the total bill shall be added if
the bill is not paid by the owner of the property within the Central Business
District by the due dates described in § 71.44 (E).  Each subsequent month
an additional 1% will be added until payment is made or the delinquent bill
is added to the tax roll for the parcel.



   (J)   Lien.  If the full amount due the city as a parking
availability charge is not paid by the owner of the property within the
Central Business District by the due dates described in § 71.44 (E), above,
then, in that case, the City Manager shall cause to be recorded in the
Treasurer's Office of the City a sworn statement showing the parking
availability charge due for the property, and the recordation sworn statement
shall constitiute a lien on the property, and shall remain in force and
effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if
any, for collection until final payment has been made.  The parking
availability charge, plus costs and expenses, if any, shall be subject to a
delinquent penalty of 1% per month in the event it is not paid in full on or
before the date of the tax bill upon which the charge appears becomes
delinquent.  Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions
hereof shall be a prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been
complied with and that the parking availability charge has been properly
adopted, and shall be full notice that the amount of the statement, plus
interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described
in the statement and is due and collectible as provided by law.



(Ord. 784, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 823, passed 4-26-99)



§ 71.45  SCHEDULE OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Each and every day and hour during which a violation of the
Uniform Traffic Code and other provisions of this chapter continues shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent offense.



   (B)   Any person who commits a violation of the Uniform Traffic Code
or the Motor Vehicle Code as adopted in §§ 70.01 and 70.08 of this title as
specifically set forth below and other specific provisions of this chapter as
specifically set forth below shall be responsible for a civil infraction.



 


Fines for such violations are as follows:




Violation

 


 

Within 7 days

 

After 7 Days





Overnight Parking
 
§71.27
 
$15
 
$30


Metered Parking
 
§ 71.04
 
$15
 
$30


Yard Parking
 
§71.29
 
$15
 
$30


Over Time Limits (Residential)
 
§71.31
 
$15
 
$30


Over Time Limits (Business)
 
§71.30
 
$15
 
$30


Alley Parking
 
UTC Rule 813
 
$30
 
$40


Prohibited Zones
 
MVC 257.674
 
$30
 
$40


Left Wheel to Curb
 
UTC Rule 801
 
$30
 
$40


Curb and Sidewalk
 
§ 71.28
 
$30
 
$40


No Permit
 
§71.32
 
$30
 
$40


Handicapped
 
MVC 257.674(s)
 
$75
 
$100




 



(Ord. 422, passed 12-30-68; Am. Ord. 667, passed 4-4-88; Am. Ord. 802, passed
7-14-97; Am. Ord. 804, passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. 811, passed 11-24-97; Am.
Ord. 844, passed 6-26-00; Am. Ord. 912, passed 9-12-05)



§ 71.46  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.



   An administrative fee shall be added to each account for each notice
sent for delinquent parking fines.  The administrative fee shall be set by
resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. 912, passed 9-12-05)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Traffic
Code shall be responsible for a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor
as provided by the Uniform Traffic Code and prosecuted accordingly. The fine
for violation of a civil infraction, other than those specifically setforth
in § 71.45, shall be $100.



   (B)   Any person who violates §§ 71.05 or 71.06 shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and punished as provided in § 10.99.



   (C)   Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in
accordance with the municipal civil infractions ordinance. The fine for
violation of a municipal civil infraction under this section shall be $100.
Any unpaid parking availability charge may be ordered to be paid as part of
any judgement received by the city.



(Ord. 784, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 804, passed 8-25-97)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 72:  BICYCLES



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Bicycle defined



   72.02   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles



   72.03   Responsibility of parents and guardians




Operating Regulations




   72.15   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   72.16   Riding on seat; number of riders



   72.17   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths



   72.18   Speed



   72.19   Emerging from alley or driveway



   72.20   Clinging to vehicles



   72.21   Carrying articles



   72.22   Parking



   72.23   Riding on sidewalks



   72.24   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles




Rentals




   72.35   Rental agencies



 



   72.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  BICYCLE DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Any device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement, all
of which are over 14 inches in diameter.



§ 72.02  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Each person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic regulations of the city applicable to vehicles or
by the traffic regulations of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except as to special regulations in this chapter pertaining to bicycles and
except as to those provisions of laws and regulations which, by their nature,
can have no application.



§ 72.03  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.



   No parent of any child, nor guardian of any ward, shall authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.



Penalty, see § 72.99



OPERATING REGULATIONS



§ 72.15  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Each person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or “U” turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any sign, except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey
the regulations applicable to pedestrians.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.16  RIDING ON SEAT; NUMBER OF RIDERS.



   (A)   No person propelling a bicycle shall ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.17  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   (A)   Each person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   No person riding a bicycle upon a street or highway shall ride
more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent
to a street or highway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use
the street or highway.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.18  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the condition then existing.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.19  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle, emerging from an alley, driveway, or
building, shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending
across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on
said sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.20  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall attach the same or himself/herself
to any vehicle upon a roadway.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.21  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handle bars.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.22  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.23  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Safety or his/her designee is
authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk, street, or roadway prohibiting the
riding of bicycles thereon by any person, and when such signs are in place,
no person shall disobey the same.



   (B)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.



Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.24  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   Each bicycle when in use at night-time shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
which shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a
bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at
least 100 feet except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any
person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.



   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



Penalty, see § 72.99



RENTALS



§ 72.35  RENTAL AGENCIES.



   A bicycle rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent
unless such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required
in this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 946, passed 4-13-09)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
held responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in
accordance with the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance. The fine for
violation of a municipal civil infraction under this chapter shall not exceed
$50. Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter shall be dealt with
by the juvenile division of the probate court or as prescribed by the laws of
the state.



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



Statutory reference:



   Jurisdiction of probate court, see M.C.L.A. §§ 712A.1 et seq.



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   ALARM SYSTEMS



   91.   ANIMALS



   92.   CEMETERY REGULATIONS



   93.   FIRE PREVENTION



   94.   RESERVED



   95.   MUNICIPAL AIRPORT



   96.   NUISANCES



   97.   PARKS AND RECREATION



   98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



   99.   TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS



CHAPTER 90:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   90.01   License required; alarm system defined



   90.02   Application of provisions; exemptions



   90.03   Director of Public Safety to be notified of alarm
installation



   90.04   Alarm requirements



   90.05   Connection of system to Public Safety Dispatch Board



   90.06   Automatic dialing to public service or utility



   90.07   False alarms



   90.08   Fee schedule



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  LICENSE REQUIRED; ALARM SYSTEM DEFINED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of installing an alarm
system who has not been licensed by the state in accordance with Public Act
190 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 338.1051 et seq.



   (B)   The term ALARM SYSTEM shall mean an assembly of equipment and
devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter is intended to regulate burglar alarms, hold-up alarms,
and non-single family residential fire alarm systems. Alarm systems that
signal the presence of hazards other than those stated above are exempt from
the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)



§ 90.03  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY TO BE NOTIFIED OF ALARM INSTALLATION.



   No person shall install an alarm system, with the exception of
residential fire alarm systems, without first notifying the Director of
Public Safety in writing of the location of the alarm and the type of system
being installed.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  ALARM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No alarm shall cover more than one business place and/or
residence, meaning that buildings with more than one business must have a
separate alarm for each business with a separate entrance. No single alarm
shall cover a grouping of houses, apartments or condominiums, which have
separate entrances to each living quarters. Provided, however, in case of
fire alarm systems, (i.e. heat detector, smoke detector, sprinkler system
supervision) or any combination of systems in multiple occupancy building, an
annunciation panel shall be installed in an area which is readily accessible
to the Division of Public Safety. The annunciation panel shall indicate in
which occupancy or section of the building the system was activated.



   (B)   No alarm system shall be installed within the city unless said
system meets the requirements of Public Act 190 of 1975, § 33, being
M.C.L.A. § 338.1083; and the installation of all alarm systems shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Director of Public Safety or
his/her authorized representative.



   (C)   In the case of fire alarm systems or devices, the following
additional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Fire alarm devices shall be subject to approval by the
Director of Public Safety or his/her authorized representative.



      (2)   Plans and specifications for all fire alarm and
sprinkler system supervision systems shall be submitted to the City Building
Official and the Director of Public Safety or his/her authorized
representative for their approval prior to the installation of the system.



      (3)   All fire alarm systems shall be installed and maintained
according to applicable sections of the National Fire Codes (National Fire
Protection Association Standards) and the National Electrical Code.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  CONNECTION OF SYSTEM TO PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCH BOARD.



   No alarm system shall be connected to the Public Safety Dispatch Board
without permission of the Director of Public Safety and payment of an
installation fee to the city as established by resolution of the Commission.
Residential alarms shall not be permitted to connect to the Dispatch Board.
Priority shall be given to financial institutions and high risk commercial
and industrial businesses, as determined by the Director of Public Safety. In
addition, a yearly maintenance and monitoring fee shall be paid to the city
upon completion of installation and at the beginning of each calendar year.
The fee shall be established by resolution of the Commission. Permission to
connect to the Public Safety Dispatch Board shall be subject to revocation by
the Director of Public Safety upon notification in writing. All alarm systems
in operation after January 1, 1985, shall be subject to the above fees.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  AUTOMATIC DIALING TO PUBLIC SERVICE OR UTILITY.



   (A)   No person shall sell, install, operate, adjust, arrange for,
or contract to provide a device upon which activation, either mechanically,
electronically, or by other means initiates the automatic calling, dialing or
connection to any telephone number assigned to a public service, utility or
police agency for the purpose of delivering a recorded message without first
receiving written permission from that service, utility or agency.



   (B)   The term TELEPHONE NUMBER includes any additional numbers
assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing
communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or
other system to connect with the subscriber to such primary number when the
primary telephone number is in use.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety to
notify any person, firm or corporation responsible for creating or
maintaining a public nuisance as herein defined. Such notice shall advise of
the public nuisances which are to be abated within a period of time, not
exceeding ten days from the date of said notice. Said notice shall further
state that failure to comply with its terms and conditions within the
specified period shall render said person, firm or corporation a violator of
this chapter.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   As used in this section FALSE ALARM means the activation of an
alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation
or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or his/her
employee or agent. FALSE ALARM does not include an alarm caused by severe
weather or other violent conditions beyond the control of the owner or lessee
of an alarm system or of their employee or agent.



   (B)   An alarm system experiencing more than two false alarms within
a 30-day period or four false alarms within a calendar year is deemed
defective and upon written notice to the owner or lessee of the alarm system
by the Director of Public Safety the owner or lessee shall have the system
inspected by an alarm system contractor who shall within 15 days file a
written report to the Director of Public Safety of the results of its
inspection of the system, the probable cause of the false alarms and its
recommendations for eliminating false alarms.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the report the Director of Public Safety shall
forward same to the owner or lessee ordering corrections be made based upon
the recommendations contained in the report.



   (D)   The owner or lessee shall have three working days from receipt
of order to make corrections; thereafter, to defray the cost of responding to
false alarms, the owner or lessee of an alarm system shall pay a fee to the
city for each false alarm received and responded to by the Division of Public
Safety during the calendar year in which order to correct the system was
issued. Said fee shall be established by resolution of the Commission.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)



§ 90.08  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The following fee schedule as recommended by the Director of Public
Safety is hereby approved, effective January 1, 1985:



 

Installation fee
 
$100


Yearly maintenance and monitoring fee
 
100


False alarm penalty
 
25 per alarm


Violation penalty
 
100 plus costs



 



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in
pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine in the amount of $100 and
costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon
which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly
provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this chapter whether
or not such penalty is re-enacted in amendatory ordinance.



(Ord. 618, passed 9-17-84)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



   91.01   Dogs running at large



   91.02   Noisy dogs and cats prohibited



   91.03   Fierce or dangerous dogs prohibited



   91.04   Premises to be kept clean



   91.05   Removal of excrement



   91.06   Dog license required



   91.07   Rabies control



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the
possession, care, custody or control, to permit any dog to run at large upon
the public streets, walks, parks, or other public places within the city,
unless attached to a leash of sufficient strength.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.02  NOISY DOGS AND CATS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any dog or cat which
shall cause annoyance or disturbance to persons by frequent and habitual
barking, howling or yelping.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  FIERCE OR DANGEROUS DOGS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any fierce or
dangerous dog or any dog which:



   (A)   Runs and barks at pedestrians or vehicles,



   (B)   Destroys property, or



   (C)   Bites any human being.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 668, passed 4-4-88)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous animals, see M.C.L.A. §§ 287.321 et seq.



§ 91.04  PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.



   The owner or custodian of any dog shall maintain the premises where the
dog is kept in a clean and sanitary condition free from feces, rodents,
vermin and disagreeable odors.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 668, passed 4-4-88)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.



   (A)   Any person owning or having charge of any dog or cat shall be
responsible for the removal of any excrement deposited by such dog or cat on
public thoroughfares, sidewalks, parks, or any public property whatsoever, or
upon any private property.



   (B)   Any person owning or having charge of a dog or cat, which
deposits excrement on public or private property, other than the property of
the animal's owner or keeper, shall, upon being made aware of such fact,
immediately remove such excrement and dispose in a sanitary manner.



   (C)   No person owning or having charge of a dog or cat shall cause
or permit such dog or cat to be on public or private property, not owned or
possessed by such person, unless such person has in his/her immediate
possession an appropriate device for the removal of excrement and disposal in
a sanitary manner.



(Ord. 762, passed 8-14-95)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  DOG LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain, keep or harbor
any dog within the city without first procuring a license as prescribed by
state law. Application for a license shall be made to the City or County
Treasurer and shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog,
and the name and address of the applicant and the last known previous owner.
The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of a licensed
veterinarian showing that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. passed 7-25-74)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  RABIES CONTROL.



   (A)   (1)   If any person is bitten by a dog, it shall be the
duty of that person, or the owner or custodian of the dog having knowledge of
same, to report same to the Police Department within 12 hours thereafter.



      (2)   If the owner or custodian of any dog has any reason to
believe or suspect that such dog has become affected with rabies, it shall be
the duty of that person to report the to the Police Department within 12
hours thereafter.



   (B)   In the event of any report to it as set forth in divisions
(A)(1) and (2) above, the Police Department may seize such dog and deliver it
to the Isabella County Animal Control.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction.  Any person violating the
following designated provisions of this chapter shall be held responsible for
a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in accordance with the Municipal
Civil Infractions Ordinance:



   91.01   Dogs running at large



   91.02   Noisy dogs prohibited



   91.04   Premises to be kept clean



   91.05   Removal of excrement



   91.06   Dog license required



      (1)   The fine for violation of a municipal civil infraction
under §§ 91.01, 91.02, 91.04 and 91.06 shall be $50; the second violation,
$100; and the third or any subsequent violation within any one calendar year,
$250.



      (2)   The fine for violation of § 91.05 shall be $20; the
second violation, $100; and the third or any subsequent violation within any
one calendar year, $250.



   (B)   Criminal misdemeanor.  Any person violating any provision of
this chapter, with the exception of those specifically set forth in division
(A) above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided
in § 10.99.



(Ord. 762, passed 8-14-95)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 92:  CEMETERY REGULATIONS



Section



   92.01   Rules and regulations of Riverside Cemetery adopted



   92.02   Service charges



   92.03   Prohibited behavior



 



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Park regulations applicable to Riverside Cemetery, see § 97.01



§ 92.01  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF RIVERSIDE CEMETERY ADOPTED.



   The Rules and Regulations of Riverside Cemetery, dated February, 1998,
are adopted by reference and made a part of this code. The Commission may, by
resolution, adopt new rules or amendments to the rules for the operation of
Riverside Cemetery.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 532, passed 9-19-77; Am. Ord. 593, passed
4-5-82; Am. Ord. 813, passed 2-23-98)



§ 92.02  SERVICE CHARGES.



   The Commission shall by resolution determine the fees and charges for
the sale of spaces and lots and for services performed in Riverside Cemetery.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 532, passed 9-19-77)



§ 92.03  PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR.



   No person shall mark, deface, disfigure, tamper with, displace or
remove a cemetery headstone, marker, monument, or like item in Riverside
Cemetery.



(Ord. 813, passed 2-23-98)



§ 92.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction.  Any person violating the rules
and regulations of Riverside Cemetery shall be held responsible for a
municipal civil lnfraction and prosecuted in accordance withthe municipal
civil infractions ordinance.  The fine for violation of a rule or regulation
of Riverside Cemetery shall be $50; second violation, $100; and the third or
any subsequent violation within any one calendar year, $250.



   (B)   Criminal misdemeanor.  Any person violating § 92.03 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 813, passed 2-23-98)



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




International Fire Code




   93.01   Adoption of International Fire Code



   93.02   References in Code; changes in Code; enforcement



   93.03   Burning regulations



   93.04   Residual clean-up following a fire



   93.05   Cost recovery



   93.06   Maintenance of fire suppression equipment



   93.07   Activation of fire alarm systems



   93.08   Compliance with orders



   93.09   Authorized emergency vehicles/ equipment



   93.10   Authority to remove obstructions



   93.11   Certification required



   93.12   Fire Department connections



   93.13   Self-service gas stations



   93.14   Reserved



   93.15   Indoor pyrotechnics



   93.16   Reserved



   93.17   Review fees



   93.18   Fee schedule



   93.19   Appeals



 



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   For fireworks regulations, see Ch. 133



INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE



§ 93.01  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   (A)   The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, including
Appendices A-J, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, regulating
and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances,
materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in
the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:



      (1)   Section 101.1 Insert: City of Mt. Pleasant.



      (2)   Section 109.4 Insert: Misdemeanor not to exceed $500
and/or not exceeding 90 days in jail.



      (3)   Section 111.4 Insert: The fine shall be not less than
$50 or more than $500.



   (C)   The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:



      (1)   Section 5806.2 (geographic limits in which the storage
of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): As
regulated by State of Michigan.



      (2)   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the
storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited): As regulated by State of Michigan.



      (3)   Section 5706.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the
storage of Class I and Class I liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited):
As regulated by State of Michigan.



      (4)   Section 6104.2 (geographic limits in which the storage
of liquefied petroleum is restricted for the protection of heavily populated
or congested areas): As regulated by State of Michigan.



   (D)   Whenever applicable state laws or regulations impose a higher
requirement or standard than is provided in this Fire Code, the higher
requirement or standard shall prevail.



   (E)   Nothing in this chapter or in the International Fire Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause of
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.



   (F)   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.  The city
hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section,
subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one
or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord. 943, passed 9-22-08; Am. Ord. 1008,
passed 4-11-16)



§ 93.02  REFERENCES IN CODE; CHANGES IN CODE; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Where reference is made in the International Fire Code to the
"International Building Code" it shall be held to mean the Michigan Building
Code in effect at the time, as may subsequently be amended.



   (B)   Where reference is made in the International Fire Code to the
"International Mechanical Code" it shall be held to mean the Michigan
Mechanical Code in effect at the time, as may subsequently be amended.



   (C)   All full-time certified firefighters of the Fire Department,
under the supervision of the Director of Public Safety, are hereby authorized
and directed to enforce all of the provisions of the Fire Code.  Such
personnel shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer and may issue
appearance tickets in accordance with M.C.L.A. §§ 764.9c-764.9g, or take
any other action necessary for the enforcement of this Fire Code consistent
with the city ordinances and state law.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord. 943, passed 9-22-08; Am. Ord. 985, passed
1-13-14; Am. Ord. 1008, passed 4-11-16)



§ 93.03  BURNING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Application and interpretation.  In addition to the
provisions of the Fire Code, which generally prohibits open burning in the
city, this section applies, subject to certain exceptions.  In the event of
a direct conflict between this section and the Fire Code, the provisions of
this section shall prevail.  Terms that are expressly defined in the Fire
Code shall have the same meanings when used in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.



   (B)   Outdoor cooking.  Fires of LP or natural gas, charcoal, or
wood chips, for the purpose of outdoor cooking, are allowed on private
property without a permit, provided that the fires are contained in an
appropriate metal, brick, or other fireproof container designed for cooking
purposes, and provided that such containers are located and operated in
compliance with the Fire Code.



   (C)   Residential recreational fires. The burning of natural or LP
gas for recreational purposes in a contained and regulated manner within a
recreational outdoor portable fire pit or other freestanding container,
designed for use in having safe and controlled outdoor fires, is allowed
without a permit, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The fire container is located on the site of a
one-family or two-family dwelling.



      (2)   The fire container is not located on any balcony or deck.



      (3)   The fire container is located at least 20 feet from any
structure (including any deck, balcony, or other overhanging structure),
combustible material, lot line, roadway, alleyway, or fence.



      (4)   The fire container is no larger at its largest point
than three-feet wide, three-feet deep, and three-feet tall (exclusive of
feet, legs or chimney), and is made of non-combustible materials.



      (5)   The fire container is UL-certified and installed
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.



      (6)   There is a 4-A-rated fire extinguisher, garden hose
connected to a water supply, or other means of fire suppression readily
available for immediate use.



      (7)   The fire is constantly attended by a competent adult at
least 18 years of age until the fire is extinguished.



      (8)   Burning of yard waste, leaves, trash, refuse, building
materials, or other materials is expressly prohibited.



      (9)   Fires are prohibited during any times of high fire risk
identified by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, or during burning
bans imposed by the state or city.



      (10)   If the Fire Code Official, or his or her designee, or a
police officer determines that any open burning is unsafe due to dry weather,
wind conditions or other unfavorable conditions, or the impact on air quality
or the health of nearby residents, or the open burning causes a foul odor
reasonably offensive to the occupants of nearby properties, such officer may
order the open burning to be extinguished, or may impose reasonable
conditions on the open burning.



   (D)   Other outdoor fires.  Other types of outdoor fires, such as
bonfires, ground fires, or other similar fires not covered by divisions (B)
or (C), are allowed only with a permit issued pursuant to Section 105.6 of
the Fire Code. Gas-fueled fires in UL-certified containers are also allowed
with a permit on commercial premises, including hotel premises.  Bonfires
shall be no more than five feet by five feet in size, and shall be subject to
other regulations as deemed appropriate by the Fire Code Official to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (E)   Burning of building materials.  Open burning for building
demolition or destruction of excess construction materials is allowed only
with a permit issued pursuant to Section 105.6 of the Fire Code.  Open
burning of building materials is also permitted for purposes of Fire
Department training.



   (F)   Permit fees.  The City Commission may establish by resolution
fees for open-burning permits.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord. 1023, passed 4-24-17)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.04  RESIDUAL CLEAN-UP FOLLOWING A FIRE.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, if any dangerous or hazardous
waste occurs as a result of a fire or as a result of any other occurrence,
such waste shall be disposed of and cleaned up by the property owner, at the
property owner's sole cost, in accordance with all applicable federal, state
and local statutes, ordinances and/or regulations.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  COST RECOVERY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by law, the owner of real
property or personal property which causes or contributes to a dangerous or
hazardous condition or condition that may cause environmental pollution or
otherwise violates the Fire Code shall be required to reimburse the city for
all costs incurred by the city in remediating or mitigating such dangerous or
hazardous condition, or condition that may pollute or be a violation of the
Fire Code.



   (B)   Except as provided by applicable law, the city and its
employees shall not be liable for any costs or damages incurred by any person
as a result of the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.06  MAINTENANCE OF FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise
disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or
maintained under provisions of the Fire Code, except for the purpose of
extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs or when permitted by the Fire Code Official. Whenever a
fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or
reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been
accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall
be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Code Official.



   (B)   A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended
for use of the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such
person first obtains permission and secures a permit for such use from the
Department of Public Works.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  ACTIVATION OF FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   A person or entity shall not activate a fire alarm system in any
building or place within the city unless a valid fire emergency exists within
that building or place. A fire alarm system is any system which, upon
activation, warns the occupants of the building or place that a fire
emergency exists.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.08  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully
hinder, obstruct, endanger, or interfere with any firefighter or other public
safety personnel in the performance of his or her duties.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the vicinity of
any fire or other emergency incident, to willfully disobey any reasonable
order or rule of the Fire Official commanding any public safety personnel or
equipment at a fire or other emergency incident.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly be or remain on public
property or the unenclosed private property of another within 300 feet of a
fire (except a bonfire permitted as provided in this chapter), except persons
attempting to put out or contain the fire prior to the arrival of public
safety personnel; firefighters, police officers, or other emergency personnel
discharging their duties as such; or other persons given express permission
to remain by the fire incident commander or on-site supervisor of the public
safety department. This division shall not apply to a person awaiting arrival
of public safety personnel in order to provide information about the fire,
the structures involved, or other information that could be useful to public
safety personnel, such as, but not limited to information about the origin of
the fire, whether any occupants could be in any structure involved, materials
that may be in the structure of vicinity of the fire, persons observed in the
vicinity of the fire, words or noises heard, and the condition of any
structures involved.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord. 987, passed 4-28-14; Am. Ord. 988, passed
6-23-14)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.09  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES/EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire
Official commanding any Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself or herself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire
Department emergency vehicle, whether same is in motion or at rest.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface or
attempt to conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle
at any time, or to injure Fire Department personnel while performing
departmental duties.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.10  AUTHORITY TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTIONS.



   If any vehicle, trailer or other object is so located within a fire
apparatus access road or at any other location prohibited by this chapter at
a time the Fire Department is responding to an alarm which necessitates use
of such fire apparatus access road and/or other said location, then any
member of the Police or Fire Department may move or cause same to be moved by
any means necessary without liability for any damage being caused by the city
or any officer, agent or employee thereof.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)



§ 93.11  CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   Any installation, testing, repair or maintenance of fire alarm or
suppression systems required by this Fire Code or the Building Code shall be
performed only by a certified fire alarm or suppression firm and/or
individual or by a firm and/or individual licensed pursuant to Act 192 of the
Public Acts of 1984, as amended, and/or Act 217 of the Public Acts of 1956,
as amended, and/or Act 144 of the Public Acts of 1982, as amended, whichever
is applicable.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)



§ 93.12  FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS.



   In any required National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") standard
13 sprinkler system equipped with a Fire Department connection, the
connection shall be located within 150 feet of a fire hydrant. NFPA standard
13 systems that include Fire Department connections supplying standpipes
shall comply with fire hydrant distance as referenced in NFPA standard 14.
Hydrant distance to Fire Department connections supplying residential NFPA
standard 13R systems are subject to the approval by the local fire official.



   (A)   A horn and white strobe light shall be installed directly
above the Fire Department connection and shall be connected to the water flow
alarm valve or water flow switch.  A water flow alarm valve or water flow
switch activation shall activate the horn and strobe.



   (B)   Approved supervised water flow switches and indicating control
valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the sprinkler riser on
each floor in all buildings required to be equipped with an automatic
suppression system.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord. 985, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 1008,
passed 4-11-16)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.13  SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS.



   The owner or lessee of a self-service gasoline station shall
conspicuously post at all times at the approved emergency controls, the
regulations governing self-service stations, as prescribed by the Fire Code
Official. All persons in charge of the premises shall be familiar with all
provisions of the regulations.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.14  RESERVED.



§ 93.15  INDOOR PYROTECHNICS.



   All indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be in accordance with NFPA 1126.
In addition, a permit to conduct indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be
required. The permit shall be obtained from the Fire Code Official prior to
the display. All applicable fees shall be submitted to the Fire Department
prior to the display.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.16  RESERVED.



§ 93.17  REVIEW FEES.



   When at the discretion of the Fire Code Official plans and
specifications are required to be reviewed by an outside consultant, the
person or firm submitting the plans and specifications shall be responsible
for the total consulting fees plus a 10% administrative charge. The Fire Code
Official shall select the consultant. Consulting fees or charges shall be
paid to the city by the applicant before the review will be undertaken.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)



§ 93.18  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The City Commission, shall by resolution, adopt a fee schedule, which
may be amended from time to time. A copy of the fee schedule shall be
maintained by the Fire Code Official, or designee, and by the City Clerk, and
shall be available for inspection by the public upon request.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)



§ 93.19  APPEALS.



   (A)   Whenever a Fire Code Official or designee, disapproves an
application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the Fire Code do not apply or that the intent and/or
meaning of the Fire Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Code Official to the
Building, Fire and Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals created in division (B) of
this section within 30 days from the date of the decision.



   (B)   There shall be created a Building, Fire and Sanitary Sewer
Board of Appeals consisting of six members who are qualified by experience
and training to interpret matters covered by the Fire Code. The Building,
Fire and Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Commission
and shall hold office at its pleasure.



   (C)   The Building, Fire and Sanitary Sewer Board of Appeals shall
adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting an investigation and
shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Fire Code Official,
or designee, with a duplicate copy to the appellant.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Code or
any order made pursuant to the Fire Code, or who shall build in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved, or
any certificate or permit issued, and from which no appeal has been taken or
who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed, or modified by the
Fire Code Official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed herein, shall severally, for each and every such violation of
noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days in jail. The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each ten days that a prohibited condition is maintained
shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of the Fire Code by any
employee shall be deemed the act of the employer as well as the person
actually violating the Code, and such employer shall also be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days for each violation.



(Ord. 919, passed 4-24-06)



CHAPTER 94:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 95:  MUNICIPAL AIRPORT



Section



   95.01   Declaration of intent



   95.02   Compliance with rules and regulations



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  DECLARATION OF INTENT.



   The Rules and Regulations for the Operation of the Mount Pleasant
Municipal Airport shall be adopted by ordinance by the Commission and are
intended to provide for the development and regulation of aeronautic-related
activities on the Municipal Airport by establishing uniform regulations
consistent with those of the federal and state agencies in order that those
engaged in such activities may do so with the least possible restriction
consistent with the safety and rights of others and the public's welfare. For
the purpose of administration, these rules and regulations shall be so
interpreted.



(Ord. passed 12-15-73)



§ 95.02  COMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All rules and regulations enacted by the Michigan Aeronautics
Commission and/or the Federal Aviation Administration relative to airmen,
aircraft, air traffic, and airports, now in effect, or any amendments adopted
in the future are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter
as fully as if the same and each and all of them were completely set forth
herein.



   (B)   The Airport Manager, or his/her designated representative
shall be responsible for the enforcement of all rules and regulations
governing the airport.



   (C)   No person shall violate or refuse to obey any rule or
regulation as set forth herein. Any person violating such regulations or
refusing to comply may be promptly removed from the airport, or temporarily
grounded upon order of the Airport Manager or the City Manager, and may be
deprived of further use of airport property and airport facilities for such
time as may be required to ensure safeguarding persons and property.



(Ord. passed 12-15-73)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
held responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in
accordance with the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance. The fine for
violation of a municipal civil infraction under this chapter shall be $500.



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 96:  NUISANCES



Section



   96.01   Public nuisances defined



   96.02   Dangerous structures prohibited



   96.03   Noises prohibited



   96.04   Nuisance gathering



   96.05   Lawn maintenance; height; removal of noxious weeds



   96.06   Deposit of unwholesome substances



   96.07   Injurious substances



   96.08   Drainage of lots, excavations, cellars



   96.09   Inoperative motor vehicles



   96.10   Pigeon lofts and carrier pigeons



   96.11   Public nudity



   96.12   Notice of abatement



   96.13   Lighting standards



 



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Hazardous property; weed control; procedures; notice to owner, see
Charter Art. XIII, § 6



§ 96.01  PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.



   Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or
repose of the public; interferes with or destroys or renders dangerous any
street, highway or navigable stream; allows accumulation of junk or obnoxious
matters on private property; or in any way renders the public insecure in
life or property is declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall
include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of
this chapter and the common and statute law of this state.



Statutory reference:



   For definition of nuisance under state law, see M.C.L.A. § 125.402



§ 96.02  DANGEROUS STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a
menace to the health, morals or safety of the public.



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  NOISES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Loud or disturbing noises prohibited.  It shall be unlawful
for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any
excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety
of others, within the limits of the city.



   (B)   Prohibitions.  The following prohibited acts, although not to
be considered exclusive, are declared to be unlawful:



      (1)   Horns and signal devices.  The sounding of any horn or
signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle
while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is
approaching apparently out of control, or to give warning of intent to get
under motion, or if in motion, as a danger signal after or as brakes are are
being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by
means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and
the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time;



      (2)   Radio and musical instruments.  The playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, or any musical instruments in such a manner or
with such volume at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or
other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity;



      (3)   Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public
streets at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose
of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of
residence, or of any persons in the vicinity;



      (4)   Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers
in a loud and boisterous manner so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort,
or repose of any other person in the area;



      (5)   Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animals or
birds which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any person;



      (6)   Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
fire or danger;



      (7)   Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air or the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents
loud explosive noises;



      (8)   Construction noises. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, the
excavation of streets and highways, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m., unless a permit be first obtained from the Division of Public
Works and/or building official;



      (9)   Handling merchandise. The creating of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers;



      (10)   Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum, loud
speaker, amplifier, or otherinstrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention of any purpose without first obtaining permission from
the City Manager or his designee.



(Ord. 869, passed 2-25-02; Am. Ord. 898, passed 6-14-04)



§ 96.04  NUISANCE GATHERING.



   (A)   Purpose. The City Commission finds that there are parties or
gatherings on premises in the city that are unsafe or are a public nuisance.
These gatherings can involve alcoholic beverages that are illegally sold
and/or provided to individuals in attendance, including underage individuals.
These gatherings can result in excessive noise and traffic, excessive
consumption of alcohol, overcrowding of the premises, and other ordinance and
state law violations. The City Commission desires to protect the public from
such public nuisances.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NUISANCE GATHERING. A gathering, party or meeting that is
conducted on or within any premises located within the city and which, by
reason of the conduct of persons hosting or attending, results in one or more
of the following conditions or occurrences:



         (a)   The drinking or possession of alcohol in public or
intoxication that would warrant involuntary commitment under M.C.L.A. §
330.1276, as amended;



         (b)   The use or possession of any controlled substance,
drug, or immediate precursor enumerated in schedule 1-5 of §§ 7201 to 7231
of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.7201 et
seq., except as provided in (c) below with respect to marihuana;



         (c)   The use or possession of one ounce or more of
marihuana, except as permitted by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA
2008, Initiated Law 1, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq.;



         (d)   Indecent exposure or public nudity in violation of
M.C.L.A. § 750.335a, as amended, or § 96.11 of this code;



         (e)   Public urination or defecation;



         (f)   The unlawful sale, furnishing, possession or
consumption of alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in violation M.C.L.A. §
436.1703, as amended, or § 132.03 of this code;



         (g)   The unlawful dumping, placing or depositing of
trash or litter on public or private property in violation of M.C.L.A. §
750.552a, as amended, or §§ 96.06 or 96.07 of this code;



         (h)   The damage or destruction of public or private
property;



         (i)   The generation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
which obstructs the free flow of traffic within the public rights-of-way or
interferes with the ability to render police or other emergency services;



         (j)   The generation of noise or violations that are
audible at a distance beyond 50 feet from the property line of the premises
or from inside a neighboring building, structure or dwelling unit;



         (k)   Public disturbances, brawls, fights, quarrels or
similar disturbances of the peace in violation of § 131.02 of this code; and



         (l)   Violation of the fire code, building code or
zoning ordinance due to the over-occupancy or overcrowding of a building,
structure or dwelling unit, or any adjacent deck or patio, or the obstruction
of stairway or entries to a building, structure or dwelling unit.



      PREMISES. Any building, structure or dwelling unit, either
commercial or residential, including adjacent exterior property, common
areas, yards, and parking lots. The term PREMISES does not include an
establishment operating with a liquor license issued by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission, or a successor agency.



   (C)   Nuisance gathering prohibited.



      (1)   Nuisance gatherings are declared to be public nuisances
and are prohibited in the city.



      (2)   Any person being the owner, occupant, tenant or
otherwise having any possessory control, individually or jointly with others,
of any premises who either sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites, suffers,
permits, continues, or allows to continue a nuisance gathering at such
premises, shall commit a violation of this code, and upon conviction shall be
subject to the penalties as provided by § 96.99. In any prosecution for a
violation of this section, proof of specific of intent shall not be required
as a necessary element.



      (3)   Any person in attendance at a nuisance gathering,
whether or not such person has any possessory control over the premises,
shall commit a violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided in § 96.99 of this code.



(Ord. 619, passed 10-1-84; Am. Ord. 738, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 852, passed
3-26-01; Am. Ord. 981, passed 7-22-13; Am. Ord. 995, passed 6-22-15) 
Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  LAWN MAINTENANCE; HEIGHT; REMOVAL OF NOXIOUS WEEDS.



   (A)   Except for properly approved and constructed driveways,
walkways and parking areas, the required front yard setback and required
front yard green area of any improved parcel shall be cultivated with
vegetation and/or other landscaping ground cover.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, or his/her agent, of any
occupied or unoccupied property located within the city to:



      (1)   Permit or maintain weeds or grass on any exterior
property area in excess of 12 inches in height. For purposes of this section,
WEEDS shall be defined as all vegetation other than agricultural crops,
cultivated flowers, cultivated trees or cultivated shrubs.



      (2)   Permit the growing or placement on any exterior property
area of any deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter. For
purposes of this section, DELETERIOUS, UNHEALTHFUL GROWTHS OR OTHER NOXIOUS
MATTER shall include Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species
of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of
Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa
incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1), poison ivy (rhustoxicodendron), poison
sumac (toxicodendron vernix) or other plant that, in the opinion of the City
Manager, constitutes a public nuisance.



   (C)   The City Manager or the City Manager's designee is authorized
to publish a notice in the newspaper of general circulation in the city by
March 31 of each year that any weeds or grass higher than 12 inches in
height, at any time after May 1, shall be cut and maintained at a height less
than 12 inches, and that any deleterious, unhealthful growths or other
noxious matter shall be destroyed and removed.



   (D)   Any weeds or grass higher than 12 inches in height after May 1
may be cut by a representative of the city, after notice is first provided in
accordance with division (E) below. The city may cause a property to be mowed
as many times as is necessary in order to meet the standards of this section.
Any deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter may be destroyed
and removed by a representative of the city after notice is first provided in
accordance with division (E) below. Provided, however, notice need only be
given once in any calendar year for the conditions on any parcel in the city.



   (E)   If any weeds or grass on any parcel of property in the city
reach a height of nine inches after May 1, or there exists on any parcel of
property in the city any deleterious, unhealthful or other noxious plants as
defined in division (B)(2) above, the City Manager or the City Manager's
designee is authorized to notify, in writing, the owner and/or tenant(s) of
any premises to cut such weeds or grass or remove such deleterious,
unhealthful or other noxious plants so as to comply with this section,
providing at least two days after the receipt of that notice in which to
comply with it. Such notice shall be by hand delivery or by first-class mail
and posting upon the premises. Such notice shall be addressed and may be
mailed to the last known owner as shown on the city's tax assessment records,
and shall be deemed received if served by first-class mail and posting three
business days after mailing.



   (F)   When the city cuts, destroys or removes weeds, grass or
deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter in violation of this
section, or has paid for its removal, the actual cost, plus accrued interest
at the rate of 1% per month from the date of the completion of the work, if
not paid by such owner, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the
next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city. The charge shall
be due and payable by the owner at the time of payment of the tax bill.



   (G)   Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner
within 60 days after the cutting, destroying and/or removal of such weeds,
grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter, as set
forth in divisions (D) through (F) above, then, and in that case, the City
Manager shall cause to be recorded in the Treasurer's office of the city a
sworn statement, showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, and the
date, place or property on which the work was done, and the recordation of
such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property, and shall
remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest,
plus costs of court, if any, for collection until final payment has been
made. The costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law
for the collection of taxes, and, further, shall be subject to a delinquent
penalty of 1% per month in the event it is not paid in full on or before the
date the tax bill upon which the charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn
statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima
facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that
the work has been properly and satisfactorily done, and shall be full notice
that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against
the property designated or described in the statement and is due and
collectible as provided by law.



   (H)   Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be
conducted in a manner that controls stormwater runoff and prevents erosion,
siltation and dust.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 611, passed 1-14-84; Am. Ord. 660, passed
7-6-87; Am. Ord. 948, passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. 977, passed 1-28-13) 
Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  DEPOSIT OF UNWHOLESOME SUBSTANCES.



   No person shall throw, place, deposit or leave in the street, sidewalk,
or any public place, any animal or vegetable substance, dead animals, fish,
shavings, dirt, rubbish, excrement, filth, unclean or nauseous water or
liquor or substance whatever which may cause any offensive, unwholesome, or
nauseous smell, or endanger the health of the public.



Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Addition of substances to water supply, § 52.34



§ 96.07  INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES.



   No person shall throw, place, deposit or leave in any street, highway,
land, alley, public place, or in any private place or premises, any glass,
broken or unbroken, or any metal, stone, earthenware, tacks, cinders or other
substances of a nature likely to cause injury to travelers or pedestrians,
automobiles, bicycles, or vehicles, or to injure any horse or other animal.



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.08  DRAINAGE OF LOTS, EXCAVATIONS, CELLARS.



   If any lands, excavations, cellar, vault, sewer, drain, place or
premises within the city shall be damp, unwholesome, offensive or filthy, or
be covered during any portion of the year with stagnant or impure water, or
shall be in such condition as to produce offensive exhalations, the
Commission or Building Official may require the same to be drained, filled
up, cleansed or purified by the owner, or occupant, or person in charge of
such lot, premises or place.



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.09  INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Unless otherwise permitted, no person, whether the owner, tenant, or
manager of private property, or whether the last registered owner of the
vehicle or transferee on a bill of sale covering the vehicle, shall permit
the accumulation on private property of one or more vehicles which do not
meet the following conditions:



   (A)   Any motor vehicle must be in operating condition and eligible
for use in accordance with the requirements of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
being Public Act 300 of 1949 as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through
257.923; provided, that any such vehicle may not comply with these
regulations for a period of not exceeding ten days.



   (B)   These requirements include, but are not limited to, an engine
that runs, all necessary driving units and gears in operating condition, four
wheels with four pneumatic tires capable of holding air, current license
plates and a battery capable of starting and operating the vehicle and its
accessories.



   (C)   These provisions shall apply to all areas or zones except when
the storage of said vehicles is in a completely enclosed building or a
conforming area in compliance with the Zoning Ordinances by a licensed junk
dealer.



   (D)   Any violations of this section shall be declared a nuisance.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 439, passed 4-20-70; Am. Ord. 602, passed
3-21-83)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.10  PIGEON LOFTS AND CARRIER PIGEONS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to protect the
health and safety of the community by regulating and controlling the raising,
keeping and exercising of carrier and racing pigeons in order to prevent
disease and nuisance within the city.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CARRIER PIGEON.  Homing and racing pigeons which have the name of the
owner stamped upon the wing or tail, or are banded upon the leg with the name
or initials of the owner or with an identification or registration number
stamped on the band.



   LOFT.  Any structure in which carrier pigeons are housed.



   RACING PIGEON.  A pigeon registered with a national pigeon racing
organization and used as a game competitive bird.



   (C)   Permit.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a loft
or raise, keep, or exercise carrier and racing pigeons within the city limits
without first obtaining a permit from the city.



   (D)   Application.  The applicant shall file an application for
such a permit with the city. The applicant shall pay a filing fee of $20. The
application shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and
adequate evidence showing that the construction and operation of the proposed
loft will conform to the standards set forth in division (E) below. The
application shall also include the name of the pigeon club or organization
the birds are registered with, a contact person within the organization and a
phone number where this person can be reached.



   (E)   Standards.  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   All pigeons must be kept and maintained in a pigeon loft
as is defined in this section.



      (2)   The pigeon loft shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary manner at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection.



      (3)   The pigeon loft shall be of a size sufficient to house
the number of pigeons contemplated. In no case shall there be more than one
pigeon per 2.25 square feet of loft space nor more than 50 total pigeons.
Lofts shall be located on the property in a manner than would place such loft
the greatest distance from all adjoining and adjacent dwellings, but in no
circumstance can such loft be less than 40 feet from any dwelling, except for
those lofts in existence at the time of passage of these regulations.



      (4)   All premises on which such pigeons are kept and
maintained shall at all times be kept clean and free from filth, garbage, and
such other substances that attract rodents.



      (5)   All pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft
or premises in which such pigeons are housed and contained.



      (6)   Housing of pigeons shall not be permitted in a dwelling
house.



      (7)   All grains and food stored for the use and feeding of
such pigeons shall be kept in a rodent-proof container.



      (8)   Racing pigeons will not be released or exercised less
than six hours after having been fed.



      (9)   No more than 25 pigeons may be released or exercised in
one day.



      (10)   Pigeons may be released or exercised only between the
hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.



      (11)   The owner will maintain a log book which contains the
following information:



         (a)   Pigeon band number;



         (b)   Pigeon plastic band color;



         (c)   Time out or released;



         (d)   Time returned; and



         (e)   Type of domestic pigeon.



   (F)   Conditions and safeguards.  The permit, when granted, shall
be in full force and effect only as long as the owner of said loft retains
ownership at that particular location.



   (G)   Authority and inspection.  The city or its designee is
authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this section.



   (H)   Fees.  An annual license fee of $20 shall be charged.



   (I)   Penalties.



      (1)   Finding of violation.  Upon finding of violation of the
provisions of this section, the city shall notify the owner of the pigeons.
The owner shall then have 14 days to remedy the violations. After this 14-day
period, the city shall reinspect the loft to determine if violations still
exist.



      (2)   Revocation of permit. 



         (a)   If violations continue to exist past the 14-day
period, the city shall revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this
section.



         (b)   If a license is cited for violations of this
section three times in a 12-month period, said license shall be permanently
revoked.



   (J)   Applicability.  Owners of existing pigeon lofts as well as
proposed lofts shall be subject to the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 785, passed 5-13-96)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.11  PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purposes of this section are to:



      (1)   Protect and secure the public health, safety and general
welfare of persons and property through the prohibition of public nudity
within the city.



      (2)   Provide penalties for the violation of the provisions of
this section, to repeal any ordinance or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith and to provide an effective date of said section.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   PUBLIC NUDITY.  The knowing or intentional display in a public place,
or for payment or promise of payment of an admission fee of:



      (1)   Any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully
opaque covering; or



      (2)   A female individual's breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of the nipple and areola.



   PUBLIC NUDITY does not include: a woman's breastfeeding of a baby,
whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the
feeding; material as defined in Public Act 343 of 1984, § 2, being M.C.L.A.
§ 752.362, as amended; or, sexually explicit visual material as defined in
Public Act 33 of 1978, § 3, being M.C.L.A. § 722.673, as amended.



   (C)   Public nudity prohibited.  No person shall engage in public
nudity. No business establishment, including, but not limited to owners,
officers, persons in charge of or control of the premises shall permit
persons to engage in public nudity.



(Ord. 783, passed 3-11-96)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.12  NOTICE OF ABATEMENT.



   In the event any officer, or authorized agent, of the city shall
determine that there exists a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter and
code, notice shall be served on the owner or occupant of the premises on
which the nuisance exists, and require the owner or occupant to abate said
nuisance within the time specified in the notice. Service of the notice shall
be made:



   (A)   By delivering the same at the residence, office or place of
business with some person of suitable age or discretion;



   (B)   By mailing said notice by certified mail to such owner or
occupant at the last known address; or



   (C)   If the owner or person is unknown, by posting said notice in
some conspicuous place on the premises for five days.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 439, passed 4-20-70; Am. Ord. 602, passed
3-21-83)



§ 96.13  LIGHTING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public by encouraging lighting practices
and systems that will minimize glare, light trespass, and light pollution and
conserve energy and resources while maintaining nighttime safety, utility,
security and productivity, and curtailing the degradation of the nighttime
visual environment.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ABUTTING.  Any property having a  common lot line or that would have
a common lot line if the abutting street, alley or right-of-way were to be
vacated.



   ADJUSTABLE LIGHT FIXTURE.  Any fixture containing an adjustment screw
which allows the aiming or adjustment of the light fixture or any fixture
that can be retrofitted with a shield at a cost equal or less than 10% of the
cost of a replacement fixture.



   BEAM.  The spatial distribution of the emitted light from a light
fixture.



   BULB.  A source of light.



   CANDELA (CD).  The unit of measurement of the intensity of a point
source of light (approximately equal to one candle power).



   EFFECTIVE DATE.  This section shall take effect 30 days following
adoption by the Mt. Pleasant City Commission.



   EXISTING LIGHT FIXTURES. Outdoor light fixtures already installed at
the time this section is adopted.



   FLOODLIGHT or SPOTLIGHT.  Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates
a reflector or refractor to concentrate the light output into a directional
beam.



   FOOTCANDLE (FC).  The illuminance measured one foot from a one candela
source.



   FOOTCANDLE, HORIZONTAL and VERTICAL.  The illuminance measured by a
light meter in those positions. Illuminance may also be measured in other
specified positions or directions.



   FULL CUTOFF.  A shielded light fixture that emits no light above a
horizontal plane touching the lowest part of the fixture.



   GLARE.  The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field
that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted
that causes annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and
visibility.



   HID LAMP.  In a discharge lamp, the emitted energy (light) is produced
by the passage of an electric current through a gas. High-intensity discharge
(HID) includes mercury, metal halide and high-pressure sodium lamps. Other
discharge lamps are LPS and fluorescent. Some such lamps have internal
coatings to convert some of the ultraviolet energy emitted by the gas
discharge into visual output.



   HOLIDAY LIGHTING.  Festoon type lights limited to small individual
bulbs on a string where the output per bulb is no greater than 15 lumens.



   ILLUMINANCE.  The intensity of light in a specified direction measured
at a specified point.



   LAMP.  The component of the luminaire that produces the actual light
including luminous tube lighting.



   LIGHT FIXTURE.  The assembly that holds or contains a lamp or bulb and
may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp
holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A LIGHT
FIXTURE also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting.



   LIGHT POLLUTION.  Any adverse effect of man-made light. Often used to
denote urban sky glow.



   LIGHT TRESPASS.  Light emitted by a lighting installation that falls
outside the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.



   LIGHTING, PRIVATE.  Outdoor light fixtures located on property owned
or controlled by individual persons, including, but not limited to families,
partnerships, corporations, and other entities.



   LIGHTING, PUBLIC.  Outdoor light fixtures located on property owned,
leased, or controlled by the city, including but not limited to streets,
highways, alleys, easements, parking lots, parks, playing fields, schools,
institutions, meeting places, and all entities completely or partly funded by
grants obtained by the city or its agents from federal, state or private
sources.



   LUMEN.  The unit of luminous flux, the total amount of light falling
uniformly on or passing through an area of one square foot, each of which is
one foot from a one candela source, yielding an illuminance of one footcandle
at that distance (the output of lamps and bulbs is customarily measured in
lumens, a common 100 watt incandescent light bulb, for example, having an
output less than 1,800 lumens).



   LUMINAIRE.  A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps
together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and
protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply.



   LUMINOUS TUBE LIGHTING.  Gas filled tubing which, when subjected to
high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular
gas used, e.g. neon, argon, etc.



MERCURY VAPOR FIXTURE.  Any fixture that utilizes a HID lamp where the light
is produced by radiation from mercury vapor.



   NON-ADJUSTABLE LIGHT FIXTURE. Any light fixture not containing an
adjustment screw to permit the aiming or adjustment of the light fixture or
that can only be shielded or retrofitted at a cost greater than 10% of the
cost of a replacement fixture. An internally lit sign will be considered a
non-adjustable light fixture.



   OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE.  Outdoor artificial illuminating devices,
outdoor fixtures, lamps and other similar devices, permanently installed or
portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or advertisement.



   RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTY. Any property within the city limits of
Mt. Pleasant zoned any of the following classifications: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
M-1, M-1, PRD and any property located in the Charter Township of Union zoned
R-1, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-4, R-5.



   SAG-LENS or DROP-LENS.  A clear or prismatic refracting lens that
extends below the lowest opaque portion of a light fixture.



   SPORTS FACILITIES.  Lighting at public and private outdoor sports
facilities, including but not limited to playing fields, arenas, tracks and
swimming pools.



   STREET LIGHT.  Light fixtures in public rights-of-way, either owned by
the City of Mt. Pleasant or the public utility providing lighting to the city.



   STROBE LIGHT.  A flash lamp that produces high intensity short
duration light pulses by electric discharge in a gas.



   (C)   Submittal requirements. 



      (1)   The following information must be included for all site
plans required to be submitted to the Planning Commission in accordance with
the zoning ordinance:



         (a)   Location of all freestanding, building-mounted and
canopy outdoor light fixtures on the site plan.



         (b)   All building elevations for all structures on the
site plan.



         (c)   Specifications and details for the type(s) of
outdoor light fixture(s) being proposed including the method of shielding.



         (d)   Any other information deemed necessary by the
Building Official/Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   Site plans required to be submitted to the Planning
Commission for a location which abuts residentially zoned property or is
within a residentially zoned district must also include a photometric grid
overlaid indicating the overall light intensity (in footcandles) at the
property lines of the site.



      (3)   All applications for building permits in all districts
shall include the following:



         (a)   Verification that all outdoor light fixtures with
a bulb producing over 680 lumens shall have a full cut-off style of fixture
directed downward, and that (with the exception of motion activated fixtures)
no outdoor light fixture may create an intensity of light greater than
one-half footcandle at a property line which abuts residentially zoned
property or is within a residentially zoned district.



         (b)   Any other information deemed necessary by the
Building Official/Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   Standards.  Unless modified by other provisions of this
section or unless exempted under division (E), all lighting must comply with
the following standards:



      (1)   All exterior lighting fixtures at all properties in the
city with bulbs producing more than 680 lumens must be full cut-off or
shielded and directed downward.



      (2)   All light coming from anywhere on any property may not
exceed one-half footcandle of intensity at the property line of abutting
residentially zoned property.



      (3)   Streetlights installed after the effective date shall be
full cut-off fixtures or approved historical design fixtures utilizing a
minimum output consistent with the safety of drivers and pedestrians as
specified by Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).



      (4)   Strobe lights on towers or antennas shall be prohibited
unless required by the FAA or other government entity.



      (5)   The use of laser light sources, search lights or any
similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment is
permitted only with a special permit from the Mt. Pleasant City Commission
and only then for no more than five days per year, per applicant, for each
location.



      (6)   Any activity producing intense light, whether from
floodlights or from high-temperature processes, such as combustion or welding
or otherwise, shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely
obscure and shield the light from view from any point along the lot lines of
the property or from the sky, except during the period of construction or
repair of improvements on the property.



      (7)   All light bulbs used for the illumination of business
establishments or for the illumination of business buildings or areas
surrounding them, or for the illumination or display of merchandise or
products of business establishments, shall be completely shielded from the
view of vehicular traffic using streets abutting such business properties.
Flood lights used for the illumination of a building or any sign thereon,
whether or not such flood lights are attached to or separate from the
building, are permitted but the lighting shall not project beyond the sign or
the wall being illuminated.



      (8)   Lighting at publicly owned and privately owned outdoor
sports facilities shall be shielded to reduce glare, safety hazards, light
trespass and light pollution, and shall provide levels of illuminance
consistent with nationally recognized standards such as the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), and shall be operated on a
schedule that coincides with scheduled events.



      (9)   Unshielded sag-lens, drop lens, or mercury vapor
fixtures are prohibited. 



   (E)   Exemptions.  The following are exempt from the lighting
requirements of this section, except that the Building Officials/Zoning
Administrators may take steps to eliminate the impact of the exempted items
when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public:



      (1)   Holiday decorations.



      (2)   Temporary lighting.



         (a)   Temporary lighting that conforms to the
requirements of this chapter shall be allowed. Nonconforming temporary
lighting may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Administrator only after
considering:



            1.   The public and/or private benefits which will
result from the temporary lighting;



            2.   Any annoyance or safety problems that may
result from the use of the temporary lighting; and



            3.   The duration of the temporary nonconforming
lighting.



         (b)   The applicant shall submit a detailed description
of the temporary nonconforming lighting to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator. The administrator shall provide written approval or denial
within ten days. If denied, the written notice shall state the basis for the
denial. The applicant may appeal the denial to the City Manager. The decision
of the City Manager is final. This notification process does not apply to
temporary illuminated signs installed by MDOT, DPS, DPW or other public
safety agencies.



      (3)   Flags.  No flag lighting may exceed a one-half
footcandle at the property line. However, flags illuminated with a fixture
equivalent to the Bayville-Flaglighter Kit #MF-2348-30-2 may light the flag
to the manufacturer's specifications.



      (4)   Emergency operations.  The light standards in this
chapter shall not apply to emergency operations performed under the directive
of a public safety or public works agency, public utility, County Road
Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation.



      (5)   Motion activated fixtures.  Motion activated lighting
may be unshielded provided it is located in such a manner as to prevent
direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public
right-of-way, and provided the light is set to only go on when activated and
to go off within ten minutes after activation has ceased, and the light shall
not be triggered by activity off the property.



      (6)   Historic theater marquees.  Historic theater marquees
in the Central Business District, as defined by the City Zoning Ordinance,
are exempt from this chapter.



      (7)   Signs.  Signs are exempt from the provisions of
division (D)(1) of this section.



      (8)   Existing outdoor light fixtures.



         (a)   Existing adjustable outdoor light fixtures
installed before the effective date of this section, if they are installed
ten feet above grade, or less, may continue in service without adjustment or
modification for 12 months. All other existing adjustable outdoor light
fixtures installed before the effective date of this section may continue in
service without adjustment or modification for five  years.



         (b)   Existing light fixtures, other than adjustable
outdoor light fixtures, installed before the effective date of this section
may continue in service without adjustment or modification for 25 years.



         (c)   Light fixtures installed after the effective date
of this section, including replacements for existing fixtures, must conform
to this section.



   (F)   Inspection.  The Building Official/Zoning Administrator may
inspect any site or outdoor light fixture to determine if the site or outdoor
light fixture complies with the requirements of this section.



(Ord. 902, passed 9-13-04)  Penalty see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Municipal civil infraction.  Any person violating
the following designated provisions of this chapter shall be held responsible
for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in accordance with the
Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance:



   § 96.05   Lawn Maintenance; Height; Removal of Noxious Weeds



   § 96.09   Inoperative motor vehicles



   § 96.10   Pigeon lofts and carrier pigeons



   § 96.13   Lighting Standards



   The fine for violation of a municipal civil infraction under this
chapter shall be $50; the second violation, $100; and the third or any
subsequent violation within any one calendar year, $250. In addition, for a
violation of § 96.10, the city shall be reimbursed for any costs incurred by
the city in causing any work to be performed which the respondent has failed
to perform. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.



      (2)   Criminal misdemeanor.  In addition to any penalty or
remedy prescribed by this chapter, any person violating any provision of this
chapter, with the exception of those specifically set forth in division (1)
above or division (B) below, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished as provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 776, passed 10-9-95; Ord. 785, passed 5-13-96; Am. Ord. 902, passed
9-13-04; Am. Ord. 977, passed 1-28-13)



   (B)   Violations of § 96.11 shall be a misdemeanor, subject to
penalties, including fines of $500 or imprisonment up to 90 days, or both
fines and imprisonment for each offense, as well as costs and/or probation. 
(Ord. 783, passed 3-11-96)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




General Provisions




   97.01   Definitions



   97.02   Park operating policy



   97.03   Enforcement



   97.04   Fees




Activities by Persons in Parks




   97.15   Park property



   97.16   Sanitation



   97.17   Traffic



   97.18   Recreational activities



   97.19   Prohibited behavior



   97.20   Merchandising, advertising and signs




Parks and Recreation Commission




   97.30   Establishment; composition



   97.31   Organization; officers



   97.32   Powers and duties



   97.33   Director of Parks and Recreation



   97.34   Budget



   97.35   Annual report



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECTOR.  A person immediately in charge of any park area and its
activities, and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible.



   PARK ATTENDANT.  Any employee of the city whose job functions include
maintaining, repairing or supervising a park or whose job functions include
enforcing this chapter, including park rangers.



   PARK.  A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active
or passive recreation. The term PARKshall also include Riverside Cemetery.



   VEHICLE.  Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn,
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of or
description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service
of the city parks.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)



Cross-reference:



   Cemetery regulations, see Chapter 92



§ 97.02  PARK OPERATING POLICY.



   (A)   Park hours. City parks shall be open daily to the public
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. No person shall occupy or be
present in any park during the hours it is not open to the public, provided
that city personnel, police officers on official duty, or other city
officers, or employees on park duty, or other persons with special permits
from the Parks and Recreation Department who are conducting city business are
not so restricted.



   (B)   Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared
closed to the public by the Director at any time, and for any interval of
time, either temporarily, or at regular and stated intervals (dally or
otherwise), and either entirely, or merely to certain uses, as the Director
shall find reasonably necessary.



   (C)   Authority for use of facilities. Any organized club, school,
association, or recognized group desiring the use of specific areas of any
park, such as picnic areas, athletic fields, or ice rinks, shall file an
application with the Parks and Recreation Department, and shall not use said
park or area until said permit is granted. The use of the park shall be in
the capable limits of the park.



      (1)   Special permits, agreements and contracts. Any organized
club, school, organization, association. or recognized group desiring the use
of a portion of the park system for money-raising affairs, whether to cover
the cost of operation or for profit, shall file an application with the Parks
and Recreation Department, and pay to the Department as required by the Parks
and Recreation Commission, such fees, charges, rents, or percentages as
required by the Department for such activities and events. The application,
among other information, must designate the portion of the parks desired,
where ticket sales will be set up, or money is to be collected, and how much
per person or other unit of measurement, the location of which shall be under
control of the Parks and Recreation Department. Any fees for the permit may
be waived or refunded at the discretion of the Parks and Recreation
Commission.



      (2)   Exclusive use of park. No permit shall be issued for the
exclusive use of any park and no permittee shall exclude the public from the
park, charge any admittance fee, sell tickets or otherwise require anyone to
pay any fee for entering any park except as provided in division (C)(1)
hereof.



      (3)   Granting of permits. The authority for granting permits
shall be with the Parks and Recreation Department.



      (4)   Cleanup by permittee. All permits shall require the
permittee to clean up the park area after the activity has terminated and all
applications for permits must give the name, address, and phone number of the
permittee responsible for the necessary policing thereof. The permittee shall
be required to pay a security deposit for cleaning up the area.



      (5)   Honoring special permits.  All persons shall honor any
special permits issued by the Parks and Recreation Department for certain
areas, days, and times to clubs, organizations, teams, or any other groups,
including but not limited to picnic grounds, ball diamonds, skating rinks,
and stadiums, provided such permit is presented on official Parks and
Recreation forms.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)



§ 97.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Officials. The Director and park attendants shall take such
actions as are necessary for the enforcement of this chapter consistent with
city ordinances and state law. Park attendants shall have the powers of law
enforcement officers and may issue appearance tickets in accordance with
M.C.L.A. § 764.9c-764.9g.



   (B)   Ejection. The Director and park attendants shall have the
authority to eject for a period of 24 hours from the park any person who
violates this chapter. Repeated violations of this chapter may result in
permanent ejection from any park.



   (C)   Seizure of property. The Director and any park attendant shall
have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in
the park used in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)



§ 97.04  FEES.



   Parks and recreation fees shall be set by resolution of the Commission.



ACTIVITIES BY PERSONS IN PARKS



§ 97.15  PARK PROPERTY.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Buildings and other property.



      (1)   Disfiguration and removal. Willfully mark, deface,
disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any buildings,
bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving materials,
water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof,
signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes,
posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment,
facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.



      (2)   Restrooms and washrooms. Fail to cooperate in
maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.



      (3)   Removal of natural resources. Dig, or remove any beach
sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or
plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by
tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency.



      (4)   Erection of structures.  Construct or erect any
building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across
such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.



   (B)   Trees, shrubbery, lawns.



      (1)   Injury and removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or
remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of
any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise
disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty
or usefulness of any area.



      (2)   Climbing.  Climb any building or walk, stand or sit
upon monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences or upon any other property
not designated or customarily used for such purposes.



   (C)   Wild animals, birds and the like.



      (1)   Hunting.  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap,
chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird; nor
shall anyone remove or have in their possession the young of any wild animal,
or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird.



      (2)   Feedings.  Give or offer, or attempt to give to any
animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.



   (D)   Glass containers.  Bring or use glass containers within the
park.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.16  SANITATION.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or
cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or
other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream,
storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or
thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said
waters.



   (B)   Refuse and trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or
leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.17  TRAFFIC.



   (A)   No person in a park shall:



      (1)   State motor vehicle laws apply. Fail to comply with all
applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to
equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are
contained in this chapter and other ordinances.



      (2)   Enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all
traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and
instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on
the highways, street or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with
the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may
subsequently be issued by the Director.



      (3)   Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all
traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and
all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property.



      (4)   Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of
speed exceeding 15 miles an hour, except upon such roads as the Director may
designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel.



      (5)   Operation confined to roads. Drive any vehicle on any
area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may
on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the
Director.



      (6)   Parking.



         (a)   Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than an
established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance
with the posted directions there at and with the instructions of any
attendant who may be present.



         (b)   Removal of vehicles. Without permission no person
shall park or store any motor vehicle overnight in any park owned by the
city. Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove any
motor vehicle so parked or stored.



         (c)   Immovable vehicles. Leave any vehicle anywhere in
the park with one or more wheels chained, or with motor set in gear and doors
locked, or in any manner fixed or arranged so that such vehicle cannot
readily be moved by hand.



         (d)   Emergency procedure. Fail to immediately notify an
attendant of an emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the
assistance of a tow-truck, mechanic or other person.



         (e)   Double-parking. Doublepark any vehicle on any road
or parkway unless directed by a park official.



         (f)   Muffler required. Fail to use a muffler adequate
to deaden the sound of the exhaust system in a motor vehicle.



      (7)   Bicycles.



         (a)   Confined to roads. Ride a bicycle on other than a
paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall
be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or
wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.



         (b)   Operation. Bicyclists shall at all times operate
same with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass
to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any
vehicles they may be meeting.



         (c)   Rider prohibited. Ride more persons on a bicycle
than the bicycle was designed to accommodate.



         (d)   Designated racks. Leave a bicycle in a place other
than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available.



         (e)   Immobile. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or
paving or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons
may trip over or be injured by them.



         (f)   Night operation. Ride a bicycle at night without
an attached headlight and without a tail light or reflector plainly visible.



      (8)   Unsafe operation of vehicle. Operate a vehicle as
defined by this chapter in an unsafe manner.



   (B)   Any unlicensed vehicles or “all-terrain vehicles,” or
snowmobiles shall be prohibited from use in any park, unless authorized by
the Parks and Recreation Department and designated in certain areas.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.18  RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Bathing and swimming.



      (1)   Designated areas. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or
waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such places designated for
such activity, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in
this chapter or as may be adopted by the Director. Nor shall any person
frequent any waters or places customarily designated for that purpose of
swimming or bathing, or congregate at such places when such activity is
prohibited by the Director upon a finding that such use of the water would be
dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.



      (2)   Certain hours. Frequent any waters or places designated
for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate at such places, except
between such hours of the day as may be designated by the Director for such
purposes for each individual area.



      (3)   Structure on beach. Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or
in any beach or bathing area, any tent, shelter or structure unless permitted
by or authorized by the Director.



      (4)   Costume. Allow themselves to be so covered with a
bathing suit as to indecently expose his/her person. All bathing suits shall
conform to commonly accepted standards.



      (5)   Bathhouses. Dress or undress on any beach or in any
vehicle, restroom or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures
as may be provided for that purpose.



      (6)   Diving or jumping. Dive or jump off any bridge, dam, or
other structure.



      (7)   Mill Pond Park. Swim, bathe or wade within 200 feet of
the dams located at Mill Pond Park.



   (B)   Boating.



      (1)   Designated areas. Bring into or operate any boat, canoe,
raft, or other water craft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters,
except at places designated for boating by the Director. Such designated
boating activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations adopted
by the Director.



      (2)   Public docks. Use the public docks for dockage or other
purpose without first making arrangements for such accommodation with the
Director, who shall assign space and collect reasonable rental charges in
conformity with established regulations and rates.



      (3)   Operation of boats/canoes. Navigate, direct, or handle
any boat/canoe in such a manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy,
frighten or endanger the occupants of any other boat/canoe.



      (4)   Prohibition during closing hours. Launch, dock, or
operate any boat/canoe of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of
the park at night and opening hour the following morning, nor shall any
person be on, or remain on or in, any boat during the said closed hours of
the park.



   (C)   Fishing. Fish in any waters, using hook-and-line, net, trap,
or other device, except in waters designated by the Director for that use and
under such regulations and restrictions as have been or may be prescribed by
the Director.



   (D)   Hunting and dangerous weapons. Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife
at any time. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by law, no person shall
use, carry, or any weapon potentially dangerous to wildlife and human safety,
or any kind of trapping device. The discharge or brandishing of all weapons
is prohibited.  In addition, the use of any item in a manner that
potentially endangers any human or wildlife is prohibited.  Shooting into
park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.



   (E)   Picnic areas and use.



      (1)   Regulated. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those
designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate
the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to
secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall
comply with any directions given to achieve this end.



      (2)   Availability. Violate the regulation that use of the
individual grills, together with tables and benches, follows generally the
rule of “First come, first served.”



      (3)   Duty of picnicker.  Leave a picnic area before the
cooking grill is completely extinguished, and before all trash in the nature
of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the
disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by
the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.



   (F)   Camping. Unless permission is granted by the Director or park
attendants, no person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary
shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a
park after closing hours any movable structure, or special vehicle to be used
or that could be used for such purposes as house trailer, camp- trailer
camp-wagon, or the like.



   (G)   Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving
thrown, or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows,
javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of
recreation. The playing of rough, or comparatively dangerous games such as
football, baseball, soccer, and softball is prohibited except on the fields
and courts or areas provided for such activities.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 961, passed 11-8-10)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.19  PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Intoxicating beverages. Be under the influence of intoxicating
beverages or controlled substances. No person shall possess or consume beer,
wine, or other alcoholic beverages within Mill Pond Park or Riverside
Cemetery.



   (B)   Fireworks and explosives. Bring in, or have in his/her
possession, or set off, or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn,
any firecrackers, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable
material, or discharge them, or throw them into any such area from land, or
highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound,
mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound
would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints.



   (C)   Domestic animals. All dogs or other domestic animals shall be
restrained at all times by adequate leashes. Owners of such animals shall be
responsible to clean up the defecation left by their animals.



   (D)   Reservation of facilities. Occupy any seat or bench, enter
into, or loiter, or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section
thereof which may be reserved.



   (E)   Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire. No person shall drop,
throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper, or other inflammable material, within any park area or on any
highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.



   (F)   Closed areas.  Enter an area posted as “Closed to the
Public,” nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation
of posted notices.



   (G)   Disorderly conduct. Engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.



   (H)   Causing or risking public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm. 
Cause, recklessly create a risk of, or knowingly contribute to inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm to any person in a park by:



      (1)   Engaging in fighting or threatening, or engaging in
violent or tumultuous behavior;



      (2)   Jostling or roughly crowding persons unnecessarily;



      (3)   Making an obscene communication or display; or



      (4)   Creating a hazardous condition by any act which serves
no legitimate purpose.



   (I)   Exhibit permits. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from
the Director which he/she claims to have upon request of any authorized
person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with any ordinance or rule.



   (J)   Interference with permittees. Disturb or interfere
unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or participating in
any activity, under the authority of a permit.



   (K)   Nelson Park.



      (1)   No dogs shall be allowed within 100 feet of the cages
for the exhibited animals. This provision shall not apply to those dogs which
may assist handicapped persons or persons with disabilities.



      (2)   Harm, kill, injure, harass, taunt or tease the exhibited
animals.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.20  MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Vending and peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or
thing, nor shall he/she station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is
made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by, and under the
authority and regulation of the Director.



   (B)   Advertising. Announce, advertise, or call the public attention
in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.



   (C)   Signs. Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement, or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause
to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands, highways, or roads
adjacent to a park.



(Ord. 748, passed 5-24-93)  Penalty, see § 97.99



PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 97.30  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   There is established a Parks and Recreation Commission. Said Commission
shall consist of seven persons all serving without pay. The Commission shall
appoint the members. The term of office for the appointive members shall be
for three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified except
that the members of such commission first appointed shall be appointed for
such terms that the term of one member shall expire one year thereafter; the
term of two members shall expire two years thereafter; vacancies in such
Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by
the Commission for unexpired term.



(Ord. 483, passed 6-3-74)



§ 97.31  ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS.



   Immediately after their appointment, the members of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their
members chairperson and such officers as may be necessary. The Commission
shall have the power to adopt by-laws and advise the City Manager and
Commission on rules and regulations for the proper conduct of public parks
and recreation for the city. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall adopt
non-discriminatory rules for the use of parks and other facilities and shall
administer the facilities on a non-discriminatory basis.



(Ord. 483, passed 6-3-74)



§ 97.32  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall provide, conduct and
supervise public parks, playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers
and other recreation areas and facilities owned or controlled by the city. It
is authorized and directed to prepare land use plans and maps for each public
park or other property under its jurisdiction and to define the specific
permitted activities in each. It shall have the power to conduct any form of
recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the
people in a constructive and wholesome manner. It may conduct such activities
on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of
the authorities, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. It
will set monthly meetings (open to the public) to plan for the community
needs in park facilities and recreation programs. The Commission will advise
in establishing recreation and park policies. It shall require a quorum at
all Commission meetings for formal official action. It shall keep a complete
record of all Commission meetings and submit the minutes to all Commission
members prior to the next regular meeting. The Commission will make periodic
inspections of parks and recreation areas and facilities.



(Ord. 483, passed 6-3-74)



§ 97.33  DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall advise the City Manager on
selection of a Director of Parks and Recreation.



(Ord. 483, passed 6-3-74)



§ 97.34  BUDGET.



   Annually, the Parks and Recreation Commission shall review a proposed
budget and make recommendations to the City Manager for its approval. The
Parks and Recreation Commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or
bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied,
principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for parks,
playgrounds, or other recreational purposes.



(Ord. 483, passed 6-3-74)



§ 97.35  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall make an annual report to the
Commission and such other reports as from time to time may be requested.



(Ord. 483, passed 6-3-74)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction.  Any person violating any
provision of this chapter, with the exception of those specifically set forth
in division (B) below shall be held responsible for a municipal civil
infraction and prosecuted in accordance with the Municipal Civil Infractions
Ordinance. The fine for violation of a municipal civil infraction under this
chapter shall be $50; the second violation, $100; and the third or any
subsequent violation within any one calendar year, $250.



   (B)   Criminal misdemeanor.  Any person violating the following
designated provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in § 10.99:



 

§ 97.15(A)(1) and (3)
(C)(1) and (2)
 
Park property


§ 97.16(A) and (B)
 
Sanitation


§ 97.17(B)
 
All-terrain vehicles


§ 97.18(D)
 
Recreational activities


§ 97.19(A)
(G)
(H)
(K)(2)
 
Behavior



 



(Ord. 769, passed 8-14-95)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 98:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Streets and Public Ways




   98.01   Street defined



   98.02   Excavations



   98.03   Application for permit; fees



   98.04   Obstructions, restrictions



   98.05   Suspension, revocation of permits



   98.06   Additional construction regulations



   98.07   Tampering with street signs or barricades



   98.08   Moving buildings



   98.09   Posting notices



   98.10   Signs and signposts



   98.11   Erection of utility poles, wires



   98.12   Depositing materials on streets prohibited



   98.13   Distributing advertising matter



   98.14   Liability to city for loss or damage



   98.15   Truck routes



   98.16   Truck identification



Complete Streets



   98.20   Purpose



   98.21   Definitions



   98.22   Implementation; applicability



   98.23   Review of transportation projects




Sidewalks




   98.25   Sidewalk construction or repair, permit required



   98.26   Dangerous and unsafe conditions prohibited



   98.27   Notice to repair; work done by city



   98.28   Permit required for work on crosswalks, driveway aprons,
curb cuts



   98.29   Unsafe driveways and crosswalks



   98.30   Approval of plans and specifications required



   98.31   Public liability insurance required



   98.32   Appeal from denial of permit



   98.33   Revocation or suspension of permit



   98.34   Additional construction regulations



   98.35   Removal of materials; suspension of objects



   98.36   Driving on sidewalks prohibited



   98.37   Snow and ice removal from sidewalks



   98.38   Depositing snow and ice restricted



   98.99   Penalty



STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS



§ 98.01  STREET DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the word STREET shall mean and include
any public highway, alley and right-of-way in the city without regard to how
such highway, alley, or right-of-way may be designated or named, and shall be
construed to mean the entire width of such highway, alley or right-of-way
thereof unless the context shall indicate that a lesser portion of such
highway is intended.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)



§ 98.02  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall make any opening or excavation in or under any
street nor construct or change any driveway approach or do any work under or
within the limits of any street without first obtaining a permit from the
Director of Public Works. No permit shall be granted until the plans and
specifications for the work proposed to be done shall have been approved by
the Director of Public Works. In case of emergency occurring after office
hours, at night, or on a Sunday or legal holiday, when immediate excavation
may be necessary for the protection of public or private property, the
Director of Public Works shall be notified and requested to grant permission
to make the necessary excavation upon the express condition that an
application be made for a permit on or before noon of the next business day.



   (B)   Any public utility operating under the jurisdiction of the
Michigan Public Service Commission, upon written application and upon filing
a certificate of insurance and payment of an annual fee as provided, may be
granted a permit for the installation, replacement or repair of any
underground facilities in a public street for a period of one year. Any
public utility which has not procured an annual permit may be issued permits
and shall pay the regular permit fee.



   (C)   The issuance of a permit under this section shall be
contingent upon fulfillment of the following conditions:



      (1)   During the duration of the operations, the applicant
shall agree to keep the operations barricaded, lighted at night, and
otherwise protected as required by the Director of Public Works to secure the
safety of the public and property. If operations take place in a street, all
barricading and signing shall be in accordance with the Michigan Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the fee to
reimburse the city for the costs of inspection and supervision.



      (3)   The applicant shall agree to complete operations within
the time specified in the permit.



      (4)   Before any permit is issued, the Director of Public
Works shall require from all applicants, such public liability and property
damage insurance as shall protect the applicant and the city from claims for
damages for personal injury, including wrongful death, as well as claims for
property damage. The policy shall name the city as an additional insured. A
copy of the certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city. Amounts
of such insurance shall be established by resolution of the Commission. Any
person other than utility companies doing excavation work in any city street
shall provide the city with a surety bond in the amount of $5,000,
guaranteeing that the contractor will complete the work in accordance with
all ordinances and the plans and specifications as approved by the Director
of Public Works.



      (5)   Each contractor making an excavation shall be required
to give all utilities four hours' advance notice before beginning work.



      (6)   All excavations shall be guaranteed for a period of two
years from the time of completion against failure, settlement, poor
workmanship, or failure to meet specifications or terms of the permit.
Repairs shall be at the permittee's expense.



   (D)   All excavations made in either a paved or unpaved street,
unless specifically exempted by the Director of Public Works, shall be
backfilled and compacted to city specifications. Any settlement of the
completed work, within a two year period, must be repaired at the permittee's
expense.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)



§ 98.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEES.



   Application for a permit shall be made to the Division of Public Works
in such form and detail as prescribed and accompanied with the payment of
such charges as may be determined by resolution of the Commission.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)



§ 98.04  OBSTRUCTIONS, RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall, in performing any work authorized by permit,
obstruct more than one-half of the traveled portion of any street without
permission of the Director of Public Works.  Persons working in the street
must provide adequate signing, barricades, flag persons, and the like, to
adequately protect vehicles and pedestrians using the street and adjacent
sidewalk. Before any person shall totally block any street he/she shall first
notify Division of Public Works and obtain permission from the Director of
Public Works.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to impede or obstruct
the free passage or flow of motor vehicle traffic on any street in the city.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 925, passed 3-12-07)  Penalty, see §
98.99(A)



§ 98.05  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall inspect, or cause to be
inspected, all work done under any permit issued pursuant to the provisions
of this subchapter, and he/she shall suspend any permit when the terms
thereof, or any provisions of this subchapter, shall be violated. No person
shall perform any work authorized by any permit while the permit is suspended.



   (B)   All work done pursuant to any permit shall be inspected or
cause to be inspected by the Director of Public Works, and he/she may suspend
or revoke any permit so granted where either the workmanship or materials
used do not conform to the plans and specifications approved or required upon
issuance of the permit, or when the terms of any permit or of this subchapter
are violated. No person shall perform any work authorized by any permit, or
cause any such work to be performed, while that permit is suspended or
revoked.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.06  ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.



   The Division of Public Works may make such additional rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of the Commission, pertaining to the
making of openings or excavations in streets as are necessary to secure the
health and safety of the public and for the protection of property, and such
rules and regulations shall constitute the standards upon which the permit
hereinabove required shall be issued. Such rules and regulations are
incorporated herein by reference with the same force and effect as though set
forth herein fully and at length. No work shall be done by any permittee
except in accordance with the specifications and directions contained in the
permit.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.07  TAMPERING WITH STREET SIGNS OR BARRICADES.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall move, alter, deface, injure or
destroy any part or accessory of any street sign or barricade erected or
placed to protect, warn or guide the public.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, damage or
remove any barrier erected to protect any excavation or obstruction in any
street, or any light placed as a warning of such excavation or obstruction;
or any street sign placed to designate the name of the street; or any street
lamp, light post, pole or any of the parts or attachments thereto, or any
telephone pole or any wire or appliances thereof, or any device erected by
the authority of the city, or any public property whatsoever.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.08  MOVING BUILDINGS.



   No person shall move, or cause to be removed, any building into, along
or across any street or public way without first procuring a permit as
required by the building code of the city.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.09  POSTING NOTICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post any handbill, notice,
advertisement, sign, any other advertising device or matter, on any telephone
or electric light pole in any street, or other public place in the city,
except signs by any government authority.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.10  SIGNS AND SIGNPOSTS.



   (A)   No person shall place or cause to be placed any sign or
signpost upon any street in the city, except traffic-control devices and
street markers installed and maintained by the city or state, and except
signs of churches and other non-profit organizations, approved by the City
Manager and installed and maintained under the supervision and control of the
Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Removal, destruction or damage of any regulatory sign shall be
prohibited.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.11  ERECTION OF UTILITY POLES, WIRES.



   (A)   No person shall erect any telephone or electric light pole or
wire within any street of the city without first obtaining an annual permit
and site approval for each project from the Division of Public Works.



   (B)   All such poles and wires shall be erected under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works, but no wires shall be erected or
placed within 25 feet of the ground in any street.



   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall not be
construed as granting any right to the maintenance of any poles and wires
already erected in the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city,
except such rights as have heretofore been granted by the Commission, and the
right to compel the removal or change of any such poles and wires is reserved
by the city.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.12  DEPOSITING MATERIALS ON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drop, leave or scatter on any street, in the
city any sand, dirt, mud, gravel, brick, scrap material or any other
material. All persons using trucks, trailers, wagons, or other vehicles to
haul sand, dirt, mud, gravel, brick, scrap material or any other material
shall not load the same above the top of the side or end boards of the
vehicle. The body of any such vehicle used for such shall be constructed as
to prevent the dropping, leaving or scattering of such materials.



   (B)   Construction sites must be managed to prevent the deposition
of sand, gravel and dirt in the streets. If material is deposited in the
street, the contractor responsible must clean up all materials in the street
prior to the end of the work day. If debris is not cleaned up, the city may
have debris cleaned up with all costs incurred billed back to the permittee
and/or revocation of such permit.



   (C)   No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, any dirt or
litter of any kind out of any building or private property upon any street or
public way of the city. No person shall throw, or cause to be thrown, any
wastewater, flammable liquids, oil or grease upon any street or public way.
The Director of Public Works may have such dirt or litter removed with all
costs billed to the adjacent property owner in accordance with § 98.99.



   (D)   No person shall cause to be placed any grass clippings,
leaves, lawn rakings, tree or bush trimmings, tree trunks, stumps, ashes,
soil, dirt or household debris in or on any street, in the city. The Director
of Public Works may have such yardwaste removed by city crews with all costs
billed to the adjacent property owner, in accordance with § 98.99.



   (E)   No person shall place or cause to be placed in or upon any
street, alley or public way, any broken ware, glass, scrap metal or scrap
material, kegs, barrels, cartons, boxes, crates, excrement, sawdust, sticks,
shavings, cans, trash, rubbish, refuse, or any offensive substance
whatsoever. All garbage shall be placed and kept in covered receptacles. All
glass, trash, rubbish, refuse and small pieces of metal shall be so placed in
receptacles that pieces or particles cannot drop out. The Director of Public
Works may have such rubbish, trash, and the like, removed by city crews with
all costs billed to the adjacent property owner, in accordance with § 98.99.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.13  DISTRIBUTING ADVERTISING MATTER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, throw or scatter, or
cause to be distributed, thrown or scattered, any papers, handbills, posters,
signs, cards or other advertising matter in any street in the city; nor shall
any person place or cause to be placed any such papers, handbills, posters,
signs, cards or other advertising matter in or on any vehicle parked upon any
street in the city.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 925, passed 3-12-07; Am. Ord. 1009,
passed 4-25-16)  Penalty, see § 98.99(B)



§ 98.14  LIABILITY TO CITY FOR LOSS OR DAMAGE.



   Whenever any person performs any work, as provided in this subchapter,
either under contract with the city or by virtue of any permit issued by the
city, such person shall be liable to the city for all loss or damage which
the city may sustain and for all sums which it may have to pay to any person
by reason of any loss or injury sustained through any carelessness or
negligence in doing the work, or by reason of any neglect or failure to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter or code.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95)



§ 98.15  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to regulate the orderly
operation of trucks on the streets of the city. The primary objectives are to
facilitate the transfer of goods and services by trucks to businesses and to
preserve the quality of life in the neighborhoods. Prime considerations
involved in the purpose of the section are: 1) the safety of our citizens; 2)
avoidance of unreasonable or unnecessary disturbance or reduction in property
values due to truck noise, vibration, and/or air pollution; 3) protection
against the deterioration of those streets not designated for truck traffic,
and 4) adequate truck service to businesses and residences in an expeditious
manner, having due regard for economical vehicle operation.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:



   TRUCK. "Truck", "truck tractor", "trailer", "semi-trailer", as defined
in Act 300, Public Acts of Michigan, 1949, or any combination thereof, as
well as chartered, tour-type buses.



   (C)   Where density of traffic, protection of life and property,
construction and condition of the roadway, or any hazardous condition makes
it advisable, the direction of traffic flow and routing of trucks and heavy
vehicles may be made by the proper authority by duly posted traffic control
devices; and it shall be unlawful to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle
in violation of such direction and routing.



   (D)   The streets of the city are hereby designated for this section
into four classes:



      (1)   Primary Truck Routes.  Those streets specifically
designated by this section or subsequent traffic control orders as truck
routes.



      (2)   Secondary Truck Routes.  Those streets leading to
and/or from commercial, institutional or public facilities in need of regular
deliveries by trucks and located off of primary truck routes and designated
by this section or subsequent traffic control orders.



      (3)   Major Streets.  Those streets, other than truck routes,
that are certified by the Michigan Department of Transportation as major
streets in the city of Mt. Pleasant.



      (4)   Local Streets.  All streets not designated herein as
truck routes or major streets.



   (E)   The operation of any truck exceeding 30 feet in length or
26,000 pounds gross weight (including operator and cargo) and/or any vehicle
which requires hazardous material placards is prohibited upon every street in
the city except primary truck routes designated by this section or subsequent
traffic control orders.  The operation of any truck exceeding 30 feet in
length or 26,000 pounds of gross weight shall be permitted on secondary
routes only in accordance with D(2).



   (F)   Provided, however, that no provision of this section shall
prohibit:



      (1)   The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in
the city.



      (2)   The operation of trucks leased, owned or operated by the
Division of Public Works or any other governmental agency, any contractor or
material delivery person while engaged in the repair, maintenance or
construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the
city, or licensed refuse carrier on their assigned route.



      (3)   The operation of a truck upon any officially established
detour in any case where such trucks could lawfully be operated upon the
street for which such detour is established.



      (4)   The operation of a truck on such prohibited streets as
may be reasonably necessary when traveling from the nearest street
intersection on a street where it is permitted to operate to a destination on
a prohibited street.



      (5)   The operation of a truck on prohibited streets while
engaged in pickups or deliveries, provided that the truck shall, upon
completion of the last pickup or delivery, return by the shortest route to
the nearest street upon which it is permitted to operate.



      (6)   Any Isabella County Transportation Commission or public
school bus from traveling on any street in the city.



      (7)   Any truck traffic generated within the city of Mt.
Pleasant or Union Township from traveling on Bradley Street.



   (G)   It shall be the duty of any person who shall be driving or in
charge or control of any truck which may at that time be upon any street in
the city upon which truck travel is limited or restricted, upon the demand of
any police officer, to proceed to any public or private scale available for
the purpose of weighing and determining whether the weight thereof is in
excess of the weight limit permitted upon such street.



(Ord. 805, passed 10-13-97) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.16    TRUCK IDENTIFICATION.



   No person shall engage in commerce in the operation on the public
streets of the city a motor truck, tractor, trailer or semi-trailer unless it
shall have painted or otherwise lettered upon it the name of the business and
business address as required by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code. This section
shall not be applicable to trucks eligible for, and equipped with, farm
commercial license plates.



(Ord. 805, passed 10-13-97) Penalty, see § 98.99



COMPLETE STREETS



§ 98.20  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Sections 98.20 through 98.23 shall serve as the city’s
complete streets policy for purposes of Public Act 51 of 1951, as amended,
M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651 et seq. (“PA 51”).



   (B)   The purpose of these sections is to provide for the planning,
design, construction, and maintenance of a transportation system within the
city that satisfies the access and mobility needs of all users, regardless of
age, ability, mode of transportation, or trip purpose. The road network
should function as an integral part of the overall transportation system and
provide for safe, accessible, comfortable, and efficient transportation
options for people and goods in order to support the city’s quality of
life, economic vitality, and environmental sustainability.



(Ord. 996, passed 6-22-15)



§ 98.21  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this complete
streets policy shall have the following meanings:



   COMPLETE STREETS. Roadways planned, designed, and constructed to
provide access to all legal users in a manner that promotes safe, efficient,
and convenient movement of people and goods whether by car, truck, transit,
assistive device, foot, bicycle, or other means.



   TRANSPORTATION PROJECT. The construction, reconstruction, retrofit,
alteration, or repair of any element of the transportation system, and
includes the planning, design, approval, and implementation processes.
TRANSPORTATION PROJECT does not include minor routine maintenance such as
cleaning, sweeping, mowing, spot repair, interim measures on detour routes,
or emergency repair work and does not include projects that are not included
in the city’s capital improvement plan.



(Ord. 996, passed 6-22-15)



§ 98.22  IMPLEMENTATION AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The city shall develop and implement standards for complete
streets with the goal of creating a complete streets network throughout the
city. As it endeavors to implement those standards, the city shall routinely
approach every transportation project and program as an opportunity to
further implement complete streets, especially in the planning, design and
construction of public streets. All proposed transportation projects shall be
subject to the review procedures described in § 98.23.



   (B)   The city shall endeavor to implement standards for complete
streets into projects involving only preservation or minor routine
maintenance of a roadway, bridge, public parking facility, or other
transportation right-of-way, but such projects are not subject to the review
procedures in § 98.23.



   (C)   The city shall meet or exceed the requirements for the funding
of non-motorized transportation enhancements provided in PA 51.



   (D)   The city shall work in partnership with the Charter Township
of Union, Isabella County, the Michigan Department of Transportation, and
Central Michigan University to facilitate the implementation of complete
streets, to the extent feasible, on projects under the jurisdiction of those
entities.



(Ord. 996, passed 6-22-15)



§ 98.23  REVIEW OF TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS.



   (A)   During the annual capital improvement plan process, the
Division of Public Works shall submit to the Planning Commission a list of
proposed transportation projects for the next fiscal year that showcase,
prioritize, and incorporate complete street infrastructure. The list shall
include street projects that improve existing public streets to be complete
streets.



   (B)   The Division of Public Works shall also submit to the Planning
Commission a list of transportation projects to be excluded from
incorporating complete streets infrastructure, and shall provide information
explaining the exclusion. Transportation projects may be excluded from
incorporating complete streets infrastructure for the following reasons:



      (1)   Use by non-motorized users is prohibited by law;



      (2)   The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the
need or probable future use over the long term, generally adding 25% or more
to the budgeted project cost; or



      (3)   Planning, design, and construction as complete streets
would be unreasonable or inappropriate in light of the scope of the project.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall review the lists of
transportation projects submitted by the Division of Public Works, and may
provide comments and recommendations regarding those lists to the City
Commission prior to its consideration of the capital improvement plan.



   (D)   Upon the completion of the annual street financial report, as
required by PA 51, the Division of Public Works shall provide the City
Commission and Planning Commission with a summary of transportation projects
performed during the past year, including funding sources for each, and a
calculation of the share of the city’s PA 51 funding spent on non-motorized
transportation facilities.



(Ord. 996, passed 6-22-15)



SIDEWALKS



§ 98.25  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR, PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk except in accordance
with the lines, grade, slope and specifications established by the Director
of Public Works and without first procuring a permit from the Division of
Public Works. Permits shall be prominently displayed on the construction site.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.26  DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by
him/her to fall into a state of disrepair or be unsafe.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.27  NOTICE TO REPAIR; WORK DONE BY CITY.



   Whenever the Director of Public Works shall determine that a sidewalk
is unsafe for use, or required to be constructed for the public safety, the
Director of Public Works shall give written notice to the owner or occupant
of the abutting premises, to repair within 30 days. Alternatively, the
Director of Public Works may repair or construct the sidewalk if, in the
Director's opinion, the sidewalk condition is unsafe and dangerous and
requires immediate repair to assure public safety and to prevent the
possibility of city liability for personal injury or property damage. Upon
failure of the owner to repair the sidewalk within 30 days, the Director of
Public Works shall cause repairs to be made and shall provide a report to the
Commission of the cost and expense of performing such work, which costs and
expense shall be charged to the owner or occupant.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)



§ 98.28  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR WORK ON CROSSWALKS, DRIVEWAY APRONS, CURB CUTS.



   No person shall construct, alter or change any crosswalk, driveway
apron or any opening in or through any curb in any street or public way
without first procuring a permit from the Division of Public Works. If work
is undertaken without a permit, a $100 penalty, plus double the permit fee,
will be charged.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.29  UNSAFE DRIVEWAYS AND CROSSWALKS.



   If in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, any driveway,
crosswalk or other paved area between the sidewalk and the curb is not
reasonably safe or fit for travel and should be immediately repaired, the
Director of Public Works shall give the owner or occupant of the premises
adjacent to the driveway, crosswalk or other paved area, notice to repair
within 30 days. If the repairs are not made, the Director of Public Works
shall cause repairs to be made and shall provide a report to the Commission
of the cost and expense of performing such work, which costs shall be charged
to the owner or occupant.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.30  APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED.



   No work for which a permit is required under this subchapter shall be
done by any person except in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Director of Public Works, and all work shall be done under
the supervision of the Division of Public Works.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.31  PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Before any permit is issued to the applicant, the Director of Public
Works shall require such public liability and property damage insurance as
shall protect the applicant and the city from claims for damages for personal
injury, including wrongful death, as well as claims for property damage. Said
policy shall name the city as an additional insured, by means of certificate
of insurance to the city. Amounts of such insurance shall be established by
resolution of the Commission. Any person other than utility companies doing
excavation work in any city street or alley shall provide the city with a
surety bond in the amount of $1,000 for each job, or $5,000 per year 
guaranteeing that  the contractor  will  complete the work in accordance
with all ordinances and the plans and specifications as approved by the
Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.32  APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   If the Division of Public Works shall refuse to issue any permit, the
applicant may appeal to the Commission which shall authorize a hearing before
the Commission. The decision of the Commission may impose such conditions as
it may deem desirable to protect the safety of persons and property.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)



§ 98.33  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   All work done pursuant to any permit shall be inspected or cause to be
inspected by the Director of Public Works. Any permit may be suspended or
revoked if either the workmanship or material used does not conform to the
plans and specifications approved or required by the permit, or when the
terms of any permit or of this subchapter are violated. No person shall
perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any such work to be
performed if the permit is suspended or revoked.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.34  ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.



   The Division of Public Works may make such additional rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of the Commission, pertaining to the
making of openings or excavations in streets as are necessary to secure the
health and safety of the public and for the protection of property. Such
rules and regulations shall constitute the standards upon which any permit
required by this subchapter shall be issued. Such rules and regulations are
incorporated by reference. No work shall be done by any permittee except in
accordance with the specifications and directions contained in the permit.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.35  REMOVAL OF MATERIALS; SUSPENSION OF OBJECTS.



   (A)   No person owning, building or repairing any house or other
building shall permit any lumber, brick, plaster, mortar, earth, clay, sand,
stone or other material to remain on the sidewalk after sunset of the day
upon which it was placed there, without written permission from the Director
of Public Works.



   (B)   No person shall suspend anything above any sidewalk or within
any street area, unless expressly authorized by city ordinances, except an
awning or marquee no part of which is less than seven feet above the sidewalk
grade.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.36  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall go upon or drive, or cause to be driven, any vehicle or
animal on any pavement, sidewalk, curbing or gutter, except at a driveway
constructed for such purpose.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.37  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   (1)   Every person, partnership or corporation in charge or
in control of any commercial or industrial building or commercial or
industrial lot of land within the city fronting or abutting on a paved
sidewalk, whether its owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall
remove and clear away or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice
from a patch of at least 48 inches in width from so much of said sidewalk as
is in front of or abuts on said building or lot of land.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) hereof, snow and ice
shall be so removed from sidewalks in all business districts within the city
by 18 hours after the cessation of fall and accumulation of snow, sleet or
freezing rain, with the exception of Sundays and holidays. Holidays to be
defined as Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year's Day. The exclusion
of Sundays and holidays applies only if the subsidence of snow storm occurs
after 4:00 p.m. the previous day, in which case sidewalks must be cleaned by
12:00 p.m. (noon) the day following a Sunday or a holiday.



   (B)   In the event snow and ice on a sidewalk have become so hard
that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
division (A) hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on the
sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe; and shall then, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause a path in said sidewalk of at least 48
inches in width to be thoroughly cleaned.



   (C)   If the sidewalks covered in this section are not cleared
within the time limits set above, the property or business owner will be
issued a civil infraction ticket. After the receipt of a civil infraction
ticket, the property or business owner will have a 24-hour period to comply
with the requirements of this section.



   (D)   If the property or business owner fails to clear the sidewalks
after the 24-hour period following the issuance of a civil infraction ticket,
the DPW crews  are authorized  to clear the walk.  The cost to clear the
walk will be charged to the property owner at a fee to be set by resolution
of the Commission.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 781, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 793,
passed 11-11-96)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.38  DEPOSITING SNOW AND ICE RESTRICTED.



   No person, partnership, or corporation shall deposit or cause to be
deposited any snow and ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk,
roadway, public right of way; except that which fronts the owner's, renter's
or corporation property; or loading and unloading areas of a public
transportation system, except that snow and ice may be deposited on curbs
incident to the cleaning of sidewalks within the Central Business District.
No snow or ice shall be piled more than three feet high as measured above the
road surface within the right-of-way or on private property if it causes a
sight restriction for vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Municipal civil infraction.  Any person who violates any
provision of this chapter, with the exception of § 98.10(B), shall be held
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in accordance
with the Municipal Civil Infractions ordinance. The fine for violation of a
municipal civil infraction under this chapter shall be $50; the second
violation, $100; and the third or any subsequent violation within any one
calendar year, $250; with the exceptions of §§ 98.15 and 98.16, under which
the fine shall be $200. In addition, the city shall be reimbursed for any
costs incurred by the city in causing any work to be performed which the
respondent has failed to perform. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. 



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95; Ord. 773, passed 8-28-95)



   (B)   Criminal misdemeanor.  Any person violating §§ 98.10(B) or
98.13(B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500, or by incarceration, for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both.



(Ord. 772, passed 8-28-95; Am. Ord. 925, passed 3-12-07)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 99:  TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS



Section




General Provisions




   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Preservation and removal of trees in public places



   99.03   Prohibited species



   99.04   Permit to plant required; application for permit



   99.05   Replacement of vegetation



   99.06   Electrical wires



   99.07   Stone and cement



   99.08   Wires and ropes



   99.09   Destruction or damage to trees and shrubs



   99.10   Tree protection



   99.11   Tree maintenance; obstructions prohibited



   99.12   Interference with Division of Public Works or employees




Rules and Regulations for Trees




   99.25   Duties of Division of Public Works and Director



   99.26   Adoption of rules and regulations



   99.27   Rule 1.1 Permit required



   99.28   Rule 1.2 Planting plans



   99.29   Rule 1.3 Planting



   99.30   Rule 1.4 Tree trimming



   99.31   Rule 1.5 Tree removal



   99.32   Rule 1.6 Safety clearance



 



   99.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation having fee simple title, joint
or common tenancy, equitable ownership or the interest of a mortgagee in
possession. Any person, firm or corporation whose name appears on the last
preceding assessment roll for the property shall be deemed the prima facie
owner of the property within this chapter.



   PLANT. A young tree, vine, shrub, or herb planted or suitable for
planting.



   PUBLIC HIGHWAY. A street, road or passage under the control of and kept
by the public, established by regular proceedings for the purpose or 
generally used by the public or dedicated by the owner of the soil and
accepted by the proper authorities and for the maintenance of which they are
responsible. Highway includes roads, streets, alleys, lanes, courts, places,
trails and bridges laid out by the public or dedicated or abandoned to the
public. Highway shall include all lands between property lines of property
abutting highways.



   PUBLIC PLACE. A place to which the general public has the right to
resort; not necessarily a place devoted solely to the uses of the public, but
a place which is in point of fact public rather than private.



   SHRUB. A low, small plant, the branches of which grow directly from the
earth without any supporting trunk, or stem. Any tree with a potential growth
of less than 15 feet shall be considered a shrub.



   TREES. A woody plant, the branches of which spring from, and are
supported upon, a trunk or body which at its greatest potential growth,
exceeds 15 feet in height.



   VEGETATION. Plant life or total plant cover of an area.



   VINE.  A plant whose stem requires support and which climbs by
tendrils or twining or creeps along the ground.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)



§ 99.02  PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL OF TREES IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   The Director of Public Works shall have the right to plant, trim,
spray, preserve or remove all vegetation on highways and public places as may
be necessary to promote the health, safety or welfare of the community and to
aesthetically enhance the symmetry and beauty of public places. The Director
of Public Works may remove or cause to be removed any vegetation in an unsafe
condition or infected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)



§ 99.03  PROHIBITED SPECIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant on any highway or
public property within the city limits a Poplar grandidentata (Big Tooth
Aspen), P. tremuloides (Quaking Aspen), P. balssmifera (Balsam Poplar), P.
deltoides (Eastern Cottonwood); Ailanthus altissima (Tree of Heaven); Catalpa
speciosa and C. bignonoides (Catalpas); Acer negundo (Box Elder), A.
saccharinum (Silver Maple); Ulmus parvifolia (Chinese Elm), Ulmus pumila
(Siberia Elm), U. rubra (Slippery Elm), U. thomasii (Rock Elm), U. americana
(American Elm); Juglans nigra (Black Walnut); Saliz nigra (Black Willow), S.
babylonica (Weeping Willow); Ginkgo (Ginkgo Biloba female); Mulberry (Morus
Spp.); Black Locust (Robinia Spp.); without procuring a special permit from
the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Any of the above-named species may be removed or caused to be
removed by the Director of Public Works when it is deemed in the interest of
public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.04  PERMIT TO PLANT REQUIRED; APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   No person shall plant or set out any tree or shrub or cause or
authorize anyone to do so on any public highway or public place without
obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works. Such permit,
when issued, shall set forth the conditions under which the planting may be
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or rules and
regulations adopted by the city.



   (B)   The form of application and form of permit shall be in
accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the city.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.05  REPLACEMENT OF VEGETATION.



   Whenever any vegetation is removed by any person (including the city)
for the construction of any public improvement, or is severely damaged by
pruning to clear utility lines, the Director of Public Works, whenever
practicable, shall require the planting of a similar tree, bush or shrub to
take the place of those removed.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.06  ELECTRICAL WIRES.



   No person shall cause a wire or other conductor charged with
electricity to come in contact with any tree, plant or shrub within any
public highway or public place in such a manner as to injure or abrade such
tree, plant or shrub. The Director of Public Works may order any person to
prune or remove any tree, plant or shrub growing within a public highway or
public place or, in the alternative, to remove any wire or wires running
thereon in violation of this section with 24 hours after written notice to
the owner or person in control of such wire or wires. The owner or agent so
notified shall be responsible for the protection of the highway, public
place, and persons thereon during the progress of tree operations deemed
essential under this section.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.07  STONE AND CEMENT.



   No person shall place or maintain on any public highway or public place
any stone, cement or other impervious material or substance in such a manner
as to obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree,
plant or shrub thereon without the written permission of the Director of
Public Works.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.08  WIRES AND ROPES.



   No person shall attach or cause to be attached to any tree, plant, or
shrub within a public highway or public place any rope, wire, chain, sign or
other device without the written permission of the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.09  DESTRUCTION OR DAMAGE TO TREES AND SHRUBS.



   No person shall mutilate, disfigure or destroy any tree or shrub or
discharge or cause to be discharged any gas, oil, salt, herbicides or other
substances dangerous to vegetation upon any tree, shrub or plant or the soil
surrounding the same within any public highway or public place.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.10  TREE PROTECTION.



   During any construction, repair, alteration or removal of any building
or structure, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave any tree, bush or
shrub within any public highway or public place without sufficient guard or
protection so as to prevent injury thereto by reason of such construction,
repair, alteration or removal. No tree, bush or shrub shall be moved or
removed from any public highway or public place without the written consent
of the Director of Public Works. All such removal or moving shall be done at
the expense of the applicant. Any tree, bush or shrub destroyed by reason of
removing or moving shall be replaced by the applicant at his/her expense.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.11  TREE MAINTENANCE; OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Any tree, bush or shrub projecting upon or over any public
highway or public place shall be kept trimmed by the owner of the property on
which said tree, bush or shrub is located to a minimum of nine feet from the
natural ground level. No tree, bush or shrub on any private property shall
obstruct the light of any public street lighting or obstruct the view of any
traffic sign or signs erected by the city or any public governmental unit.



   (B)   If the Director of Public Works determines that any tree, bush
or shrub is a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the Director
shall notify the owner of the private property upon which said tree, bush or
shrub is growing, by personal service or certified mail at the owner's last
address, as shown in the record of the City Assessor, notifying said owner to
trim, treat, prune or remove such tree, bush or shrub.



   (C)   If an owner of any private property so notified concerning the
trimming or removal of any tree, bush or shrub has not removed, trimmed or
treated the same within 15 days after mailing of the aforesaid notice, or
does not have an appeal pending, the Director of Public Works is authorized
or remove, treat to trim the same and to charge the owner for the cost
thereof.



   (D)   Any owner receiving a notice under division (B) above, shall
have the right to appeal the determination of the Director of Public Works by
submitting a written request for hearing to the Commission within ten days of
receipt of the notice. The request for hearing shall be directed to the
Commission, at City of Mount Pleasant, City Hall, Mount Pleasant, MI 48858.
The request for hearing shall stay the actions of the Director of Public
Works until real determination by the Commission. The Commission shall notify
the owner, in writing, by personal service or certified mail, at least seven
days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission of when the
public hearing shall be held, The owner may appear before the Commission
personally, by agents or may submit his/her objection to the actions of the
Director of Public Works in writing. The Commission may confirm, amend or
reverse the instructions of the Director of Public Works and shall determine
the date for compliance by the owner, with 15 days after the date of the
public hearing. The Commission shall transmit in writing the finding of fact
and report of its action to the Director of Public Works and the owner.



   (E)   When the Division of Public Works has removed, trimmed or
treated any offending tree, bush or shrub on private property, or has paid
for such trimming, treating or removal, the owner shall be charged the actual
cost of said removal plus accrued interest at the rate of 1% per month from
the date of completion of said work. If the same is not paid by the owner of
the private property on which the tree, bush or shrub is located, the same
shall be charged to the owner by the city, and said charge shall be due and
payable at the time of payment of such tax bill.



   (F)   Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner
within 60 days after the trimming, pruning, treatment or removal of such
prohibited growth, as set forth in divisions (C) and (E), above, then, the
Director of Public Works shall cause to be recorded in the Treasurer's Office
of the city a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the
work and the date, place or property on which said work was done. The
recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall
remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest
until final payment has been made and shall be collected in the manner
provided by law for the collection of taxes; further, the total amount shall
be subject to a delinquent penalty of 1% per month in the event same is not
paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge
appears becomes delinquent; said sworn statements recorded in accordance with
the provision hereof, shall be notice to every person concerned that the
amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the
property described in the statement and that the same is due.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.12  INTERFERENCE WITH DIVISION OF PUBLIC WORKS OR EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or
interfere or cause or authorize or procure any interference or delay with the
Director of Public Works or any of his/her employees or agents while they are
engaged in or about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying,
trimming, or removing of any vegetation; devices attached to a tree, plant or
shrub in accordance with the requirements set forth in § 99.08 hereof;
removing of stone, cement or other material or substances as may be necessary
for the protection of any vegetation in accordance with the requirement of
§§ 99.07 and 99.09 hereof.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR TREES



§ 99.25  DUTIES OF DIVISION OF PUBLIC WORKS AND DIRECTOR.



   The Division of Public Works shall have control of the planting,
cutting, trimming and removal of all vegetation within a public highway and
the Director of Public Works shall promulgate and adopt rules and regulations
to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. No rules or regulations
promulgated hereunder shall be adopted until there has been a public hearing
before the Commission and approval of the same by resolution of the
Commission.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)



§ 99.26  ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The rules and regulations set forth in this subchapter are adopted in
accordance with § 99.25 of the code and were approved by the Commission on
March 6, 1978.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)



§ 99.27  RULE 1.1 PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall plant, trim or remove a
tree, shrub or vine on any property under the control of the city without
first obtaining a permit from the Division of Public Works.



   (B)   An application for a permit shall be made at least 48 hours in
advance of the date the work is to be performed and shall describe the work
to be done and the variety, size and location of each item to be planted or
trimmed.



   (C)   A permit shall be issued without charge and shall expire 60
days after the date of issue.



   (D)   Applications submitted by owners of the abutting property for
the planting of trees, shrubs and vines need not be accompanied by a
certificate of insurance but all other applicants shall have attached a
current certificate of insurance in the amount of not less than those given
on the attached Certificate of Insurance.



   (E)   Any work done under a written permit must be performed in
strict accordance with the terms thereof and provisions of Chapter 100 of the
Code of Ordinances, Trees, Plants and Shrubs, and the Rules and Regulations
regarding trees, plants and shrubs, and under the supervision and direction
of the Director of Public Works.



   (F)   If the work described in the application is not completed
within 48 hours of the date of issue the applicant shall notify the Director
of Public Works upon completion of the work or any major portion of it.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)



§ 99.28  RULE 1.2 PLANTING PLANS.



   (A)   Whenever five or more trees are to be planted, two copies of a
diagram drawn to scale or written statement describing the work shall
accompany the application.



   (B)   The diagram or statement shall indicate:



      (1)   The species of each tree to be planted and the species
of existing trees within 40 feet of the proposed new tree(s).



      (2)   The distance between existing or proposed trees
including any on private property within 40 feet of a proposed new tree.



      (3)   The location of existing or proposed sidewalks, curbs
and other hard surfaced areas within 40 feet of a proposed tree.



   (C)   Applicants for permits to remove a tree shall agree to observe
the city's requirements for barricading streets and shall observe such
additional instructions as may be included in the permit to protect the
public from injury.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.29  RULE 1.3 PLANTING.



   (A)   Newly planted trees must be not less than 1¼" in diameter of
trunk measured six inches above ground level and free from disease and insect
infestations.



   (B)   The spacing between trees will be determined by the species
being planted a minimum of 25 feet apart. This rule shall not prohibit the
planting of at least one tree per lot. Existing trees at the time of passage
of this chapter shall be replaced when removed in the future.



   (C)   No tree shall be planted nearer than three feet from an
existing or future curb line or outer line of the sidewalk unless a special
permit is granted by the Director of Public Works.



   (D)   No tree may be planted where the clear space between the curb
and sidewalk is less than six feet.



   (E)   All trees from 1¼" to 3" in diameter of trunk measured six
inches above the ground, must be protected and supported by tree guards. If
only one stake is used, it must be toward the prevailing winds.



   (F)   Trees shall be planted at least ten feet from the intersection
at a driveway or alley and a street right-of-way and shrubs at least five
feet therefrom.



   (G)   Species prohibited by ordinance shall not be planted for the
reasons listed below:



      (1)   Prone to clogging sewers with roots.



      (2)   Short-lived.



      (3)   Weak branches and limbs.



      (4)   Susceptible to Dutch Elm Disease.



      Poplar - (1), (2), (3)



      Big Tooth Aspen - (1), (2), (3)



      Quaking Aspen - (1), (2), (3)



      Balsam Poplar - (1), (2), (3)



      Box Elder - (1), (2), (3)



      Tree of Heaven - (3)



      Catalpa - (1)



      Silver Maple - (1), (3)



      Chinese Elm - (1)



      Siberian Elm - (3)



      Slippery Elm - (1), (4)



      Rock Elm - (1), (4)



      American Elm - (1), (4)



      Black Walnut - (1)



      Eastern Cottonwood - (1), (3)



      Black Willow - (1)



      Weeping Willow - (1)



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.30  RULE 1.4 TREE TRIMMING.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   The trees shall be pruned by removal of all dead,
diseased, broken and crossing branches.



      (2)   Live branches shall be removed to maintain the natural
shape and appearance of the trees. Mutilation and loss of characteristic
shape of the trees shall be prohibited.



      (3)   Selective removal of complete limb or limbs shall be
performed rather than excessive clipping with pruners i.e., a “hedge
trimming” effect shall be avoided.



      (4)   Saw or pruner cuts shall be flush with the parent limbs
or trunk of the tree.



      (5)   Limbs shall be precut, using a three-cut technique to
prevent splitting or stripping of bark. Ropes shall be used for lowering cut
branches where necessary to prevent damage to trees, conductors, fences, cars
and other property.



      (6)   No “hangers” shall be left in the trees after
pruning is completed.



      (7)   All old stubs shall be removed and treated. All old
scars shall be inspected and if not healing properly, shall be retraced and
treated.



      (8)   The lower branches of the tree shall be raised (where
the top is sufficient to maintain balanced life) to a height of 14 feet above
the traveled portion of the street at the curb line and seven feet above the
sidewalk and outlawn areas.



      (9)   Tools used to prune suspected or diseased trees shall be
disinfected before being used on another tree.



   (B)   Pruning procedures and scope of work.  Any tree large enough
to support a trimmer shall be climbed and trimmed. It will not be deemed
sufficient for the trimmer to remain on the ground and trim trees with a
pruning pole unless agreed upon by the Director of Public Works.



      (1)   Light pruning. The removal of dead wood, suckers,
crossed branches and stubs up to one-inch in diameter.



      (2)   Medium pruning. The work will include all of item 1
(light pruning) plus branches up to four inches in diameter. Wounds are to be
treated with a tree paint containing napthamoleacitec acid.



      (3)   Heavy pruning. Work will include items 1 (light pruning)
and 2 (medium pruning) above. Also include the removal of limbs over four
inches in diameter. Items 1, 2, and 3 above will include topping
(pollarding), trace and paint, treatment for girdling roots, installation of
supporting cables and/or bolting and sectional cavity repair work when
specifically requested by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Shaping. If in obtaining the desired shape, trees are
rendered unsightly due to lack of symmetry, further pruning to restore their
appearance shall be carried out. The extent of such shaping shall be governed
by the location and type of tree, the nature of its surroundings, and the
like. Full shaping will consist of:



         (a)   The removal or shortening by natural methods of
branches in the crown of the tree. Sufficient growth must be left on a cut
back branch to keep it alive and when possible the branch being shortened
shall be cut back far enough to preserve the natural appearance of the tree.



         (b)   Side pruning shall not be so severe as to restrict
the tree's ability to produce the food necessary for healthy growth. Top
growth shall not be reduced a greater amount than that permissible for the
species as listed below:



      50%-Silver Maple, Willow, Poplar and other fast-growing varieties



      40%-Basswood, Elm, Walnut, Ash



      14-20%-Beech, Norway and Sugar Maples and other slow-growing
species



   (C)   Pruning and utility wires.



      (1)   Any line clearing operation shall provide adequate
clearance for all power and communications circuits, including primary
service leads, as well as strain and anchor guys attached to the poles or
structures of the line.



      (2)   Limbs under conductors. Limbs growing up into the
conductors from the side of a tree shall be removed at the main trunk. If
this appears impractical or inadvisable, the limbs shall be shortened to
avoid whipping up into the line.



      (3)   Limbs parallel with conductors. Limbs growing out from
the side of a tree, parallel with conductors, and could sway into the lines,
shall be removed if practical, or shortened.



      (4)   Overhanging limbs. Limbs directly over the conductors
shall be removed if practical; otherwise, they shall be shortened
sufficiently to prevent their dropping in to the wires under the additional
weight of snow or ice.



      (5)   Dead limbs. All dead limbs shall be removed.



   (D)   Hazardous trees.



      (1)   Reporting.  Any person engaged in trimming or pruning
who becomes aware of a tree of doubtful strength which could be dangerous to
persons and property shall report it to the Director of Public Works. Such
trees shall include those that are over mature, diseased, or showing signs of
decay.



      (2)   Diagnosis. Trees of doubtful strength shall be bored at
the base with a ½-inch auger to determine the amount of dead wood. At least
three borings shall be made. Borings shall also be made in the wood
surrounding doubtful areas in the trunk or main branches as may be indicated
by exposed wood, frost cracks, bulges or sunken areas. These procedures shall
be performed by the city.



      (3)   Test holes to be plugged. Test holes in all trees left
standing following diagnosis shall be plugged with bark around the holes with
a knife. The end of the dowel shall be flush with the wood and the wound
treated with a tree wound dressing.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.31  RULE 1.5 TREE REMOVAL.



   (A)   The city will remove trees at its expense and when funds are
available from city-owned property in accordance with the following priority
list.



   (B)   Any reason for tree removal which is not included in the
priority system will be considered separately and rated in importance with
the existing priority system. Trees will be removed according to the priority
system to include as many as can be removed under the existing budget for
tree removal.



      (1)   Priority No. 1.  Removal of dangerous trees. Includes
any tree which is in immediate danger of loss of limbs or total collapse of
the tree, as determined by the arborist.



      (2)   Priority No. 2.  Removal of 100% dead trees. Removal of
any trees in which the crown area is 100% dead or missing, but is not
considered dangerous. This priority also includes trees which are affected by
an epizootic disease.



      (3)   Priority No. 3.  Removal of 75% dead trees. Includes
trees which have 75% of the crown dead or missing.



      (4)   Priority No. 4.  Removal of 50% dead trees. Includes
trees which have 50% of the crown area dead or missing, except where trimming
will produce a suitable shaped tree.



      (5)   Priority No. 5. Removal of female Box Elder and Elm.
Includes all female Box Elder, especially if removal is requested by the
property owner. Includes all American Elm trees that have 25% of the crown
dead and shows definite signs of Dutch Elm Disease or Elm Phloem Necrosis.



      (6)   Priority No. 6.  Removal for driveway improvements.
Includes trees which completely block a proposed driveway or interfere with
the installation or improvement of a driveway, upon request of owner of
adjacent property.



      (7)   Priority No. 7.  Removal for driveway impairment.
Includes trees which impair movement of vehicles in and out of a driveway.



      (8)   Priority No. 8.  Removal for sidewalk raising. Includes
trees which have roots that are raising the adjacent sidewalk and sidewalk
repair is unlikely to correct the problem.



      (9)   Priority No. 9.  Removal for sewer trouble. Includes
trees which have roots that plug sewers.



      (10)   Priority No. 10.  Removal for heavy seeding. Includes
trees which have undesirable heavy seeding upon request of the owner of
adjacent property.



      (11)   Priority No. 11.  Removal for sidewalk raising.
Includes trees which:



         (a)   Have a trunk that blocks traffic visibility.



         (b)   Have a root area which interferes with the curb
and sidewalk, and have roots which come to the surface.



         (c)   Interfere with fire hydrants, traffic-control, or
other utilities.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.32  RULE 1.6 SAFETY CLEARANCE.



   (A)   (1)   After the effective date of these regulations in all
zoning districts where yards are required adjacent to the intersection of two
streets, no structure, planting or fence shall be erected or maintained which
is higher than three feet above the street grade or more than 10% solid
within a triangle formed by the intersection street property lines and a line
between two points located 20 feet from such intersecting lines.



      (2)   This requirement shall include the additional land in
the triangle area formed by extending such line to the street edge.



   (B)   Shrubs and trees growing in violation of this rule on the date
these regulations become effective may be removed in the manner provided by
§ 99.02 of the Code of Ordinances, if, after evaluation of and documentation
of vehicle speeds, traffic volume, accident experience, right-of-way width,
direction of vehicle travel and all other related factors, it is determined
by the Traffic Engineer that such shrubs or trees create a safety hazard to
motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any person shall attempt to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Division of Public Works, or shall cause or authorize or procure the
same, or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, with the
exception of § 99.11, or rules adopted pursuant thereto, upon conviction
thereof be subject to a penalty as provided in § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 99.11 shall be held responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in accordance with the Municipal
Civil Infractions Ordinance. The fine for violation of a municipal civil
infraction under this chapter shall be $50; the second violation, $100; and
the third or any subsequent violation within any one calendar year, $250.



(Ord. 545, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 771, passed 8-14-95)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   GENERAL LICENSING



   111.   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



   112.   MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES



   113.   USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS



   114.   USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Business licenses required; state license not exemption



   110.02   Application for license; investigations



   110.03   Exhibition of license



   110.04   Suspension or revocation of licenses



   110.05   Expiration date; renewal of license



   110.06   Licenses non-transferable



   110.07   Compliance with laws required



   110.08   Payment of fees; exemption



   110.09   License Review Board



   110.10   Delegation of duties



   110.11   Required licenses



Regulations for Specific Businesses



   110.25   Junk dealers



   110.26   Pawnbrokers



   110.27   Vendors



   110.28   Mobile food service providers



   110.29   Going out of business sales



 



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  BUSINESS LICENSES REQUIRED; STATE LICENSE NOT EXEMPTION.



   (A)   No person shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct,
maintain or manage any business or premises for which any license or permit
is required by any provision of this chapter or code without first procuring
a license or permit from the city in the manner prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any
person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or
management of any business or premises shall not exempt such person from the
necessity of procuring a license or permit from the city if such license is
required by the chapter.



(Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   Application.  Each person or entity required to procure a
license from the city shall make application for said license to the City
Clerk in the form and manner prescribed by him or her. The application shall
include the following:



      (1)   The full names, dates of birth, business addresses of
the applicant or entity and residence addresses of all owners, proprietors,
officers, members, partners and managers of applicant's business;



      (2)   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to
maintain applicant's business and the length of time during which it is
proposed that such business be conducted;



      (3)   The wares, merchandise or services to be sold or offered
for sale by applicant in the city;



      (4)   The nature and kind of business which applicant proposes
to conduct and the manner of operating same;



      (5)   Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or
managing applicant's business has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
the violation of any municipal ordinance and, if so, full particulars in
connection therewith.



   (B)   Investigations.



      (1)   Upon receipt by the City Clerk of an application for the
license required by § 110.01, the City Clerk or his or her designee shall
investigate the applicant's business and moral character for the protection
of the public good. The investigation shall be conducted within two business
days. The investigation shall include criminal history records inquiry (CHR)
through the State of Michigan. The applicant will be charged a non-refundable
state filing fee for the investigation.



      (2)   If as a result of such investigation the applicant's
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the
disapproval of the City Clerk or his or her designee and the reasons for the
same shall be indicated on the application. The City Clerk shall notify the
applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no license will
be issued.



      (3)   If as a result of such investigation the character and
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
City Clerk or his or her designee shall endorse on the application his or her
approval and upon payment of the prescribed license fee and filing of proof
of insurance, if required, issue a license.



(Ord.  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.03  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Persons licensed under this chapter are required to produce or
exhibit their license upon request of any individual and any city police
officer, Code Enforcement Officer or a representative from the City Clerk's
office.



   (B)   A license issued under this chapter to a transient merchant
shall be posted conspicuously in the place of the business or vehicle named
therein. If a person applying for such a license desires to do business in
more than one place within the city, a copy of the license shall be posted
conspicuously in each.



   (C)   No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on vehicles
licensed by this chapter such tags or stickers as are furnished by the City
Clerk and required by this chapter or code.



(Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03) Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.04  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or
revoked for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation on the application for the
license;



      (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting
the business of the vendor;



      (3)   Conducting the business of the vendor contrary to the
conditions of the license; or



      (4)   Conducting the business of the vendor in such a manner
as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health,
safety or welfare.



   (B)   Upon suspension or revocation of the license, the City Clerk
or his or her designee shall deliver in person written notice to the license
holder or their representative personally at the business location or by
first class mail to the address listed in the licensee's application stating
the action taken and the reasons supporting such action.



   (C)   Persons who are denied licenses or whose licenses are
suspended or revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the
License Review Board. The appeal must be filed within seven days after
receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. The Board shall
hear and determine the appeal and the decision of the Board shall be final.



(Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.05  EXPIRATION DATE; RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The license year shall terminate on December 31 of the current
year at 12:00 noon next after the issuance of such license. In all cases
where the provisions of this chapter permit the issuance of licenses for
periods of less than one year, the expiration date shall be indicated on the
face of the license.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, an application for renewal
of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original
application.



(Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.06  LICENSES NON-TRANSFERABLE.



   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter or
code shall be transferable.



(Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.07  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No license or permit required by this chapter or code shall be
issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the
state until such person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit
and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid.



   (B)   No license shall be granted to any applicant until such
applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter and code
pertaining to the business for which application for the license is made, nor
shall any license be granted where the approval of any officer of the city is
required prior to the issuance until such approval is made.



(Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.08  PAYMENT OF FEES; EXEMPTION.



   (A)   No license shall be issued until the fees as set forth in this
chapter or code shall be paid by the applicant to the City Treasurer.



   (B)   No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from
payment of the fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with
all other provisions of this chapter. The City Clerk shall, in all such
cases, issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to said
exemption and the reason therefor.



(Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.09  LICENSE REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   The License Review Board shall be composed of the same persons
who constitute the City Zoning Board of Appeals.



   (B)   The Board shall meet from time to time as needed.



   (C)   A quorum of the Board necessary to conduct a hearing shall be
four members and the vote of a majority of the Board present shall be
required to overturn any denial, suspension or revocation of a license.



   (D)   Evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs is to be admitted and given probative
effect. The decision of the Board shall be based upon the evidence produced
and admitted in the course of a hearing.



   (E)   Appeals of decisions of the Board may be reviewed in the
County Circuit Court to determine whether sufficient evidence exists in the
record to support the Board.



(Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.10  DELEGATION OF DUTIES.



   The responsibilities of the City Clerk, Director of Public Safety,
and/or Chief Building Official as required by this chapter may be fulfilled
by his or her designees.



(Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)



§ 110.11  REQUIRED LICENSES.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the following businesses or
activities without first obtaining a license which shall require payment of a
license fee in amounts set from time to time by City Commission resolutions:



      (1)   Auctioneers;



      (2)   Circus, menagerie, carnival, exhibition, side show;



      (3)   Junk dealers;



      (4)   Mobile food service providers;



      (5)   Pawnbrokers;



      (6)   Taxicab businesses, vehicles, and drivers; and



      (7)   Vendors.



   (B)   No person shall engage in a “going out of business sale,”
as defined in § 110.29, without first obtaining a license which shall
require payment of a license fee as provided in § 110.29.



(Ord. passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed
2-24-03; Am. Ord. 982, passed 10-14-13; Am. Ord. 999, passed 7-13-15)



REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC BUSINESSES



§ 110.25  JUNK DEALERS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of dealing in scrap
iron, scrap metal, scrap wood, used or salvaged auto parts or any form of
goods commonly considered as junk, nor assemble same at one location for the
purpose of sale without first procuring a license.



   (B)   No such license shall be granted:



      (1)   Except upon approval of the Director of Public Safety or
his or her designee, the Fire Department and the Building Official;



      (2)   For conducting such business on a vacant lot or in a
partially enclosed structure unless such property is enclosed with a properly
maintained, tight board or other type fence in accordance with all
specifications of the Director of Public Works to protect the health, welfare
and safety of the public;



      (3)   Whenever 65% or more of all property-owners within a
radius of 300 feet measured from the boundary lines of the premises object in
writing to the City Clerk's office.



   (C)   Each licensee shall on demand exhibit all goods bought or
received and give the name, residence and a description of the person from
whom the same was purchased or received to any officer of the Police
Department. He or she shall keep a record or book written in ink in the
English language containing the name, residence and description of all
persons from whom purchases are made.



   (D)    (1)   Each such license granted shall designate the
particular place where said business is to be conducted and no licensee shall
engage in said business at any place other than that so designated.



      (2)   No licensee shall purchase or receive any article:



         (a)   Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;



         (b)   On Sunday;



         (c)   From any person intoxicated or under the age of 17
years without written consent of parent or guardian; or



         (d)   From a person known or suspected to be a thief or
a receiver of stolen property.



(Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.26  PAWNBROKERS.



   (A)   As used in this chapter, "pawnbrokers" mean those individuals
identified in § 3 of Act No. 469, of the Public Acts 2002, being cited as
M.C.L.A. § 446.203.



   (B)   A person, corporation, or firm shall not carry on the business
of pawnbroker in the city without first having obtained a license as
authorized by Act No. 469, of the Public Acts 2002, being cited as M.C.L.A.
§§ 446.201 et seq.



      (1)   A license fee that shall be required to be paid to the
city in order to acquire a pawnbroker license pursuant to this chapter shall
be set by a resolution of the City Commission.



      (2)   As set forth in § 2 of Act 469 of Public Acts 2002, the
bond that is required to be given to the city is $3,000.



   (C)   A pawnbroker shall comply with all of the requirements of Act
No. 231 of the Public Acts of 1945,as amended, being cited as M.C.L.A. §§
445.451 et seq., and Act No. 469 of thePublic Acts 2002, being cited as
M.C.L.A. §§ 446.201 et seq.



   (D)   Every pawnbroker, except those exempted by operation of
division (C), shall, within 48 hours, transmit to the Director of Public
Safety by means of electronic transmission through a modem or similar device
or by delivery of a computer disk, in such a format that the data are capable
of direct electronic entry into the city's computerized systems for
identifying pawned property, all transactions in whichthe pawnbroker received
used goods the preceding day by pawn, trade, purchase, or consignment. A
transaction reported by electronic transmission under this subsection shall
not be reported on paper forms unless the Director of Public Safety so
requests.



   (E)   When reporting, a thumbprint of the persons pawning property
shall be electronically scanned and transmitted to the Director of Public
Safety in the same manner as division (A).



   (F)   A pawnbroker need not report electronically transactions
taking place at a business location where the number of pawn transactions in
each 90 day period does not exceed ten. A pawnbroker reasonably believing a
location at which he or she conducts a pawn shop qualifies under this
subsection for exemption from computerized reporting and wishing to be exempt
from the requirements of division (A) shall sign, under penalty of perjury, a
declaration to the effect in a form developed by the Director of Public
Safety or the Director of Public Safety's designee, and once the declaration
is signed, so long as the volume of transactions does not exceed ten each 90
day period, pawn transactions taking place at that pawnshop need not be
reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms.



   (G)   If a licensee under this chapter or any of his or her
employees is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
the Director of Public Safety shall report such violation to the City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall:



      (1)   Notify the City Manager and the licensee and provide the
licensee notice that the city intends to revoke his or her license; and



      (2)   Shall provide the licensee an opportunity to a hearing
before the City Clerk. If the City Clerk determines that the licensee has
been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the
City Manager shall then revoke the license. The violator, upon such
revocation, shall not be issued a license as a pawnbroker for a period of one
year from the date of the revocation.



(Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03; Am. Ord. 906, passed 2-14-05)  Penalty, see
§ 110.99



§ 110.27  VENDORS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PEDDLER.  Any person who travels from place to place for the
purpose of distributing leaflets, pamphlets, fliers, or other literature,
displaying, selling, making sales, offering for sale, or leasing with the
option to buy, takes orders for, or attempts to take orders for the retail
sale of any goods, property, or services whatsoever for current or future
delivery.  Peddler includes any person who travels by foot, vehicle, wagon,
cart or any other means displaying, selling, offering for sale, taking orders
for sale, or leasing with the option to buy, at retail, any food, goods,
property, or service.  PEDDLER also includes any person who operates a
pushcart, or other structure powered by bicycles or human power, with at
least two operational wheels, which can be easily moved and which is used by
a vendor to conduct sales.



      PERSON.  Any natural person, corporation or partnership,
including both principals and agents thereof, or two or more persons having a
joint or common interest.



      TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  Any person, firm, association or
corporation, while not traveling from place to place, engaging temporarily in
a retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise in any place in the city and who
for the purpose of conducting business temporarily occupies any private lot,
building, room or structure of any kind. This section shall not be construed
to permit sales on city-owned property unless authorized under a separate
written agreement.



      VENDORS.  Any peddler or transient merchant, as provided in this
section.  VENDOR shall not include a person selling at an art fair,
farmers’ market, festival or similar special event at the invitation of the
event’s sponsor, if all of the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The sponsor has obtained a vendor’s license; and



         (b)   The person provides the sponsor with the
person’s sales tax license number.



   (B)   License required.  No vendor shall engage in such business
within the city without first obtaining a license as provided under this
chapter.  Such licenses shall be subject to the application fees as may be
set from time to time by the City Commission and paid in accordance with §
110.08 of this code.  Transient merchant license fee waived if currently
licensed and using truck/trailer as mobile food service provider.



   (C)   Regulations.  In addition to the license requirements in this
chapter, and except as otherwise provided, the following regulations apply to
vendors:



      (1)   Vendors who conduct their business by going door-to-door
shall not solicit at any premises posted with a “no solicitation” sign or
other similar marking.



      (2)   No vendor shall have any exclusive right to any location
in the public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way, or be permitted a permanent,
stationary location, or be permitted to operate in any congested area where
his or her operations impede or inconvenience the public.  For the purpose
of this section, the judgment of a police officer or Code Enforcement
Officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether
the area is congested or the public has been impeded or inconvenienced.



      (3)   Vendors shall dispose of their own trash including empty
product containers into trash bags which shall be disposed of off-site by the
vendor each day. The vendor shall keep the areas in which it operates clean,
sightly, and free of trash. Vendors shall be completely self-contained, and
are prohibited from utilizing any city electrical outlets, water from city
hydrants, and disposing of liquid wastes, including but not limited to
grease, into storm or sanitary sewers.



      (4)   Unless otherwise first authorized in wiring by the city,
no vendor shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or driveway, except as
may be necessary and reasonable to consummate a sale or engage in any
business regulated by this chapter.  Except with prior written permission of
appropriate school officials, no vendor shall conduct any sale within 150
feet of the entrance of any school building between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. on the days when school is in session.



      (5)   Applicants for a vendors license who are selling, or
offering to sell food, goods, wares, and merchandise owned by themselves, who
furnish to the City Clerk, with all other license application materials,
proof of an honorable discharge from the armed services and a copy of a
license issued pursuant to 1921 PA 359, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 35.441
through 35.443, shall not be required to pay the annual license fee.



      (6)   Individuals or groups wishing to do their business under
this section in any city park must first secure written permission from the
Parks Director before applying for a license, and shall comply with all
applicable park rental fees, rules, and regulations.



      (7)   Vendors shall present a valid license for inspection or
examination when requested by any City Public Safety Officer or city official.



      (8)   No vendor shall sell or offer for sale any unsound,
unripe or unwholesome food or drink or any defective, faulty or deteriorated
article of food.



   (D)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any of the following:



      (1)   Representatives of duly established businesses, located
elsewhere, calling upon merchants or other established businesses for the
purposes of selling them merchandise or services and who normally make
repeated calls on such businesses at regular intervals, such as wholesale
suppliers, office supply firms and similar businesses.



      (2)   Solicitations including sale or distribution of goods,
wares, merchandise, leaflets, pamphlets or other materials for religious,
charitable or political purposes.



(Ord. 753, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03; Am. Ord. 982, passed
10-14-13; Am. Ord. 990, passed 10-13-14) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.28  MOBILE FOOD SERVICE PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to license and
regulate the movement, location, business practice and hours of operation of
mobile food providers in the city, to reduce vehicular and pedestrian traffic
congestion, to promote the safe use of the streets and sidewalks; and, to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city.



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MOBILE FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER.  A motorized vehicle which, upon
issuance of a license by the City Clerk and conformance with the regulations
under this chapter, may temporarily park upon a public street or in a public
parking lot, and engage in the preparation, service, sale or distribution of
ready-to-eat food for individual portion service to the general public
directly from the vehicle.  For the purposes of this section, mobile food
vehicle includes a trailer pulled by a motorized vehicle engaged in the
preparation, service, sale, or distribution of ready-to-eat food for
individual portion service to the general public directly from the trailer;
and shall include cookers, grills, smokers or other similar apparatuses. 
MOBILE FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER shall be considered a transient merchant and
will be subject to all transient merchant regulations when operating on
private property with the permission of the property owner.  MOBILE FOOD
SERVICE PROVIDER shall not include a person selling at an art fair,
farmers’ market, festival or similar special event at the invitation of the
event’s sponsor, if all of the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The sponsor has obtained a vendor’s license; and



         (b)   The person provides the sponsor with the
person’s sales tax license number.



   (C)   License requirements.  No mobile food service provider may
engage in the service, sale, or distribution of food in the city without
first obtaining a license from the City Clerk.  The City Clerk shall charge
an application fee for mobile food service provider licenses.  Such licenses
shall be subject to the application fee as may be set from time to time by
the City Commission and paid in accordance with § 110.08 of this code. 
Mobile food service provider license fee waived if currently licensed and
using truck/trailer as a transient merchant.  The City Clerk may annually
issue up to 12 mobile food service provider licenses per year.



   (D)   Regulations.



      (1)   Mobile food service providers may conduct business in
the C-2 Central Business District as defined in § 154.066 as well as
on-street parking places on South Main Street from East High Street on the
north to East Bellows Street on the south.  Mobile food service providers
may not conduct business in any other area of the city.



      (2)   Mobile food service providers may conduct business only
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m.  Mobile food service providers
shall not conduct business at any other time.



      (3)   Mobile food service providers may conduct business in
on-street parking places and public parking lots during the permitted hours
of operation.  While conducting business, mobile food service providers
shall operate in such a manner so as not to interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.  If directed by city staff or public safety personnel for
snow plows or in response to emergency situations, mobile food service
providers shall promptly relocate.



      (4)   Mobile food service providers shall serve customers only
on the curb, lawn, or sidewalk side of the mobile food service vehicle while
parked in on-street parking spaces.  Mobile food service providers shall not
provide food service in any right-of-way.  Mobile food service providers may
serve customers only when parked.



      (5)   If operating on sidewalks or while parked on city
streets or in public parking lots, mobile food service providers shall not
supply or provide tables and chairs, booths, stools, benches, tents, or other
similar dining area for customers.



      (6)   Mobile food service providers shall provide adequate
dining utensils as reasonably necessary for its customers.  Mobile food
service providers shall place a trash receptacle outside the mobile food
service vehicle which shall be emptied and disposed of off- site by the
mobile food service provider each day.  The mobile food service provider
shall keep the area in which it operates clean, sightly, and free of trash. 
Mobile food service providers shall be completely self-contained, and are
prohibited from utilizing any city electrical outlets, water from city
hydrants, and disposing of liquid wastes, including but not limited to
grease, into storm or sanitary sewers.



      (7)   Mobile food service providers shall not be parked on the
street, or in public parking lots in which they intend to provide service
overnight or left unattended and unsecured at any time food is in the vehicle.



      (8)   Mobile food service providers shall comply at all times
with all city nuisance regulations as provided in Chapter 96 of this code.



      (9)   Mobile food service providers shall not be located
within 150 feet of a permanent business with a food license during the
business’s hours of operation.



      (10)   A license is valid only for each individual vehicle or
trailer operated by a mobile food service provider and shall not be
transferred among vehicles or trailers.



      (11)   Mobile food service providers shall present a valid
license for inspection or examination when requested by any City Public
Safety Officer or city official.



      (12)   Applicants for a mobile food service providers license
who are selling, or offering to sell food, owned by themselves, who furnish
to the City Clerk, with all other license application materials, proof of an
honorable discharge from the armed services and a copy of a license issued
pursuant to 1921 PA 359, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 35.441 through 35.443,
shall not be required to pay the annual license fee.



      (13)   Mobile food service providers shall comply with all
applicable law, rules, regulations and licensing or permit requirements
including, but not limited to those issued by the Isabella County Health
Department or the Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development or
its successor agency, the Michigan Secretary of State, the Michigan Liquor
Control Code, and any other agency with licensing or regulatory jurisdiction
over the mobile food service provider.



      (14)   Mobile food service providers shall not offer or
advertise the offering of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages.



   (E)   License revocation or suspension.  Any mobile food service
provider that violates any provision of this section may, in addition to any
other penalties, have its license suspended or revoked as provided by §
110.04 of this code.



(Ord. 982, passed 10-14-13; Am. Ord. 990, passed 10-13-14)



§ 110.29  GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY CLERK. The duly appointed City Clerk of the City or his or
her designee. 



      GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE. Any sale, whether described by that
name or by any other name such as, but not limited to, CLOSING OUT SALE,
LIQUIDATION SALE, LOST OUR LEASE SALE, FORCED TO VACATE SALE, held in such a
manner as to indicate a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on
hand, the business will cease or no longer continue at the premises where the
sale is conducted.



      GOODS. All goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property,
excepting, choses in action and money.



      REMOVAL SALE. Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a
belief that upon dismissal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will
cease and discontinue at the premises where the sale is conducted and
thereafter will be moved to and occupy another location.



   (B)   License required. No person shall advertise, represent or hold
out that any sale of goods is an insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage, insolvent,
assignee’s executor’s, administrator’s, receiver’s trustee’s,
removal sale, going out of business sale or sale of goods damaged by fire,
smoke, water or otherwise, unless he or she first obtains a license to
conduct the sale from the City Clerk. This section shall not apply to any
sales by a person regularly engaged in insurance or salvage sale of goods, or
the sale of goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise,
who acquired the goods for the account of others as a result of fire or other
casualty, sheriffs, constables, or other public or court officers, or to any
other person or persons acting under the license, direction or authority of
any court, state or federal, selling goods, wares or merchandise in the
course of their official duties.



   (C)   License application. Any applicant for a license under this
section shall file an application in writing and under oath with the City
Clerk that is in a form provided by the City Clerk and that provides the
following facts and information regarding such a proposed sale:



      (1)   The name, postal address, telephone number, and
electronic mail address of the applicant for the license, who must be the
owner of the goods to be sold, and in addition, if the applicant is a
partnership, corporation, firm or association, the name and the position of
the individual filing such application.



      (2)   The name and style in which such sale is to be conducted
and the address where the sale is to be conducted.



      (3)   The dates and period of time during which the sale is to
be conducted.



      (4)   The name, postal address, telephone number, and
electronic mail address of the person who will be in charge and responsible
for the conduct of the sale.



      (5)   A full explanation of the condition or necessity which
is the occasion for the sale, including a statement of the descriptive name
of the sale and the reasons why the name is truthfully descriptive of the
sale. If the application is for a license to conduct a going out of business
sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon
termination of the sale. If the application is for a license to conduct a
removal sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon
termination of the sale, in addition to the location of the premises to which
the business is to be moved. If the application is for a license to conduct a
sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, it shall also
contain a statement as to the time, location and cause of the damage.



      (6)   A full, detailed and complete inventory of the goods
that are to be sold, which inventory shall:



         (a)   Itemize the goods to be sold and contain
sufficient information concerning each item, including make and brand name,
if any, to clearly identify it.



         (b)   List separately any goods which were purchased
during a 60-day period immediately prior to the date of making application
for the license.



         (c)   Show the cost price of each item in the inventory
together with the name and address of the seller of the items to the
applicant, the date of the purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to
the applicant and the total value of the inventory at cost.



       (7)   A statement that no goods will be added to the
inventory after the application is made or during the sale and that the
inventory contains no goods received on consignment.



   (D)   License; issuance and restrictions.



      (1)   The City Clerk, after receiving an application including
all the information under oath as required by division (C) above and upon
receipt of the fee provided for in division (E) below, may issue a license to
the applicant, authorizing the applicant to advertise, represent and sell the
particular goods so inventoried at the time and place stated in the
application and in true accordance with the provisions of this section. The
license shall be issued in duplicate and shall bear a number and date of its
expiration. A license issued under this section shall be granted and valid
only for the sale of the inventoried goods which are the property of the
licensee. The license shall apply only to the premises specified in the
application, and it may not be transferred or assigned. If a licensee under
this section is engaged in business in other locations, advertising or
offering of goods on behalf of such location shall not represent or imply any
participation in or cooperation with the sale on the premises specified in
the license, nor shall any advertising or other offering of goods on behalf
of the premises where the licensed sale is being conducted represent or imply
any participation in or cooperation with such sale at other locations. No
license under this section shall be issued to any person:



         (a)   To conduct a sale in the trade name or style of a
person in whose goods the applicant for the license has acquired a right or
title thereto within six months prior to the time of making application for
such a license.



         (b)   To continue a sale in the name of a licensee under
this section whose goods such person acquired a right or title while such a
sale is in progress.



         (c)   To conduct a sale, other than an insurance sale, a
salvage sale or a sale of damaged goods, on the same premises within one year
from the conclusion of a prior sale of the nature covered by this section.



      (2)   Divisions (D)(1)(a), (D)(1)(b), and (D)(1)(c) above
shall not apply to any person who has acquired a right, title or interest in
goods as an heir, devisee or legatee or pursuant to an order or process of a
court of competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   License; term, renewal, fee. A license to conduct a sale
issued pursuant to this section shall not be issued or valid for a period of
more than 30 days from the start of the sale and the sale may be conducted
only during the period set forth in the license. The license may be renewed
not more than twice for a period not to exceed 30 days for each renewal upon
affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not
been disposed of and that no new goods have been or will be added to the
inventory previously filed pursuant to this section, by purchase, acquisition
on consignment or otherwise. The application for renewal of the license shall
be made not more than five days prior to the time of the expiration of the
license and shall contain a new inventory of goods remaining on hand at the
time the application for renewal is made, which new inventory shall be
prepared and furnished in the same manner and form as the original inventory.
No renewal shall be granted if any goods have been added to the stock listed
in the inventory since the date of the issuance of the license. A fee in the
amount set forth in Section 6 of 1961 PA 39, as amended from time to time, or
in such other amount as shall be established by resolution of the City
Commission, shall accompany an application for the license and for the
renewal of a license, unless the City Clerk receiving the application waives
that fee.



   (F)   Clerk’s records. The City Clerk shall endorse upon the
application the date of its filing, shall preserve the same as a record of
his office, and shall make an abstract of the facts set forth in the
application in a book kept for the purpose, properly indexed, containing the
name of the person asking such license, the nature of the proposed sale, the
place where the sale is to be conducted, its duration, the inventory of the
goods to be sold and a general statement as to where the same came from and
shall make in the book a notation as to the issuance or refusal of the
license applied for together with the date of the same. The City Clerk shall
endorse on the application the date the license is granted or refused, and
the application and abstract shall be prima facie evidence of all statements
therein contained.



   (G)   Advertisement. Any person who advertises, represents or holds
out any sale of goods to be an insurance, bankrupt, mortgage, insolvent,
assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s, receiver’s, trustee’s,
removal or going out of business sale, or a sale of goods damaged by fire,
water, smoke or otherwise, without having first complied with the provisions
of this act, is guilty of a violation of this section.



   (H)   Purchase or addition of goods.



      (1)   No person in contemplation of conducting a sale, under a
license as provided in this section shall order or purchase any goods for the
purpose of selling and disposing of the same at such sale. Each unusual
purchase and additions to the stock of goods within 60 days prior to the
filing of the application for license to conduct the sale shall be
presumptive evidence that the purchases and additions to stock were made in
contemplation of the sale and for the purpose of selling the same at the sale
and shall be presumptive evidence of a violation of this section, shall each
constitute a separate offense under this section, and shall void any license
issued to conduct a sale under this section.



      (2)   No person carrying on or conducting a sale under a
license as provided in this section shall add, during the continuance of the
sale, any goods to the stock of goods described and inventoried in his or her
original application for the license. No goods shall be sold at or during the
sale, excepting the goods described and inventoried in the original
application. Every addition of goods to the stock of goods described and
inventoried in the application and each sale of goods not inventoried and
described in the application, shall be presumptive evidence of a violation of
this section, shall each constitute a separate offense under this section,
and shall void any license issued to conduct a sale under this section.



   (I)   Removal of goods. The license as provided for in this section
shall be valid only for a sale of the goods inventoried and described in the
application for such license, in the manner and at the time and place set
forth in the application. Any removal of the goods so inventoried and
described in the application from the place of sale mentioned in the
application shall cause the goods to lose their identity as an insurance,
bankrupt, mortgaged, insolvent’s, assignee’s, executor’s,
administrator’s, receiver’s or trustee’s stock of goods or a stock of
goods being removed or closed out, or a stock of goods damaged by fire, smoke
or water, or otherwise, and no license shall be issued for the conducting of
a sale of any of such goods removed from the place described in the
application, under the provisions of this section, at any other place or
places.



   (J)   Unfair and deceptive business practices.



      (1)   The following unfair and deceptive business practices
are strictly prohibited in the course of a sale under this section:



         (a)   Causing a probability of confusion or
misunderstanding as to the source, sponsorship, approval, or certification of
the goods.



         (b)   Representing that goods have sponsorship,
approval, characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits, or quantities that
they do not have.



         (c)   Representing that goods are new if they are
deteriorated, altered, reconditioned, used, or secondhand.



         (d)   Representing that goods are of a particular
standard, quality, or grade, or that goods are of a particular style or
model, if they are of another.



         (e)   Disparaging the goods of another by a false or
misleading representation of fact.



         (f)   Advertising or representing goods with the intent
not to dispose of the goods as advertised or represented.



         (g)   Making a false or misleading statement of fact
concerning the reasons for, existence of, or amounts of price reductions,
including but not limited to advertising and/or conducting a going out of
business sale when the business continues to operate and advertising and/or
conducting a removal sale when the business continues to operate at its
current location.



         (h)   Failing to reveal a material fact, the omission of
which tends to mislead or deceive the consumer, and which fact could not
reasonably be known by the consumer.



         (i)   Making a representation of fact or statement of
fact material to the transaction such that a person reasonably believes the
represented or suggested state of affairs to be other than it actually is.



         (j)   Using any other deceptive representations in
connection with the sale of goods.



      (2)   Engaging in an unfair and deceptive business practice in
the course of a sale under this section shall constitute a violation of this
section.  Both the person engaging in the unfair and deceptive business
practice(s) pursuant to this division (J) and its employees, managers, and
agents engaging in such unfair and deceptive business practice(s) shall be
held liable for a violation of this section.



   (K)   Other requirements. Every applicant and licensee under this
section shall comply with all requirements of Act Number 39 of the Public
Acts of Michigan of 1961, as amended from time to time. Failure to comply
therewith or with the provisions hereof shall, in addition to any other
penalties or remedies be grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of
any license obtained hereunder.



(Ord. 999, passed 7-13-15)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction in
accordance with §§ 36.01et seq. Except at otherwise provided, the fine for
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be $50 for the first
offense; $100 for the second offense; and $250 for third and subsequent
violations within a 12-month period.  Each day in violation shall constitute
a separate offense.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter
licensing mobile food service providers, peddlers, or transient merchants
shall be fined in accordance with the following:



   (A)   Mobile food service providers licensed under § 110.28
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined 150% of the license
fee as set from time to time by resolution of the City Commission for the
first offense; 200% of the license fee as set from time to time by resolution
of the City Commission for the second offense; and 250% of the license fee as
set from time to time by resolution of the City Commission for third and
subsequent violations within a 12-month period.  Each day in violation shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Peddlers licensed under § 110.27 violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined 150% of the license fee as set from time to time
by resolution of the City Commission for the first offense; 200% of the
license fee as set from time to time by resolution of the City Commission for
the second offense; and 250% of the license fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the City Commission for third and subsequent violations within
a 12-month period.  Each day in violation shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (C)   Transient merchants licensed under § 110.27 violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined 150% of the license fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the City Commission for the first offense; 200%
of the license fee as set from time to time by resolution of the City
Commission for the second offense; and 250% of the license fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the City Commission for third and subsequent
violations within a 12-month period.  Each day in violation shall constitute
a separate offense.



   (D)   Regardless of the penalty provided for in this section that
applies to the other sections contained in this chapter, any person violating
any of the provisions of § 110.29 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for a first
offense, $500 for any subsequent offense, or by imprisonment in the county
jail for not less than ten days nor more than 90 days, or both such fines and
imprisonment. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided in this
division (D), any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of the
provisions of § 110.29 shall be deemed a new and separate offense for each
day that such condition continues to exist.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-14-95; Am. Ord. 888, passed 2-24-03; Am. Ord. 982, passed
10-14-13; Am. Ord. 999, passed 7-13-15)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 111:  VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



Section



   111.01   Consistent interpretation



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   Purpose



   111.04   Applicability to permittees



   111.05   Contacts, maps and plans



   111.06   Use of public right-of-way



   111.07   Indemnification



   111.08   Insurance



   111.09   Performance bond or letter of credit



   111.10   Removal



   111.11   Other items



   111.12   Repealer



 



   111.99



§ 111.01  CONSISTENT INTERPRETATION.



   This chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent
with the Metro Act and corresponding provisions of the forms of Metro Act
permit approved by the MPSC, including applicable MPSC, Metro Authority and
court decisions and determinations relating to same.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, being Act 480 of
the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3301 et seq.



   CABLE OPERATOR. The same meaning as in the Act.



   CLAIMS.  The meaning set forth in § 111.07.



   FACILITIES. The lines, equipment and other facilities of a permittee
which use or occupy the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services
in the city.



   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. The franchise agreement entered into or possessed
by a video service provider with the city as required by M.C.L.A. §
484.3303(1), if it is the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement
established by the MPSC.



   MANAGER. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee.



   METRO ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act, being Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, as amended,
M.C.L. A. §§ 484.3101 et seq.



   METRO ACT PERMIT. A permit to use the public right-of-way issued by the
city under Chapter 113, which implements the Metro Act.



   METRO AUTHORITY. The same meaning as AUTHORITY in the Metro Act.



   MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission, and having the same
meaning as the term COMMISSION in the Act and the Metro Act.



   PERMITTEE. 



      (1)   A video service provider without a currently valid Metro
Act permit but with either:



         (a)   A pre-existing agreement; or



         (b)   A currently valid franchise agreement.



      (2)   Upon applying to the city for and then obtaining a Metro
Act permit from the city, a video service provider is not a permittee and is
no longer required to comply with this chapter. A video service provider is
also not a permittee and is not required to comply with this chapter if it
and the city enter into a voluntary franchise agreement as described in  §
111.11(B).



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, association, partnership,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.



   PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENT. A cable television consent agreement predating
the effective date of the Act, January 1, 2007, which has not expired or been
terminated.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The same meaning as in the Act.



   VIDEO SERVICE.  The same meaning as in the Act.



   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. The same meaning as in the Act, and shall
include an "incumbent video provider" as referred to in M.C.L.A. §
484.3305(2).



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.03  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Under the Act, video service providers may obtain a franchise
to provide video services in the city using a standardized, uniform form of
franchise agreement established by the MPSC. This form includes the right to
use the public right-of-way to provide such service but does not contain
right-of-way management and related provisions.



   (B)   Telecommunications providers who obtain a standardized,
uniform form of franchise agreement generally will have previously obtained
from the city a permit under the Metro Act to construct and maintain their
telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way.  Such Metro Act
permits set forth the terms and conditions for such right-of-way usage,
standard forms of such permits were agreed to in a collaborative process
between municipalities and providers that was initiated by the MPSC, and such
standard forms have since been approved by the legislature and the MPSC.



   (C)   Because telecommunications providers typically provide video
services over combined video and telecommunications facilities, such Metro
Act permits generally provide adequate public right-of-way related
protections for the city and the public when such providers are providing
video services.



   (D)   Other video service providers, in particular new providers or
existing cable operators, may not have a Metro Act permit issued by the city.



   (E)   The Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement
require video service providers with such an agreement to comply with all
valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of
the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services, including the
police powers of the franchising entity, and makes such right-of-way usage
subject to the laws of the State of Michigan and the police powers of the
franchising entity.



   (F)   The Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement
state that franchising entities shall provide video service providers with
open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral access to the
public right-of-way, and may not discriminate against a video service
provider for the authorization or placement of a video service or
communications network in the public right-of-way.



   (G)   The Michigan Constitution reserves reasonable control of their
highways, streets, alleys and public places to local units of government,
which may exercise such authority through the use of their police powers.



   (H)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the
public health, safety and welfare and exercise reasonable control over the
public right-of-way by regulating the use and occupation of such
rights-of-way by video service providers who lack a Metro Act permit from the
city. This chapter does so by setting forth terms and conditions for such
usage and occupation from the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC
and approved by the legislature in M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(1), thus providing
open, comparable, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral access to the
public right-of-way and not discriminating against a video service provider
for the authorization or placement of a video service or communications
network in the public right-of-way.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.04  APPLICABILITY TO PERMITTEES.



   All permittees shall comply with this chapter, except that a permittee
need not comply with the insurance provisions of § 111.08 if it is
maintaining the insurance required by Section II.J of the standardized,
uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC (which in
accordance with the Act states that incumbent video providers shall comply
with the terms which provide insurance for right-of-way related activities
that are contained in its last cable franchise or consent agreement from the
franchising entity entered into before the effective date of the Act).



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.05  CONTACTS, MAPS AND PLANS.



   (A)   Permittee shall provide the Manager with the names, addresses
and the like for engineering and construction related information for
permittee and its facilities as follows:



      (1)   The address, e-mail address, phone number and contact
person (title or name) at permittee's local office (in or near the city).



      (2)   If permittee's engineering drawings, as-built plans and
related records for the facilities will not be located at the preceding local
office, the location address, phone number and contact person (title or
department) for them.



      (3)   The name, title, address, e-mail address and telephone
numbers of permittee's engineering contact person(s) with responsibility for
the design, plans and construction of the facilities.



      (4)   The address, phone number and contact person (title or
department) at permittee's home office/regional office with responsibility
for engineering and construction related aspects of the facilities.



      (5)   Permittee shall at all times provide Manager with the
phone number at which a live representative of permittee (not voice mail) can
be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of a public
emergency.



      (6)   Permittee shall notify the city in writing pursuant to
the notice provisions of its franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement
(whichever is then in effect) of any changes in the preceding information.



   (B)   Within 90 days after the substantial completion of
construction of new facilities in the city, permittee shall submit route maps
showing the location of the facilities to the city, in the same manner and
subject to the same provisions as apply to telecommunications providers under
M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3106(7) and (8).



   (C)   Permittee, without expense to the city, shall, upon 48 hours
notice, give the city access to all "as-built" maps, records, plans and
specifications showing the facilities or portions thereof in the public
right-of-way.  Upon request by the city, permittee shall inform the city as
soon as reasonably possible of any changes from previously supplied maps,
records, or plans and shall mark up maps provided by the city so as to show
the location of the facilities.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.06  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   (Reserved).



   (B)   Permittee shall not allow the wires or any other facilities of
a third party to be overlashed to permittee's facilities without the city's
prior written consent. The city's right to withhold written consent is
subject to the authority of the MPSC under M.C.L.A. § 484.2361.



   (C)   Permittee, its contractors, subcontractors, and the facilities
shall not unduly burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of
the public right-of-way.  Permittee's aerial cables and wires shall be
suspended so as to not endanger or injure persons or property in or about the
public right-of-way. If the city reasonably determines that any portion of
the facilities constitutes an undue burden or interference, due to changed
circumstances, permittee, at its sole expense, shall modify the facilities or
take such other actions as municipality may determine is in the public
interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and permittee shall do so within
a reasonable time period. The city shall attempt to require all occupants of
a pole or conduit whose facilities are a burden to remove or alleviate the
burden concurrently.



   (D)   This chapter does not establish any priority of use of the
public right-of-way by permittee over any present or future permittees or
parties having agreements with the city or franchises for such use. In the
event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public right-of-way,
the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to
the city, the third priority to the State of Michigan and its political
subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and thereafter as
between other permit, agreement or franchise holders, as determined (except
as otherwise provided by law) by the city in the exercise of its powers,
including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it
by the State of Michigan.



   (E)   Permittee, its contractors and subcontractors shall
immediately (subject to seasonal work restrictions) restore, at permittee's
sole expense, in a manner approved by the city, any portion of the public
right-of-way that is in any way disturbed, damaged, or injured by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the
facilities to a reasonably equivalent (or, at permittee's option, better)
condition as that which existed prior to the disturbance. In the event that
permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to make such repair within
a reasonable time, the city may make the repair and permittee shall pay the
costs the city incurred for such repair.



   (F)   (1)   Permittee shall mark its facilities installed after
the effective date of this chapter as follows: aerial portions of the
facilities shall be marked with a marker on permittee's lines on alternate
poles which shall state permittee's name and provide a toll-free number to
call for assistance. Direct buried underground portions of the facilities
shall have:



         (a)   A conducting wire placed in the ground at least
several inches above permittee's cable (if such cable is nonconductive);



         (b)   At least several inches above that, a continuous
colored tape with a statement to the effect that there is buried cable
beneath; and



         (c)   Stakes or other appropriate above ground markers
with permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that there is buried
cable below.



      (2)   Bored underground portions of the facilities shall have
a conducting wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be required to
provide the continuous colored tape. Portions of the facilities located in
conduit, including conduit of others used by permittee, shall be marked at
its entrance into and exit from each manhole and handhole with permittee's
name and a toll-free telephone number.



   (G)   Permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the public
right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into
contact with the facilities, consistent with any standards adopted by the
city. Permittee shall dispose of all trimmed materials. Permittee shall
minimize the trimming of trees to that essential to maintain the integrity of
the facilities.  Except in emergencies, all trimming of trees in the public
right-of-way shall have the advance approval of Manager.



   (H)   The construction and installation of the facilities shall be
performed pursuant to plans approved by the city. The open cut of any public
right-of-way shall be coordinated with the Manager or Manager's designee.
Permittee shall install and maintain the facilities in a reasonably safe
condition. If the existing poles in the public right-of-way are overburdened
or unavailable for permittee's use, or the facilities of all users of the
poles are required to go underground then permittee shall, at its expense,
place such portion of its facilities underground, unless the city approves an
alternate location.  Permittee may perform maintenance on the facilities
without prior approval of the city, provided that permittee shall obtain any
and all permits required by the city in the event that any maintenance will
disturb or block vehicular traffic or are otherwise required by the city.



   (I)   Permittee shall coordinate its construction and all other work
in the public right-of-way with the city's program for street construction
and rebuilding (collectively "street construction") and its program for
street repaving and resurfacing (except seal coating and patching)
(collectively, "street resurfacing"). The goals of such coordination shall be
to encourage permittee to conduct all work in the public right-of-way in
conjunction with or immediately prior to any street construction or street
resurfacing planned by the city.



   (J)   Permittee shall comply with all valid and enforceable federal
and state statutes and regulations, and all valid and enforceable local
regulations regarding the use and occupation of the public right-of-way,
including the police powers of the city, regarding the construction,
installation, and maintenance of its facilities, now in force or which
hereafter may be promulgated. Before any installation is commenced, permittee
shall secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from the city or
other governmental entity as may be required by law, including, without
limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits. The city shall not
unreasonably delay or deny issuance of any such permits, licenses or
approvals. Permittee shall comply in all respects with applicable codes and
industry standards, including but not limited to the National Electrical
Safety Code (latest edition adopted by Michigan Public Service Commission)
and the National Electric Code (latest edition). Permittee shall comply with
all zoning and land use ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as
may exist or may hereafter be amended. This section does not constitute a
waiver of permittee's right to challenge laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations now in force or established in the future.



   (K)   If the city vacates or consents to the vacation of public
right-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation necessitates the
removal and relocation of permittee's facilities in the vacated public
right-of-way, permittee shall consent to the vacation and remove its
facilities at its sole cost and expense when ordered to do so by the city or
a court of competent jurisdiction. Permittee shall relocate its facilities to
such alternate route as the city and permittee mutually agree, applying
reasonable engineering standards.



   (L)   If the city requests permittee to relocate, protect, support,
disconnect, or remove its facilities because of street or utility work, or
other public projects, permittee shall relocate, protect, support,
disconnect, or remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense, including
where necessary to such alternate route as the city and permittee mutually
agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. The work shall be completed
within a reasonable time period.



   (M)   The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig-up or
otherwise destroy facilities of permittee if such action is necessary because
of a public emergency. If reasonable to do so under the circumstances, the
city shall attempt to provide notice to permittee. Public emergency shall be
any condition which poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property
caused by any natural or man-made disaster, including, but not limited to,
storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, water main breaks, hazardous
material spills, etc. Permittee shall be responsible for repair at its sole
cost and expense of any of its facilities damaged pursuant to any such action
taken by the city.



   (N)   If eligible to join, permittee shall subscribe to and be a
member of "MISS DIG," the association of utilities formed pursuant to
M.C.L.A. § 460.701 et seq., and shall conduct its business in conformance
with the statutory provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (O)   If permittee has its facilities on poles of Consumers Energy,
Detroit Edison or another electric or telecommunications provider and
Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or such other electric or telecommunications
provider relocates its system underground, then permittee shall relocate its
facilities underground in the same location at permittee's sole cost and
expense.



   (P)   All personnel of permittee and its contractors or
subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the
general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification
card bearing permittee's name, their name and photograph. Permittee shall
account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of
permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified
as such to the public, such as by a magnetic sign with permittee's name and
telephone number.



   (Q)   Utility cabinets. Utility cabinets shall be subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Proposed utility cabinets must not:



         (a)   Create an obstacle in the public right-of-way;



         (b)   Block a driver's view of the street or sidewalk;



         (c)   Create an attractive nuisance to children;



         (d)   Interfere with essential services;



         (e)   Detract from the streetscape;



         (f)   Have a negative impact upon property owners'
rights to attractive, well-maintained public spaces and rights-of-way.



      (2)   Placement of a utility cabinet shall not be:



         (a)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



         (b)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk;



         (c)   Within 30 feet of an approach to a stop sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of the road or within the lawn
extension;



         (d)   In a place or manner that blocks egress from an
emergency exit;



         (e)   Within ten feet of the intersection of a sidewalk
or street and the edge of a driveway;



         (f)   Within 75 feet of the center of the intersection
of two streets;



         (g)   Within ten feet of a tree;



         (h)   Within ten feet of a mailbox owned by the United
States Postal Service;



         (i)   Within 30 feet of the approach to a bus stop;



         (j)    Within ten feet of an underground utility service
(if the utility is ground-mounted);



         (k)   Within 850 feet of another utility cabinet.



         (l)   In a public right-of-way adjacent to the front lot
line of a property.



      (3)   Utility cabinet specifications:



         (a)   There shall be only one cabinet per location;
however, co-location in the same cabinet may be permitted if approved by the
Manager;



         (b)   Pole-mounted utility cabinets shall not exceed 30
inches in width, 12 inches in depth, and 72 inches in height, and shall be
mounted a minimum of 12 inches above grade;



         (c)   Ground-mounted utility cabinets shall have a
maximum height of five feet and shall not exceed 80 cubic feet in volume, not
including a meter box. The meter box shall not exceed 22 inches in width, 9
inches in depth and 42 inches in height. Ground-mounted utility cabinets with
or without meter boxes shall be mounted on a concrete pad that is not to
exceed 100 square feet;



         (d)   Utility cabinets shall be dark brown or green and
not display any advertising;



         (e)   Utility cabinets in the public right-of-way shall
be mounted with their width parallel to the street;



         (f)   Ground-mounted utility cabinets in public parks
shall be landscaped with plant material sufficient to screen the cabinet from
view. The cabinet owner shall maintain the landscape materials and
replacement of them if damaged at the owner's cost;



         (g)   All utility cabinets shall clearly display on the
front of the cabinet an identifying number as well as the owner's name,
address, and emergency phone number;



         (h)   Utility cabinets shall be maintained in good
repair, and in a structurally sound and sanitary condition. The existence of
graffiti, stickers or other similar defacement of a utility cabinet shall
constitute an unsanitary condition. Failure of a cabinet owner to comply with
this division shall authorize the city to cause the proper restoration to be
made at the cabinet owner's expense. To ensure compliance with this division,
utility cabinets shall be inspected by the cabinet owner on at least a
bi-annual basis.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.07  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   Permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless
the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials,
departments, boards, and commissions from any and all claims, losses,
liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings, and
expenses of any nature (collectively "claims") (including, without
limitation, attorneys' fees) arising out of or resulting from the acts or
omissions of permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors,
successors, or assigns, but only to the extent such acts or omissions are
related to permittee's use of or installation of facilities in the public
right-of-way and only to the extent of the fault or responsibility of
permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors and
assigns.



   (B)   The city shall notify permittee promptly in writing of any
such claims and the method and means proposed by the city for defending or
satisfying any such claims. The city shall cooperate with permittee in every
reasonable way to facilitate the defense of any such claims. The city shall
consult with permittee respecting the defense and satisfaction of such
claims, including the selection and direction of legal counsel.



   (C)   The city shall not settle any claim subject to indemnification
by permittee without the advance written consent of permittee, which consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Permittee shall have the right to defend
or settle, at its own expense, any claim against the city for which permittee
is responsible under this section.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.08  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Prior to beginning any construction in or installation of
permittee's facilities in the public right-of-way, permittee shall obtain
insurance as set forth below and file certificates evidencing same with the
city. Such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect until the
end of the term of its franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement,
(whichever is then in effect). In the alternative, permittee may satisfy this
requirement through a program of self-insurance, acceptable to the city, by
providing reasonable evidence of its financial resources to the city. The
city's acceptance of such self-insurance shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (B)   Insurance requirements are as follows:



      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
completed operations liability, independent contractors liability,
contractual liability coverage, railroad protective coverage and coverage for
property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground
utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage, in an amount not less than
$5,000,000.



      (2)   Liability insurance for sudden and accidental
environmental contamination with minimum limits of $500,000 and providing
coverage for claims discovered within three years after the term of the
policy. Pursuant to the 2006 MPSC decision in Case U-14720, permittee need
not comply with the preceding sentence until such time after the effective
date of this chapter that it decides to place any new or existing facilities
underground within the public right-of-way in the city.



      (3)   Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less
than  $1,000,000.



      (4)   Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance
with statutory limits, and any applicable federal insurance of a similar
nature.



      (5)   The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a
combination of underlying (primary) and umbrella policies so long as in
combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. If more than one 
insurance policy is purchased to provide the coverage amounts set forth
above, then all policies providing coverage limits excess to the primary
policy shall provide drop down coverage to the first dollar of coverage and
other contractual obligations of the primary policy, should the primary
policy carrier not be able to perform any of its contractual obligations or
not be collectible for any of its coverages for any reason during the term of
the franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement (whichever is then in
effect), or (when longer) for as long as coverage could have been available
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the primary policy.



   (C)   The city shall be named as an additional insured on all
policies (other than worker's compensation and employer's liability). All
insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled, modified or
not renewed unless the insurance carrier provides 30 days prior written
notice to city. Permittee shall annually provide the city with a certificate
of insurance evidencing such coverage. All insurance policies (other than
environmental contamination, workers' compensation and employer's liability
insurance) shall be written on an occurrence basis and not on a claims made
basis.



   (D)   All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers licensed
to do business by the State of Michigan or by surplus line carriers on the
Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of companies qualified to do
business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated
A+ or better by A.M. Best Company.



   (E)   If the insurance policies required by this chapter are written
with retainages or deductibles in excess of $50,000, they shall be approved
by Manager in advance in writing. Permittee shall indemnify and save harmless
the city from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment
of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished under this
section.



   (F)   Permittee's contractors and subcontractors working in the
public right-of-way shall carry in full force and effect commercial general
liability, environmental contamination liability, automobile liability and
workers' compensation and employer liability insurance which complies with
all terms of this section. In the alternative, permittee, at its expense, may
provide such coverages for any or all its contractors or subcontractors (such
as by adding them to permittee's policies).



   (G)   Permittee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with
respect to the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed
officials, departments, boards, and commissions (collectively "them"). Any
insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them shall be in excess of
permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to it (where "insurance or
self-insurance maintained by any of them" includes any contract or agreement
providing any type of indemnification or defense obligation provided to, or
for the benefit of them, from any source, and includes any self-insurance
program or policy, or self-insured retention or deductible by, for or on
behalf of them).



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.09  PERFORMANCE BOND OR LETTER OF CREDIT.



   The city may require permittee to post a bond (or letter of credit), in
the amount provided in M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(3).



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.10  REMOVAL.



   (A)   As soon as practicable after the later of the term of its
franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement expires, permittee or its
successors and assigns shall remove any underground cable or other portions
of permittee's facilities from the public right-of-way which has been
installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other
opening of the public right-of-way. Permittee shall not remove any
underground cable or other portions of the facilities which requires
trenching or other opening of the public right-of-way except with the prior
written approval of Manager. All removals shall be at permittee's sole cost
and expense. For purposes of this division, CABLE means any wire, coaxial
cable, fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire.



   (B)   As soon as practicable after the later of the expiration of
the term of its franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement, permittee, or
its successor or assigns at its sole cost and expense, shall, unless waived
in writing by Manager, remove from the public right-of-way all above ground
elements of its facilities, including but not limited to poles,
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and lines attached to or suspended from
poles.



   (C)   The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to
approval by Manager. Unless extended by Manager, removal shall be completed
not later than 12 months following the expiration of the later of the term of
a franchise agreement or pre-existing agreement. Portions of permittee's
facilities in the public right-of-way that are not removed within such time
period shall be deemed abandoned and, at the option of the city exercised by
written notice to permittee at the address provided for in the franchise
agreement or pre-existing agreement (whichever was last in effect), title to
the portions described in such notice shall vest in the city.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.11  OTHER ITEMS.



   (A)   Permittees shall faithfully perform all duties required by
this chapter.



   (B)   The Act allows local units of government and video service
providers to enter into voluntary franchise agreements that include terms and
conditions which are different from those required under the Act or which are
different from those in the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement
established by the MPSC. The Metro Act allows municipalities and providers to
mutually agree to Metro Act permit terms differing from those in the standard
forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC. Current or prospective
permittees who desire terms different from those in this chapter, as applied
to them, should request such a voluntary franchise agreement or a mutually
agreed to Metro Act permit from the city.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to
protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the public, and
should any provision or section of this chapter be held unconstitutional,
invalid, overbroad or otherwise unenforceable, such determination/holding
shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining
conditions of this chapter. If any provision in this chapter is found to be
partially overbroad, unenforceable, or invalid, permittee and the city may
nevertheless enforce such provision to the extent permitted under applicable
law.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.12  REPEALER.



   All ordinances, resolutions or rules, parts of ordinances, resolutions
or rules inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A permittee who violates any provision of this chapter is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to such
civil infraction fines and costs as provided in this code. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the
event of a violation by a permittee of this chapter.



   (B)   The Manager is designated as the authorized official of the
city to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this
chapter.



(Ord. 959, passed 11-8-10)



CHAPTER 112:  MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Authorized facilities



   112.03   Application for authorization



   112.04   Relocation of facilities, transfers of licenses, and
expansion of grow operations



   112.05   General regulations



   112.06   Violations



   112.07   Policy review in 2019



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them when
used in this chapter:



   (A)   Co-location or co-located means the siting and operation of a
combination of multiple facilities or facility types at a single location.



   (B)   Facility means a location at which a license holder is
licensed to operate under the MMMFLA.



   (C)   Facility plan means the plans required to be submitted to LARA
in accordance with the MMMFLA rules that includes among other things
diagrams, floor plans, construction details, etc.



   (D)   Facility-specific step means the portion of the application
for a state operating license that follows the prequalification step and
pertains to the details of the proposed facility.



   (E)   Grower means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in
this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for
sale to a processor or provisioning center.



   (F)   LARA means the department of licensing and regulatory affairs
and any successor agency to the department.



   (G)   Licensee means a person holding a state operating license.



   (H)   Licensing board means the medical marihuana licensing board
created by the MMMFLA.



   (I)   Marihuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L.,
growing or not; the seeds of that plant; the resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. Marihuana does not include
the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin
extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed of
the plant that is incapable of germination. Marihuana does not include
industrial hemp grown or cultivated, or both, for research purposes under the
industrial hemp research act.



   (J)   MMMA means the Michigan medical marihuana act, 2008 IL 1, as
amended MCL 333.26424 et seq.



   (K)   MMMFLA means the Michigan medical marihuana facilities
licensing act, 2016 PA 281, as amended, MCL 333.27102 et seq.



   (L)   MMMFLA rules means rules, including emergency rules,
promulgated by LARA to implement the MMMFLA.



   (M)   Pre-qualification step means the portion of the application
for a state operating license pertaining to the applicant's financial
background and the criminal history of the applicant and other associated
persons.



   (N)   Processor means a licensee that is a commercial entity located
in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin
from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and
transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center.



   (O)   Provisioning center means a licensee that is a commercial
entity located in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower or
processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered qualifying
patients, directly or through the patients’ registered primary caregivers.
Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold
at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers.
A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying
patient connected to the caregiver through LARA's marihuana registration
process in accordance with the MMMA is not a provisioning center for purposes
of this chapter.



   (P)   Safety compliance facility means a licensee that is a
commercial entity that receives marihuana from a facility or registered
primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and
other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to
the facility.



   (Q)   Secure transporter means a licensee that is a commercial
entity located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana
between marihuana facilities for a fee.



   (R)   Stacked grower license means more than 1 state operating
license issued to a single licensee to operate as a grower of class C-1,500
marihuana plants as specified in each license at a facility.



   (S)   State operating license or, unless the context requires a
different meaning, “license” means a license that is issued under the
MMMFLA that allows the licensee to operate as a grower, processor, secure
transporter, provisioning center, or a safety compliance facility.



(Ord. 1038, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 112.02  AUTHORIZED FACILITIES.



   (A)   Facilities eligible for authorization. The following medical
marihuana facilities may be authorized to operate in the city:



      (1)   Not more than five growers operating under Class A
licenses;



      (2)   Not more than three growers operating under Class B or
Class C licenses;



      (3)   Not more than three provisioning centers;



      (4)   Processors;



      (5)   Secure transporters; and



      (6)   Safety compliance facilities.



   (B)   Co-location and stacked licenses. Co-location and stacked
grower licenses (with up to three grower licenses per zoning lot) are
permitted in the city. For purposes of the limitations provided in division
(A):



      (1)   A facility with a stacked grower license counts as a
single grower; and



      (2)   On a site with co-location, each license (other than
stacked grower licenses) authorized to operate within a single location
counts as a separate facility.



   (C)   Final authorization from city required. The authorization
process described in § 112.03 determines the locations in the city at which
facilities may operate. A proposed facility is not eligible for a state
operating license until the clerk grants final authorization pursuant to §
112.03(D).



(Ord. 1038, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 112.03  APPLICATION FOR AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   Submission. Beginning on October 1, 2018, a person may apply
for authorization to operate a facility within the city by submitting the
following items to the City Clerk. These items may be submitted to the Clerk
before applying for requisite zoning approvals:



      (1)   A copy of official paperwork issued by LARA indicating
that the applicant has successfully completed the prequalification step of
the application for a state operating license.



      (2)   A signed statement from the applicant, made on a
standard form available in the Clerk's Office, indicating:



         (a)   The current property owner of record;



         (b)   If the current property owner is different than
the applicant (e.g. where the applicant has a lease, option, land contract,
or other future interest in the property), the property owner's signature is
required in addition to the applicant's. Only one application shall be
submitted per property, unless the applications are for proposed co-located
facilities;



         (c)   The address, tax identification number, and zoning
designation of the proposed facility;



         (d)   The proposed facility type;



         (e)   If the proposed facility type involves stacked
growing licenses, the number of licenses sought; and



         (f)   Written consent for the city to inspect the
facility at any time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with
applicable laws and regulations.



      (3)   An application fee in an amount established by
resolution of the City Commission.



      (4)   An advance of the annual administrative fee established
in § 112.05(d).



   (B)   Initial receipt period set by resolution. For any facility
type subject to numerical limitations under § 112.02 , the city shall
establish an initial receipt period that will commence on October 1, 2018,
and will end on a date to be set by resolution of the City Commission. The
City Commission shall adopt such resolution on or before October 1, giving
consideration to the number of applicants that have completed the
pre-qualification step of the state licensing process by that time.



   (C)   Clerk action upon receipt. The Clerk will accept and receive
any application that includes the required items listed above, unless the
city has already received an application for the same property (other than an
application for a proposed co-located facility) from another applicant. Upon
receiving a complete application, the clerk will time- and date-stamp the
application and inform the applicant of the following:



      (1)   The number of existing facilities of the proposed
facility type currently operating within the city;



      (2)   The number of pending applications for the desired
facility type



      (3)   The date, time, and location of any drawing that may be
conducted pursuant to division (D).



   (D)   Conditional authorization. The City Clerk will conditionally
authorize facilities as follows:



      (1)   If, after close of business on the end date of the
initial receipt period, the city has received more applications for a given
facility type than would be permitted under § 112.02, the Clerk will conduct
a drawing to randomly select applicants for conditional authorization and to
establish a waiting list for future conditional authorizations for that
facility type. The drawing will be noticed and conducted as a public meeting.



      (2)   For any facility type not subject to numerical limits
under § 112.02, or otherwise not subject to the drawing process described in
division (D)(1), the Clerk will conditionally authorize facilities in the
order in which applications are received.



      (3)   Once the Clerk has issued conditional authorizations for
all of the facilities of a given facility type that would be permitted under
§ 112.02, the Clerk will place subsequent applications at the end of the
waiting list for that facility type.



   (E)   Final authorization. The City Clerk will grant final
authorization for the facility if the applicant:



      (1)   Submits the paperwork for the facility-specific step of
the application for a state operating license (and all related applications
for stacked licenses) to LARA within 30 days of receiving conditional
authorization;



      (2)   Submits an application for special use authorization
pursuant to § 154.410(B)(4)(p) of the zoning ordinance within 30 days of
receiving conditional authorization;



      (3)   Obtains special use authorization within six months of
receiving conditional authorization; and



      (4)   Obtains a state operating license within 18 months of
receiving conditional authorization.



   (F)   Expiration of conditional authorization. If the applicant for
a conditionally authorized facility fails to satisfy any of the deadlines
established above, the conditional authorization will expire. The City
Commission may extend any of the deadlines upon a showing of good cause.



   (G)   Waiting list and refund of administrative fee. The Clerk will
keep and maintain the waiting lists established pursuant to division (D)
until the maximum number of facilities of the type to which the list pertains
are operating in the city (at which time the Clerk will discard the waiting
list). If a conditional authorization for a proposed facility of that
facility type expires, the clerk will conditionally authorize the next
application on the waiting list. Upon discarding the waiting list, the Clerk
will refund the advance of the annual administrative fee established in §
112.05(D) to all applicants remaining on the waiting list.



   (H)   Newly available authorizations.



      (1)   For facility types for which the maximum number of
facilities specified in § 112.02 are operating in the city, an authorization
will become available when:



         (a)   The state operating license for a facility with
final authorization expires or is revoked by LARA; or



         (b)   This chapter is amended to authorize additional
facilities of that facility type.



      (2)   When an authorization becomes available as described in
division (H)(1), the city clerk will select a date within the next 60 days on
which the city will begin accepting applications from interested persons, and
will publish notice of the selected date in a newspaper of general
circulation.



      (3)   On the selected date, the Clerk will begin accepting
applications using the same process described in divisions (C) and (D) above,
and will conduct a drawing to randomly select an application if multiple
applications are received on that date.



(Ord. 1038, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 112.04  RELOCATION OF FACILITIES, TRANSFERS OF LICENSES, AND EXPANSION OF
GROW OPERATIONS.



   (A)   An existing facility may be moved to a new location in the
city, subject to applicable zoning regulations and approval by the Licensing
Board. 



   (B)   A license for an existing facility may be transferred to a new
licensee that intends to continue operating at the same location, subject to
approval by the Licensing Board.



   (C)   No further city approvals are required for the relocations and
license transfers described in this section.



   (D)   A licensee may expand growing operations by upgrading the
class of the license (e.g., from class A to class B, or from class B to Class
C), or by obtaining a stacked license, subject to all the limitations
established in § 112.02. To do so, the licensee must submit a new
application to the city satisfying the requirements in § 112.03(A), which
shall include payment of the application fee and an advance of any additional
annual administrative fee that will be owed due to the addition of stacked
licenses. The application shall be conditionally approved upon receipt of all
required materials.



(Ord. 1038, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 112.05  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Submission of supplementary information to the city.
Applicants for city authorization and persons operating existing facilities
in the city must provide the City Clerk with copies of all documents
submitted to LARA in connection with the initial license application,
subsequent renewal applications, or investigations conducted by LARA. The
documents must be provided to the Clerk within seven days of submission to
LARA, and may be submitted by electronic media unless otherwise requested by
the Clerk.



   (B)   Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Medical
marihuana facilities must be operated in compliance with the MMMFLA, MMMFLA
rules, all conditions of the facility's state operating licenses, and all
applicable city ordinances. Compliance with the foregoing does not create
immunity from prosecution by federal authorities or other authorities of
competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   No consumption on premises. No smoking, inhalation, or other
consumption of marihuana shall take place on or within the premises of any
facility. It shall be a violation of this chapter to engage in such behavior,
or for a person to knowingly allow such behavior to occur.  Evidence of all
of the following gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that a person allowed
the consumption of marihuana on or within a premises in violation of this
section:



      (1)   The person had control over the premises or the portion
of the premises where the marihuana was consumed;



      (2)   The person knew or reasonably should have known that the
marihuana was consumed; and



      (3)   The person failed to take corrective action.



   (D)   Annual fee. A licensee must pay a fee of $5,000, for each
license used within the city in order to help defray administrative and
enforcement costs. The holder of a stacked grower license must pay a separate
fee in the amount of $5,000 for each license. The initial annual fee(s) must
be paid to the City Clerk when the application for city approval is
submitted. In each subsequent year, fees are due on the date on which the
licensee submits an application to LARA for renewal of the state operating
license.



(Ord. 1038, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 112.06  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Request for revocation of state operating license. If at any
time an authorized facility violates this chapter or any other applicable
city ordinance, the City Commission may request that LARA revoke or refrain
from renewing the facility's state operating license.



   (B)   Civil infraction. It is unlawful to disobey, neglect, or
refuse to comply with any provision of this chapter. A violation of this
chapter is a municipal civil infraction. Each day the violation continues
shall be a separate offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
ordinance to the contrary, violators shall be subject to the following fines:



      (1)   First violation: $500;



      (2)   Second offense: $2,500; and



      (3)   Each subsequent offense: $5,000.



   (C)   Other remedies. The foregoing sanctions are in addition to the
city's right to seek other appropriate and proper remedies, including actions
in law or equity.



(Ord. 1038, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 112.07  POLICY REVIEW IN 2019.



   On or before December 31, 2019, city staff shall submit a report to the
City Commission regarding the administration of this chapter and the
provisions of the zoning ordinance pertaining to medical marihuana, and
regarding any other pertinent information relating to the operation of
medical marihuana facilities in the city.  The report may include proposed
ordinance amendments or other proposed policy changes.



(Ord. 1038, passed 6-11-2018)



CHAPTER 113:  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS



Section



   113.01   Purpose



   113.02   Conflict



   113.03   Definitions



   113.04   Permit required



   113.05   Issuance of permit



   113.06   Construction/engineering permit



   113.07   Conduit or utility poles



   113.08   Route maps



   113.09   Repair of damage



   113.10   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee



   113.11   Modification of existing fees



   113.12   Savings clause



   113.13   Use of funds



   113.14   Annual report



   113.15   Cable television operators



   113.16   Existing rights



   113.17   Compliance



   113.18   Reservation of police powers



   113.19   Severability



   113.20   Authorized city officials



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is:



   (A)   To regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way
by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities;



   (B)   To protect the public health, safety and welfare;



   (C)   To exercise reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002), the Small Wireless Communications
Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 365 of 2018) (the "Acts") and other
applicable law; and



   (D)   To ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the
Acts by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Acts.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.02  CONFLICT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to
conflict with the Acts or other applicable law.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CITY.  The City of Mount Pleasant.



      CITY COMMISSION.  The City Commission of the City of Mount
Pleasant or its designee. This chapter does not authorize delegation of any
decision or function that is required by law to be made by the City
Commission.



      CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager or his or her designee.



      METRO ACT.  The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002), as amended from time to
time.  A copy of the METRO Act and application and permit forms currently
approved by the MPSC can be obtained on the Internet at:
http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/c omm/rightofway/rightofway.htm.



      PERMIT.  A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the METRO or
Small Wireless Acts and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use
the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities.



      SMALL WIRELESS ACT.  The Small Wireless Communications
Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 365 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §§ 460.1301 et
seq.), as amended from time to time. A copy of the Small Wireless Act can be
obtained on the Internet at:



http://www.legislature.mi.gov/documents/2017-2018/publicact/pdf/2018-PA-0365.pd
f



   (B)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined or as provided in the METRO Act, including without
limitation the following:



      MPSC.  The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Consumer and Industry Services and shall have the same meaning as the term
COMMISSION in the Act.



      PERSON.  An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not
include a federal, state or private right-of-way.



      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES.  The equipment or
personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches,
conduits, pipes and sheaths which are used to or can generate, receive,
transmit, carry, amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally
licensed commercial mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of Title
III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3 and
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.



      TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES.  Those terms as defined in § 102 of the METRO Act, 2002 PA 48,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3102. TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat.1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3 or service
provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of
this chapter only, a PROVIDER also includes all of the following:



         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a
telecommunications service;



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the METRO or Small
Wireless Acts, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within
a public right-of-way;



         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport
access service.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in the Acts, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in
the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a
permit pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   Wireline telecommunications providers shall apply for a
permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1)
of the METRO Act.  A copy of the Act and application and permit forms
currently approved by the MPSC can be obtained on the Internet at:
http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm.



      (2)   Wireless telecommunications providers shall apply for
permit by notifying the local authority of the wireless provider's intent to
locate a small cell wireless facility within the ROW, along with proof of
other necessary permits, permit applications, or easements necessary for the
proposed activity.



      (3)   A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager, one copy
with the City Attorney and one copy with the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Applications for a wireline facility shall be complete
and include all information required by the METRO Act, including without
limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and
proposed facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of the METRO Act.



   (C)   Confidential information.  If a telecommunications provider
claims that any portion of the route maps submitted as part of its
application contains trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information
which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 - 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, the
telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each
map.



   (D)   Application fee. An application for a wireline facility under
the METRO Act shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application
fee in the amount of $500. An Application for a wireless facility under the
Small Wireless Act shall be accompanied by a $200 fee for each small cell
wireless facility alone, or a $300 fee for each small cell wireless facility
requiring a new utility pole to which it will be attached.



   (E)   Additional information.  The City Manager may request an
applicant submit additional information which the City Manager deems
reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such
requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for additional information
established by the City Manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree
on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city
or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the METRO
Act.



   (F)   Previously issued permits.  Pursuant to § 5(1) of the METRO
Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under § 251 of
the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A.
§ 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit
requirements of this chapter.



   (G)   Existing providers.  Pursuant to § 5(3) of the METRO Act,
within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the METRO Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way
in the city as of such date that has not previously obtained authorization or
a permit Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. §
484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the METRO Act,
a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this division
is not required to pay the $500 application fee required under division (D)
above. A provider under this division shall be given up to an additional 180
days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as
provided in § 5(4) of the Act.



   (H)   A provider subject to the Small Wireless Act with existing
wireless facilities in the public right-of-way before March 12, 2019 shall be
subject to fees, rates, and terms of the agreement or ordinance in effect at
the time of their contract. After termination of an existing contract, and
for all new contracts after March 12, 2019, the provisions of § 13(3) of the
Small Wireless Act shall apply.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.05  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Approval or denial of a wireline permit.



      (1)   The authority to approve or deny an application for a
wireline permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to § 15(3)
of the METRO Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a
permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an
application for a permit under § 113.04(B) of this chapter for access to a
public right-of-way within the city.



      (2)   Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall
notify the MPSC when the City Manager has granted or denied a permit,
including information regarding the date on which the application was filed
and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall
not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.



   (B)   Approval or denial of a wireless permit. The authority to
approve or deny an application for a wireless permit is hereby delegated to
the City Manager. Pursuant to § 15 of the Small Wireless Act, the City
Manager shall approve or deny an application within 60 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a proposed collocation
of a small cell wireless facility, subject to the adjustments provided in §
15(h). Denial of an application may only be for a reason listed in § 15(i)
of the Small Wireless Act.



   (C)   Form of METRO Act permit.  If an application for a METRO Act
permit is approved, the City Manager shall issue the permit in the form
approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms,
in accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the METRO Act.



   (D)   Conditions.  Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the City
Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit which conditions
shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the
public right-of-way.



   (E)   Bond requirement for wireline facility. Pursuant to § 15(3)
of the METRO Act, and without limitation on division (C) above, the City
Manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider
as a condition of the permit for a wireline facility. If a bond is required,
it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public
right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider's access and use.



   (F)   Bond requirement for wireless facility. Pursuant to § 33 of
the Small Wireless Act, and without limitation on division (C) above, the
City Manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications
provider as a condition of the permit for a wireless facility. The purpose of
the bond must be either to remove abandoned or improperly maintained small
cell wireless facilities, to repair the right-of-way, or to recoup rates or
fees that are more than 12-months delinquent following 60-days advance
notice. A cash bond is not required unless the wireless provider has failed
to obtain or maintain a bond required by § 33 or has defaulted or failed to
perform on a bond previously given to the city. The bond requirement shall
not exceed $1,000.00 per small cell wireless facility.



   (G)   Fee requirement for a wireless facility. Pursuant to § 13(3)
of the Small Wireless Act, the City Manager shall require an annual fee of
$20 for each existing utility pole or wireless support structure in the
public right-of-way on which the provider has collocated a small cell
wireless facility. If the utility pole or wireless support structure was
erected by or on behalf of the wireless provider on or after March 12, 2019,
the City Manager shall require an annual fee of $125.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.06  CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.



   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under Chapter 98
of this code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way.
No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.07  CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.



   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the METRO Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a wireline
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.08  ROUTE MAPS.



   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the METRO Act, a wireline telecommunications
provider shall within 90 days after the substantial completion of
construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city submit route
maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the
MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper and electronic format
unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of
the METRO Act.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.09  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   (A)   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the METRO Act, a telecommunications
provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing
telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily
obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit,
shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all
installations under, over, below or within the public right-of-way and shall
promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.



   (B)   Pursuant to § 13(10) of the Small Wireless Act, wireless
providers must repair all damage to the right-of-way directly caused by their
activities while occupying, constructing, installing, mounting, maintaining,
modifying, operating, or replacing small cell wireless facilities in the
right-of-way. If the provider fails to return the right-of-way to its
functional equivalent before the damage within 10 days after written notice,
the City may make those repairs and charge the wireless provider the
reasonable, documented cost of the repairs.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.10  ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.



   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set
forth in § 113.04(D) above, a telecommunications provider with wireline
telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an
annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to § 8 of the METRO Act.
There is no maintenance fee for a wireless telecommunication facility in the
city's public right-of-way.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.11  MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.



   (A)   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the METRO
Act, the city hereby modifies to the extent necessary any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the METRO Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to
an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the
METRO Act, which shall be paid to the authority.



   (B)   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(4) of the METRO
Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with
telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's
boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under § 8
of the METRO Act.



   (C)   The city shall provide each telecommunications provider
affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter in compliance with the
requirement of § 13(4) of the METRO Act. To the extent any fees are charged
telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the
METRO Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the METRO Act, such
imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent,
and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be
promptly refunded as having been charged in error.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.12  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the METRO Act, if § 8 of the METRO Act is
found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under §
113.11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.13  USE OF FUNDS.



   Pursuant § 10(4) of the METRO Act, all amounts received by the city
from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related
purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the
city from the authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or
the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Public Act 51 of 1951,
being M.C.L.A §§ 247.651 - 247.675.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.14  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the METRO Act, the City Manager shall file an
annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the authority.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.15  CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.



   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the METRO Act, the city shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy
an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues
from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.16  EXISTING RIGHTS.



   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the METRO Act, except as expressly provided
herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing
rights that a wireline telecommunications provider or the city may have under
a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.17  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in
adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the METRO
and Small Wireless Acts, and the provisions hereof should be construed in
such a manner as to achieve that purpose.



   (B)   The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
the METRO Act, including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of
Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 - 15.246,
as provided in § 113.04(C) of this chapter;



      (2)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy
the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with § 113.04(F) of this
chapter;



      (3)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to
submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500
application fee in accordance with § 113.04(G) of this chapter;



      (4)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within
45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for
a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in
accordance with § 113.05(A) of this chapter;



      (5)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a
permit, in accordance with § 113.05(A) of this chapter;



      (6)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with § 113.05(A) of this chapter;



      (7)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC with
or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 113.05(B)
of this chapter;



      (8)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a
permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with § 113.05(C) of this chapter;



      (9)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider
which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication
provider's access and use, in accordance with § 113.05(D) of this chapter;



      (10)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any
additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with
§ 113.06 of this chapter;



      (11)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by
the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with
§ 113.11 of this chapter;



      (12)   Submitting an annual report to the authority, in
accordance with § 113.14 of this chapter; and



      (13)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for
a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 113.15 of this
chapter.



   (C)   The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
the Small Wireless Act, including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Not prohibiting, regulating, or charging for the
collocation of small cell wireless facilities except as provided by the Small
Wireless Act.



      (2)   Not entering into an exclusive arrangement with any
person for use of the right-of-way for the construction, operation, or
maintenance of utility poles or the collocation of small call wireless
facilities.



      (3)   Not charging a wireless provider a rate which exceeds
the provisions in § 13(3) or an application fee which exceeds the provisions
of § 15(3) of the Small Wireless Act.



      (4)   Administering and regulating the activities of wireless
providers in the right-of-way in a manner that is reasonable,
nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral in compliance with applicable
law.



      (5)   Not directly or indirectly requiring an applicant to
perform services unrelated to the collocation for which a permit is sought,
such as reserving fiber, conduit, or pole space for the City or making other
in-kind contributions to the authority.



      (6)   Within 25 days of receiving an application, notifying
the applicant in writing whether the application is complete. If an
application is incomplete, the notice shall clearly and specifically
delineate all missing documents and information.



      (7)   Within 10 days of receiving a supplemental submission,
notifying the applicant in writing whether the application is complete.



      (8)   Processing application on a nondiscriminatory basis.



      (9)   Issuing an approval or denial of an application within
60 days after it is received, subject to the adjustments provided in § 15(h)
of the Small Wireless Act.



      (10)   Denying an application only for reasons provided in §
15(i) of the Small Wireless Act.



      (11)   Issuing an approval or denial of a revised application
within 30 days after it is received.



      (12)   Not instituting a moratorium on filing, receiving, or
processing applications or issuing permits for the collocation of small cell
wireless facilities or the installation, modification, or replacement of
utility poles on which small cell wireless facilities may be collocated.



      (13)   Not requiring a permit, any other approval, or a fee or
rate for the replacement of another wireless facility that is not larger or
heavier than what exists, routine maintenance, or installation, placement,
maintenance, operation, or replacement of a suspended micro wireless facility.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.18  RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.



   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the METRO Act and § 13(5) of the Small
Wireless Act, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and
approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public
right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.19  SEVERABILITY.



   The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and clauses of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.20  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the
municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as
provided by the City Code.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The
fine for violation of a municipal civil infraction under this chapter shall
be $500. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter
or a permit.



(Ord. 822, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 885, passed 10-28-02; Am. Ord. 1042,
passed 4-8-19)



CHAPTER 114: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



General Provisions



   114.01   Purpose



   114.02   Right to require franchise



   114.03   Definitions



Permits



   114.15   Requirement of permits and agreements



   114.16   Permit application procedures



   114.17   Annual permit fees



   114.18   Duration of permit; renewal



   114.19   Permit terms and requirements



   114.20   Use of public rights-of-way by permittee



   114.21   City not liable for interference



   114.22   Indemnification



   114.23   Insurance



   114.24   Assignment and transfer of control



   114.25   Permit revocation



   114.26   Removal of facilities



Enforcement



   114.35   Other provisions not waived



   114.36   Severability



   114.37   Authorized city officials



   114.38   Exemption



 



   114.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 114.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the access to and ongoing
use of public rights-of-way by rights-of-way users, except for video service
providers governed by Chapter 111 and telecommunications providers governed
by Chapter 113, to ensure and protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to exercise reasonable control of the public rights-of-way pursuant to
the city charter, by:



   (A)   Minimizing disruption of the public rights-of-way by
regulating the access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way and the
construction and installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way;



   (B)   Ensuring that the city and the public are protected from
liability for use of the public rights-of-way by rights-of-way users; and



   (C)   Providing for the payment of permit fees by rights-of-way
users.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 11-8-10)



§ 114.02  RIGHT TO REQUIRE FRANCHISE.



   Rights-of-way users shall be required to obtain and maintain a permit
for access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way and to otherwise
comply with the terms of this chapter. Such a permit shall not constitute a
franchise. The city reserves the right to require rights-of-way users to
obtain a franchise in the future to transact local business within the city.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AFFILIATE or AFFILIATED. Any entity controlling, controlled by or under
common control with a permitted.



   CITY. Refers to the City of Mt. Pleasant.



   CITY COMMISSION. The City Commission of the City of Mt. Pleasant or its
designee. This chapter does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the City Commission.



   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the City Division of Public Works.



   METRO ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002), as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et
seq.



   PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to this chapter for
access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by rights-of-way users for
wires, cables, poles, pipes, conduits, or other facilities designed or used
to provide services. The term "permit" does not include any other permits,
licenses, or approvals required by the city or any other governmental
entities.



   PERMITTEE. A rights-of-way user which has been issued a permit pursuant
to this chapter.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.



   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway within the city.



   SERVICES or SYSTEM.  The provision of water, water treatment, sanitary
sewage disposal, sanitary sewage treatment, storm drains, electric light and
power, gas, steam, heat, or any combination, along with related
appurtenances, to the city and its inhabitants or to persons located outside
the city limits.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  The same meaning as in Chapter 113.



   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. The same meaning as in Chapter 111.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 11-8-10)



PERMITS



§ 114.15  REQUIREMENT OF PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Except for video service providers governed by Chapter 111 and
telecommunications providers governed by Chapter 113, no person shall use the
public rights-of-way to provide services without a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the permit issued includes the
right to install, construct, maintain, or repair of a system within the
public rights-of-way. Failure to comply with the permit requirement of this
section shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   A person in violation of division (A) above shall still be
obligated to comply with all requirements of this chapter applicable to a
permittee and shall pay the annual fee plus late payment charges as provided
by § 114.17 for the time period in which the violator did not have a permit
plus the actual costs incurred by the city in enforcing this chapter against
the person.



   (D)   Receipt of a permit under this chapter does not supersede a
permittee's obligation to obtain any and all other necessary permits or
authorizations, under any applicable city ordinance, resolution, regulation,
or policy or other applicable law.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 11-8-10)



§ 114.16  PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application. A rights-of-way user shall apply for a permit
pursuant to this chapter. Three copies of the application information shall
be filed with the Director.



   (B)   Required information. The application shall include, without
limitation, the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and each person
exercising control over the applicant, and if the applicant or any person or
persons exercising control is not a natural person, each of its officers,
directors, stockholders beneficently holding more than 15% of the outstanding
voting shares, or its managers, general partners, limited partners and/or
members holding an equity interest of more than 15%. If no person controls
15% or more of the outstanding shares, the name and address of the ten
largest shareholders, partners, limited partners, and/or members as the case
shall be provided.



      (2)   Copies of the most recent financial statements of the
applicant.



      (3)   A general description of the applicant's existing and
proposed system and services in the city and the type of existing and
proposed facilities to be placed in the public rights-of-way; and a statement
whether such systems and/or facilities are owned by the applicant and that
such use complies with the terms of any agreement existing between the owners
of such facilities and applicant setting forth the nature of the applicant's
interest therein and the rights of the applicant to use the facilities.



      (4)   A map setting forth the location of the facilities in
the public rights-of-way. The map shall completely and accurately identify
the location and dimensions of above ground and underground facilities in
sufficient detail to the satisfaction of the City Manager or his/her
designee. Prior to the issuance of a right-of-way construction permit,
specific location of the facilities in the public rights-of-way must be
identified.



   (C)   Application fee. The application will be accompanied by a
non-refundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the
City Commission. The non-refundable application fee shall be designed to
reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing an application for a permit and
issuance of a permit in accordance with the procedures of this chapter.



   (D)   Administrative completeness. An application shall not be
deemed to be filed until the application is determined by the Director to be
administratively complete. If the Director determines that the application is
not administratively complete, the Director shall so advise the applicant in
writing and shall identify the items which must be furnished by the applicant
for an administratively complete application.



   (E)   Additional information. The Director may request an applicant
to submit such additional information which the Director deems reasonably
necessary or relevant to review the application. The applicant shall comply
with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such
additional information established by the Director.



   (F)   Misleading statements. A person who makes a statement which
was untrue when made or omits a material fact for the purpose of inducing the
city to issue a permit hereunder, which permit would not have been issued but
for the misstatement of fact or omission of fact, shall be in violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to all remedies for violation of this
chapter including, without limitation, denial of the requested action, permit
revocation, civil fines and costs.



   (G)   Conditions. The Director may impose conditions on the granting
of a permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Without
limitation, these conditions may include the posting of a bond by the
rights-of-way user in an amount which shall not exceed the reasonable cost to
ensure that the public rights-of-way are returned to their original condition
during and after the rights-of-way user's access and use. The Director may
require a rights-of-way user to maintain a letter of credit, cash bond, or
other financial guarantee with a local financial institution, in an amount
proportionate to the size of such rights-of-way users system (including
approved expansions, if any), but not in excess of the reasonable cost to
ensure that the public rights-of-way are returned to their original
condition, which can be drawn upon by the city due to the rights-of-way
users' failure to cure, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director or his
or her designee, any violation of this chapter, or breach or default under a
permit, after 30 days notice.



   (H)   Appeal. The Director shall not unreasonably deny any request
for a permit. A denial of any request for a permit may be appealed to the
City Manager who shall make the final decision.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 11-8-10)



§ 114.17  ANNUAL PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Establishment of annual fees; payment. In addition to the
non-refundable application fee set forth in § 114.16(C) and any other fees
for other permits or authorizations required by the city, a permittee shall
pay the city an annual fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Commission. The annual fee may be modified from time to time by resolution of
the City Commission. The annual fee shall be payable annually in December of
each year.



   (B)   Prorating; late charges. When a permit is issued on any day
other than January 1, the annual fee shall be prorated for the balance of the
calendar year. A person who violates this chapter by failing to obtain a
permit shall pay the annual fee plus late payment charges, as required by
this section, for the time period in which the violator did not have a permit
plus the actual costs of the city in enforcing this chapter against the
person.



   (C)   Records. All records (including those of affiliates)
reasonably necessary to verify the accuracy of annual fees paid by the
permittee under § 114.17(A) shall be made available by a permittee at a
location within the city or within 20 miles of the city's boundaries. The
city, by itself or in combination with other municipalities, reserves the
right to audit any permitted (or any affiliate of a permittee) to verify the
accuracy of annual fees paid or to be paid to the city. Any additional amount
due the city shall be paid within 30 days of submission of an invoice. If the
additional amount due exceeds 2% of the total annual fee which the audit
determines should have been paid for a calendar year, the permitted shall pay
the city's costs in connection with the audit within 30 days of submission of
an invoice.



   (D)   Other payments. The non-refundable application fees and the
annual fees established pursuant of this chapter shall be in addition to any
tax, charge, fee, or payment due, or to become due, to the city by a
permittee under any city ordinance or the laws of the state.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.18  DURATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL.



   A permit shall remain in effect until January 1 following the tenth
year anniversary from the date of the issuance of the permit (unless the
permit expires pursuant to § 114.19(J) or the permit is earlier revoked
pursuant to § 114.24). Applications for renewal of permits shall be filed in
the same manner as original applications in § 114.17 and shall be filed with
the city not less than 120 days before the expiration of the permit. The city
expressly reserves all rights to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
applications for permit renewals pursuant to this chapter and to impose
additional conditions on renewed permits.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.19  PERMIT TERMS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Non-exclusive; additional permits. A permit shall be
non-exclusive. The city expressly reserves the right to approve, at any time,
additional permits for access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way
by rights-of-way users and to enter into agreements and grant franchises for
such access and use. The issuance of additional permits, entry into
agreements, or grant of franchises shall not be deemed to amend, modify,
revoke, or terminate the terms and conditions of any permits previously
issued to rights-of-way users.



   (B)   Expansion requests. A permit approved by the city shall
authorize, access to and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way described in
the permit, subject to compliance with the conditions of the permit, the
requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable requirements of a city
ordinance or applicable state and federal law. The permittee shall not use
any public rights-of-way not expressly authorized by the permit. Any use of
the public rights-of-way (including any installation, construction,
maintenance, or repair of a system within the public rights-of-way) to
provide services shall be performed only as authorized by the permit. A
permittee may, however, expand or modify its system to public rights-of-ways
not described in its permit by obtaining approval of an amended permit from
the city. Such approval may be granted in writing by the Director in response
to a written request from the permittee for expansion or modification to
specific portions of named public rights-of-way. The City Commission may
establish by resolution a non-refundable application fee for such a request.
After taking into consideration the public health, safety and welfare, the
Director may grant, grant with conditions, or deny such request. The Director
shall not unreasonably deny any request. A denial of any request may be
appealed to the City Manager who shall make the final decision. Any expansion
or modification into additional public rights-of-way shall be subject to all
terms and conditions of the original permit and this chapter including,
without limitation, the application of the annual fee to the expanded or
modified public rights-of-way used by the permittee.



   (C)   Construction permit. A permittee shall not commence
construction, excavation, street opening, tree trimming, or maintenance of,
upon over, across or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first
obtaining all necessary construction, excavation, street opening, tree
trimming, or other applicable permits as required under applicable city
ordinances, for construction, excavation, street opening, tree trimming, or
maintenance within the public rights-of-way.



   (D)   Lease or use of facilities; overlashing. A permittee shall not
lease, sublease, license or otherwise allow the use of wires, conduit, poles
or other facilities in the public rights-of-way by a person without securing
from the person a representation that the person has secured all necessary
governmental approvals required to occupy space in the public right-of-way. A
permittee shall not allow the property of a third party system wires or any
other facilities to be overlashed, affixed or attached to any portion of a
permittee's system located in the public right-of-way; or allow other actions
with a similar result without securing from the person a representation that
all governmental approvals have been secured in order to occupy space in the
public right-of-way.



   (E)   "As built" maps. Without expense to the city, a permittee
shall provide the city with "as-built" maps, records and plans showing its
system or portions thereof within the city, including those of affiliates
used by the permittee, and maps and descriptive information of facilities of
other persons used by the permittee. The "as built" shall be in such format
as required by the city. (Digital GIS maps are required if available.) The
Director may waive part or all of this requirement if satisfactory records of
the location of the system were previously provided to the city. The "as
built" maps, records and plans shall be provided within 30 days of the
completion of the system and any extensions, additions, or modifications to
the system. In addition to the foregoing, a permittee, without expense to the
city, shall, upon 48 hours notice, give the city access to all "as-built"
maps, records, plans and specifications showing its system or portions
thereof within the city. Upon request by the city, a permittee shall inform
the city as soon as possible (but no more than one business day after the
request) of any changes from previously supplied maps, records, or plans and
shall mark up maps provided by the city so as to show the location of its
system.



   (F)   Inducement. By acceptance of a permit, a permittee
acknowledges that it has not been induced to obtain the permit by any
understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or
on behalf of the city or by any third person concerning any term or condition
of a permit not expressed in this chapter.



   (G)   Acceptance of terms and conditions. Permittee acknowledges by
the acceptance of a permit that it has carefully read its terms and
conditions and does accept all of such terms and conditions.



   (H)   No priority. A permit does not establish any priority of use
of the public rights-of-way by a permittee over any present or future
permittees or parties having agreements with the city or franchises for such
use. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public
rights-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the
second priority to the city, the third priority to the state and its
political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and
thereafter as between permittees, other permit holders, parties having
agreements with the city, and franchisees, as determined by the city in the
exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved
to and conferred on it by the state.



   (I)   Future use by city. A permittee acknowl- edges, by accepting a
permit, that it obtains no rights to or further use of the public
rights-of-way other than those expressly granted herein. Each permittee
acknowledges and accepts as its own risk that the city may make use in the
future of the public rights-of-way which a permittee is using or in which a
permittee's system is located in a manner inconsistent with the permittee's
use of such public rights-of-way and that in such event the permittee will be
required to relocate their facilities and not be entitled to compensation
from the city.



   (J)   Expiration of permit. Unless the city grants an extension, a
permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless prior thereto
the permittee either:



      (1)   Commences construction, installation, or operation of
its system within the public rights-of-way authorized by the permit and
diligently pursues completion of construction or installation; or



      (2)   Commences use of the public rights-of-way to provide
services as authorized by the permit.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.20  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY PERMITTEE.



   (A)   No burden on public rights-of-way. A permittee and its
contractors and subcontractors and a permittee's system shall not unduly
burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public
rights-of-way within the city. A permittee shall erect and maintain its
system so as to cause minimum interference with the use of the public
rights-of-way and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners. The permittee's cables and wires shall be suspended or buried so as
to not endanger or injure persons or property in the public rights-of-way. If
the city in its reasonable judgment determines that any portion of the system
located in the public right-of-way constitutes an undue burden or
interference, the permittee at its sole cost and expense shall modify that
portion of the system or take such other actions as the city may determine
are in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and the
permittee shall do so within the time period established by the city.



   (B)   Restoration of property. A permittee and its contractors and
subcontractors shall immediately restore, at the permittee's sole cost and
expense and in a manner approved by the city, any portion of the public
rights-of-way that is in any way disturbed, damaged, or injured by the
construction, operation, maintenance or removal of the system to as good or
better condition than that which existed prior to the disturbance. In the
event that the permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to do so
within the time specified by the city, the city shall be entitled to complete
the work and the permittee shall reimburse the city for the costs of doing so
or the city may draw upon the letter of credit or bond posted by the
permittee, at the city's sole option.



   (C)   Easements. Upon the city's request, a rights-of-way user shall
submit evidence of any easement or authorization to use private property for
construction or operation of its services or system. Any easements over or
under private property necessary for the construction or operation of a
system shall be arranged for and obtained by the permittee. Any use or
intrusion on private property without an easement or other instrument
evidencing permission of the property owner shall constitute a trespass by
the permittee and a violation of this chapter. Any easements over or under
property owned by the city other than the public rights-of-way shall be
separately negotiated with the city.



   (D)   Tree trimming. Subject to all applicable city ordinances, if
any, permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the public rights-of-way
so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with its
system. The permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to trimming only
those trees that are essential to maintain the integrity of its system. No
trimming shall be done in the public rights-of-way without previously
informing the city. The permittee will use reasonable efforts to notify all
affected property owners in advance of trimming trees on or adjacent to their
properties.



   (E)   Pavement cut coordination/additional fees.



      (1)   A permittee shall coordinate all construction work in
the public rights-of-way with the city's program for street construction,
rebuilding, resurfacing and repair (collectively, "street resurfacing").  A
permittee shall meet with the official of the city primarily responsible for
the public rights-of-way at least twice per year to this end.



      (2)   The goals of such coordination shall be to require a
permittee to conduct all work in the public rights-of-way in conjunction with
or immediately prior to any street resurfacing planned by the city, and to
prevent the public rights-of-way from being disturbed by a permittee for a
period of years after such street resurfacing.



      (3)   In addition to any other fees or payments required by
this chapter, a permittee shall pay to the city the sum set from time to time
by City Commission resolution or ordinance for each foot cut into or
excavation of any public rights-of-way, or portion thereof, which was subject
to street resurfacing within 18 months prior to such cut or excavation. This
fee is in addition to and not in lieu of the obligation to restore the public
rights-of-way and is in addition to all other fees required by this chapter.



   (F)   Marking. A permittee shall mark any installations of its
system which occur after the effective date of this chapter as follows:



      (1)   Aerial portions of its system shall be marked with a
marker on its lines on alternate poles which shall state the permittee's name
and provide a toll-free number to call for assistance.



      (2)   Direct buried underground portions of its system shall
have:



         (a)   A conducting wire placed in the ground at least
several inches above the permittee's facility (if such facility is
non-conductive);



         (b)   At least several inches above that a continuous
colored tape with the permittee's name and a toll-free phone number and a
statement to the effect that an underground system is buried beneath; and



         (c)   Stakes or other appropriate above-ground markers
with the permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating what system is
buried below.



      (3)   Portions of its system located in pipe or conduit,
including facilities of others used by a permittee, shall be marked at each
manhole with the permittee's name and toll-free telephone number to call for
assistance.



   (G)   Compliance with laws. A permittee shall comply with all laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations regarding the installation,
construction, ownership and use of its system, whether federal, state or
local, now in force or which hereafter may be promulgated (including, without
limitation, any ordinance requiring the installation of a reasonable amount
of additional conduit when a permittee installs underground conduit for its
system). Before any installation is commenced, the permittee shall secure all
necessary permits, licenses and approvals from all appropriate departments,
agencies, boards or commissions of the city or other governmental entity as
may be required by law, including, without limitation, all utility line
permits and highway permits. A permittee shall comply in all respects with
applicable codes and industry standards, including but not limited to the
National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition) and the National Electric
Code (latest edition). A permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use
ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as may exist or may hereafter
be amended.



   (H)   Street vacation. If the city vacates or consents to the
vacation of public rights-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation
necessitates the removal and relocation of a permittee's facilities in the
vacated right-of-way, the permittee shall, as a condition of the permit,
consent to the vacation and move its facilities at its sole cost and expense
when ordered to so do by the city or a court of competent jurisdiction. The
permittee shall relocate its facilities to such alternate route as the city,
acting reasonably and in good faith, shall designate.



   (I)   Relocation. A permittee may request to relocate its facilities
above, below or within a public right-of-way. After taking into consideration
the public health, safety and welfare, the Director may grant, grant with
conditions, or deny such request. The Director shall not unreasonably deny
any request for a permit. A denial of any request may be appealed to the City
Manager, who shall make the final decision. If the city requests a permittee
to relocate, protect, support, disconnect, place underground or remove its
facilities because of street or utility work, or other public projects, the
permittee shall relocate, protect, support, disconnect, place underground or
remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense, to such alternate route
as the city, acting reasonable and in good faith, shall designate. The work
shall be completed within the time period designated by the city.



   (J)   Public emergency. The city shall have the right to sever,
disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy facilities of a permittee, without any
prior notice, if such action is deemed necessary by the Director, Police
Chief, or Fire Chief or their designees because of a public emergency. Public
emergency shall be any condition which, in the opinion of any of the
officials named, poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property
caused by any natural or man-made disaster, including, but not limited to,
storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, major water main breaks,
hazardous material spills, and so forth. The permittee shall be responsible
for repair at its sole cost and expense of any of its facilities damaged
pursuant to any such action by the city.



   (K)   “Miss Dig.” If eligible to join, a permittee shall
subscribe to and be a member of "Miss Dig," the association of utilities
formed pursuant to Act 53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, M.C.L.A.
§§ 460.701 et seq., and shall conduct its business in conformance with the
statutory provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (L)   Use of existing facilities; undergrounding. A permittee shall
utilize existing poles, conduits, pipelines and other facilities wherever
practicable, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or
additional facilities unless expressly authorized by the permit. Where
utility wiring is located underground, either at the time of initial
construction or subsequent thereto, a permittee's system shall also be
located underground unless otherwise expressly authorized by the permit. All
undergrounding shall be at the sole cost and expense of the permittee.



   (M)   Underground relocation. If a permittee has its facilities on
poles of a municipal electric utility, or any other public utility company
and such utility relocates its facilities underground, the permittee shall
relocate its facilities underground in the same location at permittee's sole
cost and expense.



   (N)   Pole/conduit/trench license agreement; notification. If a
permittee forfeits or otherwise loses its rights under a pole/conduit/trench
license agreement with any entity, then permittee shall notify the City
Manager in writing within 30 days.



   (O)   Identification. All personnel of a permittee and its
contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact
with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible
identification card bearing their name and photograph. A permittee shall
account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of a
permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified
as such to the public with the permittee's name.



   (P)   Utility cabinets. Utility cabinets shall be subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Proposed utility cabinets must not:



         (a)   Create an obstacle in the public rights-of-way;



         (b)   Block a driver's view of the street or sidewalk;



         (c)   Create an attractive nuisance to children;



         (d)   Interfere with essential services;



         (e)   Detract from the streetscape;



         (f)   Have a negative impact upon property owners'
rights to attractive, well-maintained public spaces and rights-of-way.



   (2)   Placement of a utility cabinet shall not be:



      (a)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (b)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk;



      (c)   Within 30 feet of an approach to a stop sign or traffic
control signal located at the side of the road or within the lawn extension;



         (d)   In a place or manner that blocks egress from an
emergency exit;



         (e)   Within ten feet of the intersection of a sidewalk
or street and the edge of a driveway;



         (f)   Within 75 feet of the center of the intersection
of two streets;



         (g)   Within ten feet of a tree;



         (h)   Within ten feet of a mailbox owned by the United
States Postal Service;



         (i)   Within 30 feet of the approach to  a bus stop;



         (j)    Within ten feet of an underground utility service
(if the utility is ground-mounted);



         (k)   Within 850 feet of another utility cabinet;



         (l)   In a public right-of-way adjacent to the front lot
line of a property.



      (3)   Utility cabinet specifications:



         (a)   There shall be only one cabinet per location;
however, co-location in the same cabinet may be permitted if approved by the
Director;



         (b)   Pole-mounted utility cabinets shall not exceed 30
inches in width, 12 inches in depth, and 72 inches in height, and shall be
mounted a minimum of 12 inches above grade;



         (c)   Ground-mounted utility cabinets shall have a
maximum height of five feet and shall not exceed 80 cubic feet in volume, not
including a meter box. The meter box shall not exceed 22 inches in width, 9
inches in depth and 42 inches in height. Ground-mounted utility cabinets with
or without meter boxes shall be mounted on a concrete pad that is not to
exceed 100 square feet;



         (d)   Utility cabinets shall be dark brown or green and
not display any advertising;



         (e)   Utility cabinets in the public rights-of-way shall
be mounted with their width parallel to the street;



         (f)   Ground-mounted utility cabinets in public parks
shall be landscaped with plant material sufficient to screen the cabinet from
view. The cabinet owner shall maintain the landscape materials and
replacement of them if damaged at the owner's cost;



         (g)   All utility cabinets shall clearly display on the
front of the cabinet an identifying number as well as the owner's name,
address, and emergency phone number;



         (h)   Utility cabinets shall be maintained in good
repair, and in a structurally sound and sanitary condition. The existence of
graffiti, stickers or other similar defacement of a utility cabinet shall
constitute an unsanitary condition. Failure of a cabinet owner to comply with
this division shall authorize the city to cause the proper restoration to be
made at the cabinet owner's expense. To ensure compliance with this division,
utility cabinets shall be inspected by the cabinet owner on at least a
bi-annual basis.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 11-8-10)



§ 114.21  CITY NOT LIABLE FOR INTERFERENCE.



   (A)   The city, and its officers, agents, elected or appointed
officials, employees, departments, boards, and commissions, shall not be
liable to a permittee or to its affiliates or customers for any interference
with or disruption in the operation of a permittee's system, or for any
damages arising out of a permittee's use of the public rights-of-way.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to recover all assessable costs
and expenses where public safety equipment, personnel or services are
provided to a permittee in response to a request or report of the need for
such equipment, personnel or services.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 11-8-10)



§ 114.22  INDEMNIFICATION.



   As a condition of a permit, a permittee shall defend, indemnify,
protect, and hold harmless the city its officers, agents, employees, elected
and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions from any and
all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments,
decrees, proceedings, and expenses of any nature (including, without
limitation, attorney's fees) arising out of resulting from the acts or
omissions of the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors,
successors, or assigns, but only to the extent of the fault of the permittee,
its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.23  INSURANCE.



   (A)   A permittee shall obtain and maintain in full, force and
effect for the duration of a permit the following insurance covering all
insurable risks associated with its ownership or use of its system:



      (1)   A comprehensive general liability insurance policy,
including completed operations liability, independent contractors liability,
contractual liability coverage and coverage for property damage from perils
of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as
XCU coverage, in an amount not less than $5,000,000.



      (2)   An automobile liability insurance policy covering any
vehicles used in connection with its activities under its permit in an amount
not less than $1,000,000.



      (3)   Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance
with statutory limits.



   (B)   The city shall be named as an additional insured in all
applicable policies. All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not
be canceled or modified unless 30 days prior written notice is given to the
city. A permittee shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance
evidencing such coverage as a condition of issuance of the permit and shall
maintain on file with the city a current certificate. All insurance shall be
issued by insurance carriers licensed to do business by the state or by
surplus line carriers on the Michigan Insurance Bureau approved list of
companies qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus
line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company or another
rating agency approved by the city.



   (C)   If the insurance policies required by this section are written
with deductibles in excess of $50,000, the deductibles shall be approved in
advance by the city. A permittee agrees to indemnify and save harmless the
city from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of
any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished by this chapter.



   (D)   The permittee shall require that its contractors and
subcontractors working in public rights-of-way carry in full force and effect
workers' compensation and employer liability, comprehensive general liability
and automobile liability insurance coverages of the types which permittee is
required to obtain under § 114.23(A) with appropriate limits of coverage.



   (E)   The permittee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance
with respect to the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and
appointed officials, department, boards, and commissions. Any insurance or
self insurance maintained by any of them shall be in excess of the
permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to it.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.24  ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF CONTROL.



   A permittee shall not assign or transfer a permit or any of its rights
under a permit, in whole or in part, voluntarily, involuntarily or by
operation of law, including by merger or consolidation or by other means,
without the prior written consent of the city, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The permittee shall reimburse the city for reasonable,
actual costs, including attorneys fees, incurred in the review of a request
by the permittee for consent to an assignment or transfer of the permit.
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the permittee may
grant a security interest in its rights under a permit in favor of a third
party without first obtaining the consent of the city. If a permit or any
rights thereunder is assigned or transferred in whole or in part with the
approval of the city, the terms and conditions of the permit and of this
chapter shall be binding upon the successors and assigns of the permittee.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if the transfer of a permit
is to an affiliate owned or controlled by the permittee, then no such
approval shall be required, but the permittee shall provide written notice
prior to any of such transfer to the city; provided however, no such transfer
will relieve the permittee of its obligation of compliance with this chapter
and permit.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.25  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   In addition to all other rights and powers reserved or pertaining to
the city, the city reserves as an additional separate and distinct remedy the
right to revoke a permit and all rights and privileges of a permittee in any
of the following events or for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   A permittee fails after 30 days prior written notice to comply
with any of the provisions of the permit or this chapter (except §
114.16(F)); or



   (B)   A permittee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; or



   (C)   All or part of a permittee's facilities are sold under an
instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permittee within 90
days from such sale; or



   (D)   A permittee violates § 114.16(F) of this chapter or otherwise
attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations
with the city; or



   (E)   The city condemns all of the property of a permittee within
the city by the lawful exercise of eminent domain; or



   (F)   A permittee abandons its system or fails to seek renewal of
its permit; or



   (G)   A permittee fails to pay any fines due for violations of this
chapter; or



   (H)   A permittee fails to pay any civil fines imposed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such as pursuant to an ordinance providing for civil
infractions. No revocation, except for reason of condemnation, shall be
effective unless the City Commission shall have adopted a resolution setting
forth the reason for the revocation and the effective date, which resolution
shall not be adopted without 30 days prior notice to the permittee and a
hearing at which the permittee receives rudimentary due process.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.26  REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Removal; underground. Upon revocation of a permit, or upon
expiration of a permit if the permit is not renewed, the permittee may remove
any underground facilities from the public rights-of-way which has been
installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other
opening of the streets along the extension of the facility to be removed.
Except as otherwise provided, the permittee shall not remove any underground
cable, pipe, conduit, or other facility which requires trenching or other
opening of the public rights-of-way. The permittee shall remove, at its sole
cost and expense, any underground cable, pipe, conduit, or other facility
which is ordered to be removed by the city based upon a determination, in the
sole discretion of the city, that removal is required in order to eliminate
or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets
for public purposes. Any order by the city to remove cable, pipe, conduit, or
other facility shall be mailed to the permittee not later than 30 calendar
days following the date of expiration or termination of the permit of its
intention to remove facilities and a schedule for removal by location. The
schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by
the city. Removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the
date of revocation or expiration of the permit. Underground facilities in the
public rights-of-way, which are not removed within such time period, shall be
deemed abandoned and, at the option of the city, title shall be vested in the
city.



   (B)   Removal; above ground. Upon revocation of a permit, or upon
expiration of a permit if the permit is not renewed, a permittee, at its sole
cost and expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the city,
remove from the public rights-of-way all above ground elements of its system,
including but not limited to poles, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, and
lines attached to or suspended from poles.



   (C)   Permits; restoration; completion. A permittee shall apply for
and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses, authorizations or other
approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security as required by
applicable law or ordinances of the city, shall conduct and complete the work
of removal in compliance with all such applicable law or ordinances, and
shall restore the public rights-of-way to the same condition they were in
before the work of removal commenced.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 114.35  OTHER PROVISIONS NOT WAIVED.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any
ordinances, Charter provisions, codes or regulations of the city.



   (B)   The city fully reserves its police powers to ensure and
protect the public health, safety, and welfare and fully reserves its
authority and power to amend this chapter at any time. The terms and
conditions of any permit shall be subject to compliance with any future
amendments of this chapter. The city fully reserves its right to exercise the
reasonable control of the public rights-of-way pursuant to Article VII, § 29
of the 1963 Michigan Constitution.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter or any permit shall limit any right
the city may have to acquire by eminent domain any property of a
rights-of-way user.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter or any permit shall limit the
authority of the city to impose a tax, fee, or other assessment of any kind
on any person. A rights-of-way user shall pay all fees necessary to obtain
all federal, state, and local licenses, permits, and authorizations required
for the construction, installation, maintenance, or operation of its system
within the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.36  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any provision of this chapter or any related ordinances is
held by any court of any federal, state or county agency of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal, state, or county
law, rule or regulation, said provision shall be considered a separate,
distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not
affect thevalidity and enforceability of the rest of the whole. In the event
that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded,
amended or otherwise changes, so that the provisions which had been held
invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the laws, rules and
regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full
force and effect and shall be binding on the parties, provided that the city
shall give the permittee 30 days written notice of such change before
requiring compliance with said provision.



   (B)   Any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, a permittee shall at all times comply with all laws and
regulations of the federal, state, county and city governments and all
administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, that if any law or
regulation shall prohibit a permittee expressly from performing a service
required hereunder, such that it would be in conflict with the terms of this
chapter or the provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances, then as soon as
such a conflict becomes known to the permittee, the permittee shall notify
the city in writing of what it believes the conflict to consist of and in
particular what law or regulation it believes to be conflict with this
chapter or the city's Code of Ordinances, and the permittee shall be thereby
excused from performance hereunder, provided that it acts in good faith
reliance thereon, pending an authoritative resolution of such conflict.



   (C)   If the city determines that a material provision of this
chapter or any related ordinances is affected by such action of a court or of
the federal, state or county government, the city shall have the right to
modify any of the provisions herein or in such related ordinances to such
reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and
purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.37  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the
municipal ordinance violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as
provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



§ 114.38  EXEMPTION.



   Public water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer utilities provided by the
City of Mount Pleasant shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 960, passed 11-8-10)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less
than $500 and not more than $5,000, plus costs and other sanctions, for each
infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased
fines as follows:



   (A)   First repeat offense not less than $1,000 and not more than
$10,000.



   (B)   Second and subsequent repeat offense not less than $2,000 and
not more than $20,000.



(Ord. 895, passed 10-13-03)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND PROPERTY



   132.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES



   133.   FIREWORKS



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   General penalty




Minors




   130.10   Contributing to delinquency of a minor



   130.11   Curfew



   130.12   Parental responsibility



Cross-reference:



   Alcohol offenses involving minors, see §§ 132.02 through 132.08



§ 130.01  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person violating a provision of this title for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an
amount not exceeding $500, or imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, or
both, unless the provision substantially corresponds to a violation of state
law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93
days, in which case the person may be fined an amount not exceeding $500, or
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 93 days, or both.



(Ord. 1018, passed 10-12-16)



MINORS



§ 130.10  CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR.



   No person shall accost, entice, or solicit any child under the age of
16 years to commit any act of depravity or delinquency.



§ 130.11  CURFEW.



   (A)   No child under the age of 12 years shall be permitted, caused
or suffered to be upon the public streets or in any public place between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless such child is accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to
accompany such child. No child under the age of 16 years shall be permitted,
caused or suffered to be upon the public street or in any public place
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., unless such child is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or some adult delegated by his
or her parent or guardian to accompany such child.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian;



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by a parent, guardian,
or custodian;



      (3)   Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity directed
by a parent, guardian, or custodian; or



      (4)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:



         (a)   Lawful employment;



         (b)   A lawful athletic, educational, or religious
event; or



         (c)   Interstate travel.



§ 130.12  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having
the care or custody of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter.



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY, AND PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Disorderly conduct



   131.02   Disturbing the peace



   131.03   Crossing police line or clear zone



   131.04   Discharging firearms and other devices



   131.05   Gambling devices, gambling prohibited



   131.06   Abandoned refrigerators



   131.07   Destroying, injuring or interfering with public property



   131.08   Prohibition of spray devices



   131.09   Trespassing



   131.10   Larceny



   131.11   Assault and battery



   131.12   Malicious destruction of property under $200



   131.13   Skateboards, roller skates, and inline skates



   131.14   Prohibited conduct in certain places



§ 131.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Engage in prostitution or solicit or accost any person
for the purpose of inducing the commission of prostitution.



      (2)   Engage in window peeping.



      (3)   While intoxicated in a public place, engage in conduct
that causes a public disturbance or endangers oneself or others.



      (4)   Make threatening, abusive, insulting, or sex-related
comments or gestures to a specific person or persons in a manner that
intimidates, offends, or otherwise provokes a reaction of fear, anger, or
apprehension in such person or persons, or is intended to cause such
reactions.



      (5)   Attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of any place
where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale or use of alcoholic beverages,
drugs or any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted.



      (6)   Solicit employment of legal services or services of
sureties upon criminal recognizance in or about a police station, police
headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building, or other public
building.



      (7)   Unnecessarily interfere with the passage of others
through a public place.



      (8)   Urinate or defecate on or about any public place outside
of an appropriate sanitary facility.



   (B)   Public place defined. For purposes of this chapter, the term
PUBLIC PLACE means any street, sidewalk, alley, park, parking lot, public
building, or any other property, public or private, open for use by the
general public.



(M.C.L.A. § 750.167)  (Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 577, passed 7-21-80;
Am. Ord. 804, passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. 1007, passed 12-14-15)



§ 131.02  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any noisy or
riotous persons to assemble in any house owned, occupied or controlled by
him/her, to the annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood and the public
peace.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to wilfully interrupt or disturb any
assembly of people met for the worship of God, within the place of such
meeting or out of it. (M.C.L.A. § 750.169)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent,
turbulent, quarrelsome, or disorderly manner, which would disturb the good
order, peace and dignity of the city, its inhabitants or persons.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person, with the purpose of causing
public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his or her conduct is
likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, to willfully use
abusive or obscene language or make an obscene gesture to any other person
when such words by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an
immediate breach of the peace.



(Ord. 900, passed 9-13-04)



§ 131.03  CROSSING POLICE LINE OR CLEAR ZONE.



   (A)   When any fire, accident, explosion, parade, calamity, public
disturbance or other occasion causes or may cause persons to collect on the
public streets, sidewalks or other areas of the city, the Director of Public
Safety or his/her designee may establish a police line or zone as may be
necessary for the purpose of affording a clearing for:



      (1)   the protection of persons and property;



      (2)   police officers, firefighters, emergency medical
personnel; and other personnel performing operations in accordance with their
duties;



      (3)   the exclusion of the public from the vicinity of a fire,
accident, explosion, calamity, other emergency or public disturbances;



      (4)   the passage of a parade; or



      (5)   the movement of traffic.



   (B)   Any person who shall knowingly cross any such line, knowingly
enter into any such zone, or remain in any such zone after being requested to
leave, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Provided, that bona fide and
properly identified representatives of the press and media, residents of the
zone, and such other persons as the Director of Public Safety or his/her
designee may authorize to cross such lines or be within such zone, may be
permitted to cross such lines or enter into such zone, and may remain in such
zone so long as they will not and do not interfere with emergency personnel
performing their duties.



   (C)   Every person present within such zone shall comply with any
necessary order or instruction of any police officer. Any person who refuses
to comply with the necessary order of a police officer shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 633, passed 9-3-85)



§ 131.04  DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER DEVICES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm
or other instrument producing a like effect and noise within the city, except:



      (1)   In the lawful defense of person or property;



      (2)   At regularly established indoor firearm ranges
authorized by the city;



      (3)   At such times and places as have been approved by the
City Commission, following a public hearing; and



      (4)   As otherwise permitted by law.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow,
crossbow, or compound bow, or to discharge any other type of device which
expels a projectile capable of causing death or serious physical injury,
anywhere within the city, except:



      (1)   At regularly established archery ranges authorized by
the city;



      (2)   At such times and places as have been approved by the
City Commission, following a public hearing; and



      (3)   As otherwise permitted by law.



(Ord. passed  - -  ; Am. Ord. 761, passed 7-24-95; Am. Ord. 860, passed
8-27-01; Am. Ord. 863, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 1026, passed 9-11-17)



§ 131.05  GAMBLING DEVICES, GAMBLING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any common
gambling house, or gaming room, or to permit on any premises owned, occupied
or controlled by him/her any apparatus or device used for gaming or gambling,
or to use such apparatus or device or to assist any other person to use same
for gaming or gambling purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to have
in his/her possession any policy or pool slips, tickets, checks, or any paper
which is marked additionally with any kind of notation indicating any form of
gambling, and the possession of such writing or device shall constitute,
prima facie, evidence of intention to use same for gambling.



Statutory reference:



   Gambling prohibited, see M.C.L.A. § 750.301 et seq.



§ 131.06  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave in a place accessible to
children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any
other container of any kind or size sufficient to permit the  entrapment 
or  suffocation  of  a  child  therein, without first removing the
snap-lock or other locking device from the lid or cover thereof.



(M.C.L.A. § 750.493d)



§ 131.07  DESTROYING, INJURING OR INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure or deface, or in
any manner interfere with or hinder the use of, any public building or any
public property whatsoever.



§ 131.08  PROHIBITION OF SPRAY DEVICES.



   (A)   Definition.     For the purpose of this section, SPRAY
DEVICE means a device or container which contains more than 3/4 ounce of
solution which ejects, releases or emits one of the following:



      (1)   More than 35 grams of any combination of
orthochlorobenzalmalononitrile and inert ingredients; or



      (2)   A solution containing more than 2% oleoresin capsicum.



   (B)   A person who uses a spray device to eject, release or emit
orthochlorobenzalmalononitrile or oleoresin capsicum at another person is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   A person shall not sell a spray device to a minor. A person
who violates this division is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (D)   Division (B) above does not prohibit either of the following:



      (1)   The reasonable use of a spray device by a law
enforcement officer in the performance of the law enforcement officer's duty.



      (2)   The reasonable use of a spray device by a person in the
protection of a person or property under circumstances which would justify
the person's use of physical force.



(Ord. 754, passed 8-22-94)



§ 131.09  TRESPASSING.



   Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of
another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the
owner or occupant, or the agent or servant of either, or any person remaining
upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom
by the owner or occupant, or the agent or servant of either, or any person
who enters or remains without lawful authority on fenced or posted lands or
premises of another without the consent of the owner or occupant, or the
agent or servant of either, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in § 130.01.



(Am. Ord. 964, passed 4-25-11)



Statutory reference:



   For similar state law, see M.C.L.A. § 750.552



§ 131.10  LARCENY.



   A person who commits larceny by stealing any of the following property
of another person is guilty of a misdemeanor:



   (A)   Money, goods, or chattels.



   (B)   A bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill
of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate.



   (C)   A book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due, or to
be delivered.



   (D)   A deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or other
valuable contact in force.



   (E)   A receipt, release, or defeasance.



   (F)   A writ, process, or public record.



(Ord. 828, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 1018, passed 10-12-16)



§ 131.11  ASSAULT AND BATTERY.



   A person who assaults or assaults and batters an individual, if no
other punishment is prescribed by law, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of no more than $500, or
both.



(Ord. 829, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 964, passed 4-25-11)



§ 131.12  MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY UNDER $200.



   A person who willfully and maliciously destroys or injures the personal
property of another person, if the amount of the destruction or injury is
less than $200, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or both imprisonment and a
fine.



(Ord. 837, passed 2-28-00)



§ 131.13  SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, AND INLINE SKATES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller
skate or inline skate in any city owned parking lot or in the Town Center
(the public property bordered by Main Street, Mosher Street and Broadway) at
any time.



   (B)   The City Commission may, by resolution, prohibit the use of
skateboards, roller skates or inline skates on public property. No person
shall ride a skateboard, roller skate or inline skate upon any public
property where it is prohibited by resolution of the City Commission and so
posted.



   (C)   The prohibitions contained in this section do not apply to a
police officer engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties.



   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in
accordance with the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance. The fine for a
violation of a municipal civil infraction under this section shall not exceed
$50. Any minor who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be dealt
with by the juvenile division of the probate court or as prescribed by the
laws of the state.



(Ord. 889, passed 4-14-03)



§ 131.14  PROHIBITED CONDUCT IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure the safety
and sense of safety of persons in the community by prohibiting interactions
with occupants of motor vehicles operating in traffic lanes and by ensuring
zones of personal safety for those engaging in certain activities.



   (B)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this division:



      ACCOST. To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as
would cause a reasonable person to apprehension for his or her personal
safety, of imminent bodily harm or of the commission of a criminal act upon
his or her person, or upon property in his or her immediate possession.



      FORCE ONESELF UPON THE COMPANY OF ANOTHER. That, after engaging
or attempting to engage another person in conversation or to induce them into
an exchange of any items in a public place, a person does one or more of the
following:



         (a)   Blocks the passage of the other person;



         (b)   Pursues and continues to address the other person
for at least ten feet as the other person attempts to walk away or verbally
expresses a desire not to so engage; or



         (c)   Otherwise engages in conduct which could
reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force the other person to
accede to a request or demand.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Shall have the same meaning a provided in § 131.01.



   (C)   Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Accost another.



      (2)   Force oneself upon the company of another.



      (3)   Enter or reach into a traffic lane in a public
right-of-way to render any service (except emergency medical or mechanical
services) or exchanging with, conveying to, or receiving from an occupant of
any vehicle in a traffic lane any funds or other items.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D), to solicit
money or other things of value:



         (a)   On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful
occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a
sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property;



         (b)   While located within 15 feet of the entrance to or
exit from any public toilet facility;



         (c)   While located within 15 feet of an automated
teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located
within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured
from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility;



         (d)   While located within 15 feet of any pay telephone,
provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or
other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of
the telephone booth or facility;



         (e)   While located within any public transportation
vehicle, or within 15 feet of any bus stop, taxi stand or rapid transit stop;



         (f)   While located within 15 feet from any person who
is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including,
but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; or



         (g)   While located within 15 feet of the entrance or
exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any
residence, business or athletic facility.



   (D)   Exceptions. Division (C) does not apply to:



      (1)   Soliciting money or other things of value on private
property with the consent or invitation of the property owner; or



      (2)   Soliciting money or other things of value from the
occupant of a residential unit, when such solicitation occurs at the front
entrance of the residential unit and the occupant has not asked the person
not to solicit on the property or posted a sign clearly indicating that
solicitations are not welcome.



      (3)   Soliciting emergency assistance from anyone when a
person is in immediate need of emergency medical care or a person is being
threatened by others with bodily harm.



(Ord. 1007, passed 12-14-15; Am. Ord. 1009, passed 4-25-16)



CHAPTER 132:  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES



Section




Alcoholic Beverage Offenses




   132.01   Public consumption; open container



   132.02   Furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors prohibited



   132.03   Purchase, consumption, and possession of alcoholic
beverages by minors prohibited



   132.04   Furnishing or using fraudulent identification



   132.05   Authority to stop violators; appearance tickets



   132.06   License sanctions



   132.07   Preliminary breath test



   132.08   Notice to parents or guardians



Cross-reference:



   Minors, see §§ 130.10 through 130.12



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE OFFENSES



§ 132.01  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION; OPEN CONTAINER.



   (A)   No alcoholic liquors shall be consumed on any public highway,
street, alley, public place, or place of amusement or recreation open to the
public not licensed by the state to sell alcoholic liquors.



   (B)   No person shall transport or possess any alcoholic liquor in a
container which is open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken, on the
public streets, sidewalks, or rights-of-ways of the city.



(Ord. 739, passed 4-27-92)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic
liquor on the public highways, street and alleys, vehicle parking lots, or
any public place within the city where the consumption of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited by the laws of the state.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prohibit public consumption, see M.C.L.A. § 436.34



§ 132.02  FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO MINORS PROHIBITED.



   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the
person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or
furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or
who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21
years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 789, passed 10-14-96)



§ 132.03  PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION, AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY
MINORS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or
attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic
liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily
alcohol content, except as provided in division (B).



   (B)   This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of
age from engaging in any of the following:



      (1)   Possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours
and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed
to sell or transport alcoholic liquor, if the alcoholic liquor is not
possessed for his or her personal consumption.



      (2)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is
enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational
institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision
of a faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the
consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course.



      (3)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in
connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not
prohibited by this section.



      (4)   Possessing alcoholic liquor in an undercover operation
under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of
the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer sponsored internal
enforcement action.



      (5)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the
commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless
the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the
minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the
local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation.



   (C)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as
follows:



      (1)   For the first violation, a person shall be guilty of a
civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $100. The court may
also order community service, participation in substance use disorder
services as defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368,
MCL 333.6230 and designated by the administrator of the office of substance
abuse services, and substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her
own expense as described in division (C)(4) below. A person may be found
responsible or admit responsibility only once under this division.



      (2)   If a violation of division (A) occurs after one prior
judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this
subsection is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the
court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to
successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered
by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $200, or both. A court may order
a minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder
services as defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368,
MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the Office of Substance
Abuse Services, to perform community service, to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in division
(C)(4) below, and sanctions against his or her operator's or chauffeur's
license as provided in section § 132.06.



      (3)   If a violation of division (A) occurs after two or more
prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under
this subdivision is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, if
the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to
successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered
by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $500, or both, as applicable. A
court may order a minor under this subsection to participate in substance use
disorder services as defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health Code, 1978
PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the Office of
Substance Abuse Services, to perform community service, to undergo substance
abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in
division (C)(4) below, and sanctions against his or her operator's or
chauffeur's license as provided in § 132.06.



      (4)   A court may order an individual found responsible for,
or convicted of, violating this section to undergo screening and assessment
by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated community
mental health entity as defined in Section 100A of the Mental Health Code,
1974 PA 258, MCL 330.1100a, to determine whether the individual is likely to
benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and
alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may order an individual subject
to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on
probation regarding, a violation of this section to submit to a random or
regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. The parent, guardian, or
custodian of a minor who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular
preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation.



      (5)   An individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of division (C)(2), or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile
delinquency proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of division (C)(2), the
court, without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a
determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile has
committed the offense, and with the consent of the accused, may defer further
proceedings and place the individual on probation. The terms and conditions
of that probation include, but are not limited to, the sanctions in division
(C)(3), payment of the costs including minimum state cost as provided for in
Section 18m of Chapter XIIA of the Probate Code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCL
712A.18m, and section 1j of Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1927 PA 175, MCL 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in Section
3 of Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 771.3. If
a court finds that an individual violated a term or condition of probation or
that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court
may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and
proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and
conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss
the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection shall be
without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is
not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of disqualifications
or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. An individual may
obtain only one discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The court
shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are
deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and
dismissal under this division. The secretary of state shall retain a
nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this
subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of the following:



         (a)   To a court, prosecutor, or police agency on
request for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized
this division.



         (b)   To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or
a law enforcement agency, on the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law
enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions:



            1.   At the time of the request, the individual is
an employee of the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department of
corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency.



            2.   The record is used by the department of
corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine
whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of employment or
whether an applicant meets criteria for employment.



      (6)   A misdemeanor violation of division (C) successfully
deferred, discharged, and dismissed under division (C)(5) is considered a
prior judgment for the purposes of division (C)(3).



   (D)   The following individuals are not considered to be in
violation of division (A):



      (1)   A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who
voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for
treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of
Sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b
to 750.520g, committed against a minor.



      (2)   A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of
the following criteria:



         (a)   Has consumed alcoholic liquor.



         (b)   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a
health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not
limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from
a violation of Sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328,
MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.



      (3)   A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or
emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical
assistance for a legitimate health care concern.



   (E)   If a minor who is less than 18 years of age and who is not
emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents
himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for
observation as provided under division (D), the health facility or agency
shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian of the individual
as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the name of a parent,
guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the health facility or
agency.



   (F)   In a prosecution for the violation of division (A) concerning
a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that
the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that
consumption is legal.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      (1)    ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirituous, vinous, malt, or
fermented liquor, powder, beer, wine, spirits, alcoholic liquids, and
compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever
name called, containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by
volume, which are fit for use for food purposes or beverage purposes as
defined and classified by the liquor control commission according to
alcoholic content as belonging to one of the varieties defined in MCL Chapter
436.



      (2)   ANY BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT. Either of the following:



         (a)   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of
urine.



         (b)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body
resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of
alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or
ceremony.



      (3)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. That term as
defined in Section 20904 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL
333.20904.



      (4)   HEALTH FACILITY OR AGENCY. That term as defined in
Section 20106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106.



      (5)   PRIOR JUDGMENT. A conviction, juvenile adjudication,
finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any of the
following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United States
substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state
substantially corresponding to a law of this state:



         (a)   This section or MCL 436.1701, 436.1703, or
436.1707.



         (b)   Section 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan Vehicle
Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625.



         (c)   Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.80176,
324.81134, and 324.82127.



         (d)   Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan Penal Code,
1939 PA 328, MCL 750.167a and 750.237.



      (6)   SACRAMENTAL WINE. Wine containing not more than 24%
percent of alcohol by volume which is used for sacramental purposes.



(Ord. 789, passed 10-14-96; Am. Ord. 964, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 1018,
passed 10-12-16; Am. Ord. 1032, passed 1-8-18)



§ 132.04  FURNISHING OR USING FRAUDULENT IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person
less than 21 years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100 or
both.



   (B)    A person who uses fraudulent identification to purchase
alcoholic liquor, or to enter a business where alcoholic liquor is sold, is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days
or a fine of not more than $100, or both.



   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of this section shall also
be subject to sanctions against his or her operator's or chauffeur's license
as provided in section § 132.06.



(Ord. 789, passed 10-14-96; Am. Ord. 838, passed 2-28-00; Ord. 1018, passed
10-12-16; Am. Ord. 1032, passed 1-8-18)



§ 132.05  AUTHORITY TO STOP VIOLATORS; APPEARANCE TICKETS.



   An officer or member of the Mount Pleasant Division of Public Safety
who witnesses a violation of § 132.03 may stop and detain the person for
purposes of obtaining satisfactory identification, seizing illegally
possessed alcoholic liquor, and issuing an appearance ticket.



(Ord. 789, passed 10-14-96)



§ 132.06  LICENSE SANCTIONS.



   Upon the entry of a conviction or a probate court disposition for a
second or subsequent violation of § 132.03, or any state or local law
substantially corresponding to § 132.03, or a violation of § 132.04,  the
court shall order that the Secretary of State suspend or deny the operator's
or chauffeur's license of such individual convicted of a second or subsequent
violation of § 132.03, or state or local law substantially corresponding to
§ 132.03,  or violation of § 132.04, as provided in Section 319 of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.319.



(Ord. 789, passed 10-14-96; Am. Ord. 1032, passed 1-8-18)



§ 132.07  PRELIMINARY BREATH TEST.



   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person less than
21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to
submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A legal presumption shall
be made by the court that the person less than 21 years of age has consumed
or possessed alcoholic liquor if a preliminary chemical breath analysis or
other acceptable blood alcohol test indicates the person's blood contained
.02% or more by weight of alcohol. A person less than 21 years of age who
refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required
in this section is responsible for a civil infraction.



(Ord. 789, passed 10-14-96)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



§ 132.08  NOTICE TO PARENTS OR GUARDIANS.



   Upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not
emancipated pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 772.1 - 772.6 allegedly consumed,
possessed, purchased or attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic
liquor in violation of § 132.03, the Mount Pleasant Division of Public
Safety shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the
person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian or
custodian is reasonably ascertainable. The notice shall be made within 48
hours of determining that the person who allegedly violated § 132.03 is less
than 18 years of age and not emancipated. The notice may be made by any means
reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited
to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If a person less
than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating § 132.03, then his or her
parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately.



(Ord. 789, passed 10-14-96)



CHAPTER 133:  FIREWORKS



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks



   133.03   Possession of consumer fireworks by a minor



   133.04   Prohibited conduct



   133.05   Permit required for articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks



   133.06   Sale; manufacture of fireworks



   133.07   Local state and federal law requirements



 



   133.98   Determination of violation; seizure



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Tat term as defined in section 1 of the Michigan
Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, M.C.L.A. § 57.1d, as amended.



   APA STANDARD 87-1. 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for construction
and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical
pyrotechnics, as published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of
Bethesda, Maryland.



   ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC. Pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are
similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but
not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer
fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or
UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce
visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500
and 1507, as amended, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1: 3.1.2, 3.1.3,
or 3.5. CONSUMER FIREWORKS does not include low-impact fireworks.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. That term as defined in section 8b of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, M.C.L.A. § 257.8b, as amended.



   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27
CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1.



   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a
flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.



   LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that
phrase is defined in APA standard 87-1: 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.



   MINOR. An individual who is less than 18 years of age.



   NFPA. The National Fire Protection Association headquartered at 1
Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts.



   NFPA 1123. The “Code of Fireworks Display,” 2000 edition, as
amended, developed by NFPA.



   HOLIDAY. Any of the following:



      (1)   New Years’ Day, January 1.



      (2)   Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in
January.



      (3)   Presidents’ Day, the third Monday in February.



      (4)   Memorial Day, the last Monday in May.



      (5)   Independence Day, July 4.



      (6)   Labor Day, the first Monday in September.



      (7)   Columbus Day, the second Monday in October.



      (8)   Veterans’ Day, November 11.



      (9)   Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November.



      (10)   Christmas Day, December 25.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)



§ 133.02  IGNITION, DISCHARGE AND USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   A person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the
city on the day proceeding, the day of, or the day after a holiday, but not
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. The ignition, discharge, and use
of consumer fireworks within the city are prohibited on all other days of the
year.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12; Am. Ord. 989, passed 8-25-14)  Penalty, see §
133.99



§ 133.03  POSSESSION OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS BY A MINOR.



   A minor shall not possess, ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.04  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks, articles pyrotechnics or display fireworks on public property,
school property, church property, or the property of another person without
that organization’s or person’s express permission to use those fireworks
on those premises.



   (B)   A person shall not use consumer fireworks, articles
pyrotechnics, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the
influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination
thereof.



   (C)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks, articles pyrotechnics, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks
during the pendency of “red flag” warnings as designated by the National
Weather Service, Grand Rapids, Michigan.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.05  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC, DISPLAY FIREWORKS.



   (A)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use articles
pyrotechnic or display fireworks for a public or private display within the
city, without a permit issued by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   Application shall be made to the Director of Public Safety by
the person seeking the permit on forms provided by the Michigan Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, together with an application fee in an
amount set from time to time by resolution of the City Commission.



   (C)   The Director of Public Safety shall not issue a permit unless
he or she is satisfied that the applicant has sufficient bond or insurance
protection as required in the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, 2011 PA 256, as
amended, M.C.L.A. § 28.466(2).



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.06  SALE; MANUFACTURE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The sale, possession and transportation of consumer fireworks,
articles pyrotechnics, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks in the city
shall be prohibited, except as allowed by the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act,
2011 PA 256, as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 28.451 et seq.



   (B)   The manufacture of consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnics,
display fireworks or low-impact fireworks is prohibited within the city
limits.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)



§ 133.07  LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL LAW REQUIREMENTS.



   Nothing contained within this chapter shall be construed to relieve a
person of any duties and obligations imposed under any local, state or
federal laws, rules, regulations, license or permit requirements.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)



§ 133.98  DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION; SEIZURE.



   If a city police officer determines that a violation of any section of
this chapter has occurred, the officer may issue a municipal civil infraction
citation and seize the consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks or low-impact fireworks as evidence of the violation.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable
as a municipal civil infraction with fines not to exceed $500. Violations
shall be prosecuted as set forth in Chapter 36 of this code.



   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided by this section, the
district court shall have the equitable jurisdiction to enforce any judgment,
writ, or order necessary to enforce any provision of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, abatement of any violating condition or the granting of
any injunctive relief.



   (C)   Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for
violating this chapter, the city may dispose of or destroy any consumer
fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks
that were retained as evidence in that prosecution.



   (D)   In addition to any penalty, a person that is found responsible
for a violation of this chapter shall be required to reimburse the city for
the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying consumer fireworks,
articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks that were
confiscated for a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 975, passed 8-13-12)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



   151.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



   152.   HOUSING LICENSING CODE



   153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



   154.   ZONING ORDINANCES



   155.   LAND DIVISION



   156.   HISTORIC DISTRICTS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   Street numbers on buildings



   150.02   Private swimming pools




International Building Code




   150.15   Adoption by reference



   150.16   Building permit fees



   150.17   Enforcement



   150.18   Building Board of Appeals



 



   150.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  STREET NUMBERS ON BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Display required.  Every building or structure, both new and
pre-existing, shall havedisplayed the proper street address number, in
accordance with the following criteria:



      (1)   One- and two-family dwellings.



         (a)   The digits used for street address numbers shall
be at least four inches in height and made of a durable and clearly visible
material, which shall contrast with the background. Two-family dwellings
shall have each individual unit clearly and permanently identified in
numerical or alphabetical order, without duplication.



         (b)   Digits shall be conspicuously placed, so that the
street address number is plainly visible from the street from which the
address is derived. Generally, digits shall be placed immediately above, on,
or adjacent to, the main entrance of each building.



         (c)   If the structure is located on the property so
that the posted numbers are not clearly readable from the roadway, due to
distance or intervening sight barriers such as, but not limited to,
shrubbery, terrain features or structures, the identification numbers shall
also be posted separate from the main structure in a fashion that is clearly
readable from the adjacent roadway. Such additional identification numbers
shall be either located centrally between the side boundaries of the property
or located immediately adjacent to the driveway providing ingress to the
property, and shall be located on the same side of the adjacent roadway as
the property it identifies.



      (2)   Multiple-family, commercial, and industrial buildings.



         (a)   All multiple-family, commercial, and industrial
buildings shall have each individual unit clearly and permanently identified
in numerical or alphabetical order, without duplication.



         (b)   If the structure is located more than 90 feet from
the centerline of the traveled portion of the adjacent roadway, the
identifying number shall be not less than six inches in height, but in any
case such numbers shall be of a size sufficiently large so that they are
readable from the centerline of the adjacent roadway by a person of normal
vision. Size and type of letters is subject to the review of the Fire Marshal
and/or Building Official and shall be submitted as a part of the building
permit application. In no case shall a certificate of occupancy be granted
before letters meeting the requirements of the Fire Marshal are in place on
the buildings.



         (c)   If the structure is located on the property so
that the posted numbers are not clearly readable from the roadway, due to
distance or intervening sight barriers such as, but not limited to,
shrubbery, terrain features or structures, the identification numbers shall
also be posted separate from the main structure in a fashion that is clearly
readable from the adjacent roadway. Such additional identification numbers
shall be either located centrally between the side boundaries of the property
or located immediately adjacent to the driveway providing ingress to the
property, and shall be located on the same side of the adjacent roadway as
the property it identifies.



         (d)   Owners of buildings that are connected with or
located so close to other buildings as to prevent access between such
buildings and which require a different route of access to the rear than that
to the front of the building shall cause the correct business name and street
numbers to be placed on the rear entrance door or immediately adjacent
thereto. Such names and numbers shall be not less than four or more than six
inches in height, and must consist of standard manufactured letters and/or
numerals in a color contrasting to the background upon which they are placed.
The name and number shall be placed so as to be plainly visible and readable
from the alley, service drive, easement, parking lot or any other rear
access. Generally, digits shall be placed immediately above, on, or adjacent
to, the rear entrance of each building.



   (B)   Responsibility for compliance.  If an owner, lessee or
occupant of any building or structure fails, refuses or neglects to comply
with any provision of this section, the Building Inspection Department, Fire
Marshal, and/or other department or enforcement officer(s) designated by the
Commission to enforce these provisions shall serve written notification on
such person, either personally or by mail, advising such person of the
applicable provisions of the section, the manner of noncompliance, the time
to remedy the noncompliance, and the penalty for violating this section.



(Ord. 794, passed 12-9-96)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.02  PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.



   (A)   Private swimming pools shall be equipped with filtration,
circulation and purification systems adequate to maintain the water in a
clean and healthful condition in accordance with the health requirements of
the city, or any other governmental body with jurisdiction.



   (B)   All discharge from private pools shall be as follows (in the
order of priority as set forth below):



      (1)   To the nearest sanitary sewer through either a temporary
or permanent connection established at the residence where the private pool
is located. If the quantity to be discharged is greater than 1,500 gallons
notification shall be given to the City of Mt Pleasant wastewater treatment
plant prior to proceeding with the discharge;



      (2)   To the surface of the ground at a rate no greater than
that which causes it to stay within the boundaries of private property on
which the pool is located, does not result in ponding, does not create a
nuisance in the right-of-way, or does not otherwise impinge on surrounding
property holders; or



      (3)   If the city determines, in its sole discretion, that
options (1) and (2) are not possible and/or practical, pool water may be
discharged to the storm water sewer nearest the property on which the pool is
located provided the property owner has treated the pool water to meet
federal and/or state discharge parameters and obtained the necessary National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits from the State of Michigan.



   (C)   Private swimming pools shall be completely enclosed with a
permanent fence with gate or gates, no less than four feet in height above
the ground level. Such fence or gate shall be designed and maintained so as
to permit access to the pool only with permission of the owner.



   (D)   The pool shall be located on its respective site in accordance
with Chapter 154.



   (E)   No lighting or electrical wiring shall overhang the surface of
the water or be located so as to present the possibility of falling into the
water. All lighting of the pool area shall be located so as not to reflect
upon adjacent property or buildings.



   (F)   The provisions of this section shall apply to any basin or
structure on private property for the holding of water for swimming, diving
and other aquatic recreation; provided, however, that these regulations do
not apply to any plastic, canvas or rubber pool temporarily erected upon the
ground, holding less than 300 gallons of water.



(Ord. 1029, passed 10-23-17; Am. Ord. 1035, passed 3-12-18)



INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE



§ 150.15  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   Pursuant to the State Construction Code Act, Public Act 245 of 1999,
the state has adopted the International Building Code and the International
Residential Code, as amended, collectively hereinafter referred to as the
"Code."



(Ord. 779, passed 11-27-95; Am. Ord. 817, passed 11-9-98; Am. Ord. 862,
passed 9-10-01; Am. Ord.864, passed 10-22-01)



§ 150.16  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Building permit fees shall be set by resolution of the
Commission. The determination of the value or valuation shall be made by the
Building Official and shall be used in computing the permit and plan checking
fees and shall be the total value of all construction work, including all
finished work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, elevators, fire extinguish systems, landscape, and other
permanent work or equipment.



   (B)   Where work for which a permit is required by the Code is
started or proceeded with prior to obtaining a building permit, the building
permit fees specified above shall be doubled, but the payment of such doubled
fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements
of the Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties
prescribed herein.



(Ord. 862, passed 9-10-01)



§ 150.17  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of the Code. For such purposes, he or she shall have the powers of
a law enforcement officer and may issue appearance tickets in accordance with
Public Acts 366 of 1984, being M.C.L.A. § 764.9c through 764.9g, or take any
other legal action necessary for enforcement of the Code.



(Ord. 862, passed 9-10-01)



§ 150.18  BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   In order to determine the suitability of alternative materials
and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of
the provisions of the Code, there shall be and hereby is created a Building
Board of Appeals consisting of six members who are qualified by experience
and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The
Building Official or his or her designee shall be an ex officio member and
act as secretary of the Building Board of Appeals. The Building Board of
Appeals shall be appointed by the Commission and shall hold office at its
pleasure. The Building Board of Appeals shall also have the right to
interpret and hear appeals of such other regulations as the Commission may
determine by resolution.



   (B)   The Building Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its investigation and shall render all decisions
and findings in writing to the Building Official with a duplicate copy to the
appellant and may recommend to the Commission such new legislation as is
consistent therewith.



(Ord. 862, passed 9-10-01)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure to remedy noncompliance with § 150.01 within ten days
following the service of the written notice as provided in § 150.01(B) shall
be punishable as a municipal civil infraction, and the person so cited shall
be prosecuted in accordance with the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance.
The fine(s) for commission of a municipal civil infraction under § 150.01
shall be set by resolution of the Commission.  (Ord. 794, passed 12-9-96)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert,
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the
city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of the Code.



(Ord. 794, passed 12-9-96; Am. Ord. 862, passed 9-10-01)



Cross-reference:



   Municipal civil infractions, see Chapter 36



CHAPTER 151:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



   151.01   Chapter in compliance with state and federal regulations



   151.02   Flood-resistant construction



   151.03   Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas



   151.04   Disclaimer of liability



§ 151.01  CHAPTER IN COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.



   This chapter is adopted in compliance with the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. § 4001 et seq., and all related state and federal
regulations.



(Ord. 984, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.02  FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION.



   As part of its responsibilities under the Stille-Derossett-Hale-Single
State Construction Code, Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the
city will enforce the requirements pertaining to flood-resistant construction
in Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code as well as all other
flood-related provisions throughout the Michigan Building Code and Michigan
Residential Code.



(Ord. 984, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.03  DESIGNATION OF REGULATED FLOOD PRONE HAZARD AREAS.



   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has produced a Flood
Insurance Study (FIS)  dated February 5, 2014 and entitled “Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) Report and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Isabella
County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions).”  FEMA has also produced (a) Flood
Insurance Rate Map(s) dated February 5, 2014, and marked as panel number(s)
26073C: 0193D, 0194D 0306D, 0307D, 0308D, 0309D and 0330D.  These documents
are adopted by reference and are declared to be a part of § 1612.3 of the
Michigan Building Code and to provide content to the “food hazards”
section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code.



(Ord. 984, passed 1-13-14)



§ 151.04  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   By taking on the responsibility of administering and enforcing the
Michigan Building Code and the Michigan Residential Code, the city is not in
any way ensuring or implying that a particular development will be free from
flooding or damage.  Moreover, neither this chapter nor Chapter 150 shall be
construed as a waiver of governmental immunity.



(Ord. 984, passed 1-13-14)



CHAPTER 152:  HOUSING LICENSING CODE



Section



   152.001   Title



   152.002   Purpose



   152.003   Scope



   152.004   Definitions



   152.005   Responsibilities of owners



   152.006   Responsibilities of occupants



   152.007   Referenced codes and standards



   152.008   Housing license application; fee



   152.009   Temporary license



   152.010   Enforcement



   152.011   Housing Board of Appeals



   152.012   Determination and notice of violation



   152.013   Notice



 



   152.999   Penalty



§ 152.001  TITLE.



   This code shall be known as the “Housing Licensing Code” and may be
cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)



§ 152.002  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum requirements for the
health, safety and welfare of the general public and the owners and occupants
of certain residential buildings.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)



§ 152.003  SCOPE.



   (A)   Application.  This Code shall apply to all rented or leased
buildings, including manufactured homes, or any portions thereof, that are
used or intended to be used for human habitation as a two-family dwelling, a
multi-family dwelling, a rooming dwelling, a boarding dwelling, a lodging
dwelling, or a hotel or motel.  This Code shall also apply to single-family
dwellings which are leased or rented by the owner for more than 180 days
during any 12-month period.  In addition, if a building that is licensed
under this Code but does not comply with all of the provisions of the Code is
thereafter unlicensed for one year or more, the building must thereafter
comply with this Code before it acquires a new license.



   (B)   Alterations.  Existing licensed buildings that are subject to
this Code, but that do not comply with this Code shall, at the time of
alteration or repair, and with respect to this new work, be altered or
repaired to conform to this Code, the City Building Code (Chapter 150 of the
Code of Ordinances), and the laws of the state of Michigan.



   (C)   Relocation.  Buildings which are moved or relocated shall be
considered new buildings and shall comply with all of the requirements of
this Code.



   (D)   Exception.  This Code shall not apply to a single-family
dwelling that is leased or rented for less than 180 days annually if the
owner of the single-family dwelling receives a principle home exemption from
the city, and the owner resides at least 180 days in the dwelling during the
annual time period in which the dwelling is leased or rented.



   (E)   Severability.  If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or a
violation of the laws of the State of Michigan, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 966, passed 4-25-11)



§ 152.004  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions in Chapter 2 of the 2012 Edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code are adopted as part of this Code.  The following
definitions shall also apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.



   BOARDING DWELLING. A rooming dwelling where meals are provided.



   BUILDING, EXISTING. A building constructed prior to this Code or one
which was built pursuant to a valid building permit.



   CEILING HEIGHT. The clear vertical distance from finished floor to the
finished ceiling.



   DESIGNATED AGENT.  A person, firm or corporation acting on behalf of,
representing, or caring for the property on behalf of the owner.



   DWELLING. A building including manufactured homes, used in whole or in
part for human habitation.



   EXIT.  A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way,
and shall include intervening doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways,
smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit courts, and yards.



   FAMILY.  A family is defined as one of the following:



      (1)   One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption
or guardianship, plus not more than one person not so related, living as a
single housekeeping unit in all zoning districts of the city.



      (2)   Two persons plus their offspring living as a single
housekeeping unit in all residential zoning districts in the city.



         (a)   One professional caregiver such as a nurse, nanny,
physical therapist, and the like, caring for either of the persons or their
offspring may also reside in the dwelling.



         (b)   OFFSPRING means descendants, including biological
offspring, adopted children, foster, and legal wards.



      (3)   A functional family living as a single housekeeping unit
which has received a permit pursuant to the Mount Pleasant Zoning Ordinance.



   FIRE OFFICIAL.  The duly appointed city Fire Official or a regularly
authorized assistant.



   FUNCTIONAL FAMILY. A group of people plus their offspring having a
relationship which is functionally equivalent to a family.  The relationship
must be of a permanent and distinct character with a demonstrable and
recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit.  FUNCTIONAL FAMILY does
not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge,
organization or group of students or other individuals where a common living
arrangement or basis for establishment of a housekeeping unit is temporary.



   GOOD REPAIR.  Suitable general condition after repair.



   GUEST ROOM.  Any room or rooms used, or intended to be used by a guest
which is a person sharing a rooming or dwelling unit in a non-permanent
status for not more than 72 hours, for sleeping purposes.  Every 100 square
feet of superficial floor area in a dormitory is a guest room.



   HABITABLE ROOM. Any room meeting the requirements of this Code for
sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes excluding such enclosed places
as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting
corridors, laundries, foyers, storage spaces, unfinished attics, utility
rooms, cellars and similar spaces.



   HOTEL and MOTEL.  A building containing six or more guest rooms used
for the accommodation of transient guests, whether rented or hired out to be
occupied or are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests whether rent is paid
in money, goods, labor, or otherwise.  If used or intended to be used or
designed primarily for accommodation of transient or non-transient guests,
the designation given by the owner (such as hotel, motel, motor inn, or
similar) may (but is not required) be used in determining its
classification.  It does not include any jail, hospital, or institution in
which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint.



   HUMAN HABITATION. Living quarters used by people whether for a portion
of a day or longer, containing certain provisions for sleeping and may
include provisions for living, cooking, dining, and sanitation.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body-ft. (2.4 m) or more in
width or 40 body-ft. (12.2 m) or more in length or, when erected on site, is
320 ft2 (29.7 m2) or more and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation,
when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating and
electrical systems contained therein; except that such terms shall include
any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the
size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily
files a certification required by the regulatory agency. Calculations used to
determine the number of square feet in a structure are based on the
structure's exterior dimensions, measured at the largest horizontal
projections when erected on-site.  These dimensions include all expandable
rooms, cabinets, and other projections containing interior space, but do not
include bay windows.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing three or more dwelling
units.



   OCCUPANT.  A person residing in a rented or leased building to which
this Code applies.



   OWNER. The record title owner of a parcel that is the site of a rented
or leased building to which this Code applies.



   ROOMING DWELLING. A building containing one or more units that is
approved for use by three or more persons, not meeting the definition of a
family, per dwelling unit.  This is also known as a ROOMING HOUSE.



   SUPERFICIAL FLOOR AREA.  Is the net floor area within the enclosing
walls of the room in which the ceiling height is not less than five feet
excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units, or
fixtures.



   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING.  A building used exclusively or designed for
occupancy of two individual families living independently of each other.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 986, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 1017,
passed 10-12-16)



§ 152.005  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.



   Every owner shall comply with the following provisions:



   (A)   At the time a new tenant occupies a vacant dwelling unit, the
new tenant shall be provided with a clean, healthful and safe dwelling unit,
free of visible mold and mildew.



   (B)   Maintain the public or shared areas of a dwelling or the
premises in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.



   (C)   Maintain in good repair every dwelling and premises and all
parts thereof, including, but not limited to, plumbing, heating, ventilating,
and electrical systems, and the interiors and exteriors of dwellings and
dwelling units.



   (D)   Maintain all fixtures, furniture, and furnishings that are
furnished by the owner in a safe condition and in good repair.



   (E)   Display in a conspicuous place in the common way of the
dwelling or dwelling unit a copy of the housing license or attach a copy of
the then current housing license to the lease at the time of execution of the
lease, or include the following provision in the lease:



      The City of Mt. Pleasant regulates rental properties within the
city.  Your Landlord will provide you a copy of the current housing license
for your property without charge upon your written request to the Landlord. 
You may also acquire a copy of the current housing license for your property
by contacting the Mt. Pleasant Fire Department at 989-779-5100.



   (F)   Include within the terms of every written lease the provisions
set forth in § 96.04.



   (G)   Cooperate with and assist the city in the enforcement of §
96.04.



   (H)   An owner or agent shall not allow a dwelling unit to be
occupied by more persons than such dwelling unit is licensed for or allow any
portion of the dwelling unit to be occupied in such a manner that any of the
provisions of this Code are violated.



   (I)   Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which
are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.



   (J)   Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this
Code or a previous regulation or Code under which the building was
constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. 
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required by applicable law to be removed from or shut off
for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit, except for such temporary
interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress.  The
requirements of this Code are not intended to provide the basis for removal
or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing
buildings.



   (K)   All water leaks shall be properly repaired.



   (L)   All locations within the building for which the Landlord is
responsible for under the lease, shall be kept free of visible mold and
mildew.



   (M)   Comply with other applicable provisions of this Code.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.006  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS.



   Every occupant shall cooperate with and assist the owner to keep and
maintain the building, dwelling unit and premises to meet the minimum
requirements of this Code.  In addition:



   (A)   Every occupant shall notify the owner or his/her agent in
writing of any water leaks or of any condition believed to be in violation of
this Code which directly affects the dwelling unit within a reasonable time
of discovery of any leaks or condition.



   (B)   Every occupant may at any time notify the Fire Official of any
condition believed to be in violation of this Code.



   (C)   Every occupant shall properly use all facilities, including
bathroom and kitchen facilities, and shall maintain them in a manner that is
sufficiently clean and sanitary so as not to place other occupants within
that building at risk for safety or health reasons.



   (D)   An occupant shall not sublet or allow any portion of the
dwelling unit to be occupied in such a manner that any of the provisions of
this Code are violated.



   (E)   Every occupant shall properly use the designated parking area
provided by the applicable lease and shall not park across sidewalks or lawns.



   (F)   Occupants of any dwelling unit shall be responsible jointly
and/ or severally for any violation of this section of this Code.



   (G)   Every occupant shall assist the owner and cooperate with the
City in compliance with and enforcement of the § 96.04.



   (H)   Occupants shall not place any article of furniture and/ or an
appliance manufactured for and intended primarily for indoor use out of
doors, in yards, on open porches, or patios.



   (I)   No occupant of any dwelling unit or building shall cause
intentional destruction nor allow the intentional destruction by others to
the dwelling unit or building or any part thereof.



   (J)   No occupant shall access, nor permit access by others, to the
rooftop of any structure.  Exception: access by property maintenance
personnel shall be permitted for necessary repairs.



   (K)   Every occupant shall properly use all facilities and maintain
them in a clean and sanitary manner free of excessive accumulations of waste
product or clutter, unwashed clothing and unclean dishware or cookware.  All
areas for which the tenant is responsible for under the lease, shall be kept
free of visible mold or mildew.



   (L)   No occupant of any dwelling unit or building shall allow any
refuse, debris or other substance to accumulate in the dwelling unit or
building or any other area, which said occupant has use or possession
thereof, which puts other occupants of that building at risk for health or
safety reasons.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.007  REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.



   Chapters 3 through 8 of the 2012 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby adopted as part of this Code and shall apply to
all buildings subject to the Code except as added, amended or deleted, as
follows:



   Add   301.4 Owner-occupied rental. Owner occupied portions of
residential dwelling buildings shall be inspected annually to insure that a
non-owner occupant of that residential dwelling building will not be subject
to risk because of safety or sanitary conditions existing in the
owner-occupied portion of the residential dwelling building.



   Add   301.5 New rental properties.  Each dwelling added to the
housing licensing program after the adoption date of this Code, shall be
considered as new construction with respect to fire resistance rate
construction, fire protection systems and means of egress and shall comply
with all sections of this Code and all other applicable codes.



   Amend   302.4 Weeds. The regulation of noxious weeds shall be
enforced in accordance with Section 96.05 of the Mt. Pleasant Code of
Ordinances, entitled Lawn Maintenance; Height; Removal of Noxious Weeds.



   Amend   302.8 Motor Vehicles.  The regulation of motor vehicles
shall be enforced in accordance with Section 96.09 of the Mt. Pleasant Code
of Ordinances, entitled Inoperative Motor Vehicles.



   Amend   304.14 Insect screens.  Every door, window and other
outside opening required for ventilation (see § 403.1) of habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas or any area where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and
every swinging screen or storm door shall have a self-closing device in good
working condition.



   Amend   304.18.1 Doors.  Each dwelling added to the housing
licensing program after the adoption date of this Code, shall provide all
doors providing access to a dwelling unit that is rented, leased or let shall
be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. 
Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key
and shall have a lock throw of not less than one-inch.  For the purpose of
this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt
lock.  Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturer's
specifications and maintained in good working order.  All deadbolt locks
required by this section shall be designed and installed in such a manner so
as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit without the use of a key, tool,
combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort.



   Add   304.18.4 Room security.  Each rooming dwelling added to the
housing licensing program after the adoption date of this Code, shall have
positive latching, lockable door hardware, on each sleeping room.



   Delete   308.2.1



   Delete   308.3.1



   Delete   308.3.2



   Add    308.4 Garbage facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in compliance with the City of Mt. Pleasant zoning requirements and Chapter
50 of the City Code of Ordinances.



   Add   308.5 Occupant responsibility. Occupants of all dwellings are
required to comply with Chapter 50 of the City Code of Ordinances.



   Amend   403.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at
least one openable window.  The total openable area of the window in every
room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area
required in Section 402.1.



            Exception:  Where rooms and spaces without openings
to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed
opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area
of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 
m2).  The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total
floor area being ventilated.



            Exception:  Where rooms and spaces without openings
to the outdoors comply with the Michigan Residential Code for light and
ventilation in habitable rooms.



   Add   403.6 Sleeping rooms with two doors. Sleeping rooms with an
exterior door in lieu of a window, shall be provided with a screen door at
the exterior for ventilation.



   Add   404.3.2 Elevated sleeping surface. Lofts, bunk beds or other
elevated sleeping surfaces shall be installed not closer than 30 inches from
the top of the sleeping surface to the ceiling of the room.  Lofts, bunk
beds or other elevated sleeping surfaces shall not block any opening or
window that is a required means of egress by any applicable code.



   Amend   404.3 Minimum ceiling heights for rentals added to the
housing licensing program after the adoption date of this code.  Habitable
spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and
habitable basement areas may be approved to be less than 7 feet if the
following conditions are met:



            1.   Ceiling height shall not be less than 6 feet
8 inches and the ceiling must be at least 3 feet 6 inches in width at that
height across the length of the room.



            2.   Bedrooms must have at least one window which
meets the current minimum egress size requirements of the local adopted
building code.



            3.   The smoke detectors must meet the minimum
requirements of the local adopted building code.



            4.   In habitable spaces where the ceiling height
is less than 8 feet, ceiling paddle fan blades shall have a clearance height
of 7 feet to the floor.



   Delete   Exceptions to Section 404.3



   Amend   404.4.2 Access from bedrooms.  Each dwelling added to the
housing licensing program after the adoption date of this Code shall not have
bedrooms which constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or
habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other
habitable spaces.



   Add   404.8 Minimum floor area.  Each dwelling subject to this Code
shall have the minimum number of square feet of total floor area as set forth
in Chapter 154 of the City Code of Ordinances, except as provided in §
154.007.



   Amend   602.3 Heat Supply. Heat shall be supplied so as to maintain
a minimum temperature of 68° F (20°) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
toilet rooms.



         Exceptions:



            1.   When outdoor temperature is below the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is
operating at its full design capacity.  The winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in the Michigan Plumbing
Code.



            2.   In areas where the average monthly
temperature is above 30° F (-1° C) a minimum temperature of 65° F (18° C)
shall be maintained.



   Add   702.5 Emergency escape. Emergency escape and rescue openings
shall be provided and installed in accordance with this Code, as follows:



            702.5.1 Emergency escape and rescue openings for
existing rental dwellings shall be provided and installed in accordance with
the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings.



            702.5.2 Emergency escape and rescue openings for each
dwelling added to the housing licensing program after the adoption date of
this Code shall be provided and installed in accordance with the Michigan
Residential Building Code.



   Add   703.3 Under-stair protection. Enclosed accessible spaces under
stairs shall have the walls, under stair surface and any soffit protected on
the enclosed side with minimum 1/2 inch gypsum wallboard, taped and
finished.  Use of under stair storage areas, which pose difficulty for
compliance with this Code, shall be discontinued and permanently sealed from
future use. Under stair mechanical areas, which pose difficulty for
compliance with this Code, may be protected by the installation of domestic
water sprinkler head(s) to completely protect the area.



   Add   703.4 Separation required.  Each dwelling subject to this
Code with attached garage or storage areas shall have a fire separation
extending the full width and height of the common wall(s) with the living
portion of the structure. All separations shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the Michigan Residential Building Code.  If the living space
of the structure is located above a garage space, the common floor/ceiling
between the two spaces shall be separated in accordance with the garage
separation section of this and all applicable codes.  Fire resistance-rated
floor-ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight against the
exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend tight to and be sealed to the
underside of the roof sheathing.



   Amend   704.2 Smoke alarms.  Each dwelling added to the housing
licensing program after the adoption date of this Code shall have smoke
alarms installed in accordance with the Michigan Residential Building Code. 
Dwellings licensed on or before the adoption date of the Code shall comply
with State of Michigan law as amended for the Michigan Building Code
(R408.30446), the Michigan Residential Building Code (R408.30546) and the
Michigan Rehabilitation Code (R408.30566). In addition, existing buildings
constructed after November 6, 1974, that do not comply with state law shall
conform to state law when battery operated smoke alarms expire.  Finally,
when any new smoke alarm is installed in any dwelling licensed under this
Code after this date, the smoke alarm shall comply with the following
provisions:



            704.2.1 A smoke alarm shall receive its primary power
from the building wiring (provided that such wiring is served from a
commercial source) and shall be equipped with a back-up battery.



            704.2.2 A smoke alarm shall be sealed and have a
non-removable, non-rechargeable battery which will last ten (10) years.



   Delete    704.3



   Delete    704.4



   Add    704.5 Early detection with elevated sleeping surfaces. 
Sleeping rooms or areas with elevated sleeping surfaces such as bunk beds or
lofts shall require the installation of a smoke detector in said sleeping
room.  It shall be the responsibility of the provider of the loft or bunk to
provide a smoke detector that is sealed and has a non-removable,
non-rechargeable battery that is capable of operating the smoke alarm in the
normal condition for a life of at least 10 years.  This smoke detector must
be mounted on the ceiling surface in accordance with manufacturers
requirements.



   Add    704.6 Smoke alarm maintenance. Smoke alarms shall be
maintained in good working condition and shall be replaced in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations and the detector listing.  Smoke alarms
shall be maintained free of accumulations of dirt, dust and other materials
that may impede operation. Covers shall be maintained on all alarm units for
proper testing.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 1017, passed 10-12-16)  Penalty, see §
152.999



§ 152.008  HOUSING LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall occupy a dwelling subject to this Code unless
a current, unrevoked housing license has been issued by the Fire Official, or
designee, for the specific named dwelling.



   (B)   No person shall operate or permit occupancy of a dwelling
subject to this Code unless a current, unrevoked housing license has been
issued by the Fire Official, or designee, for the specific dwelling in the
name of the owner.



   (C)    No person who manages a property on behalf of an owner shall
permit occupancy of a dwelling subject to this Code unless a current,
unrevoked housing license has been issued by the Fire Official, or designee,
for the specific dwelling in the name of the owner.



   (D)   The following shall apply to the issuance of any housing
license:



      (1)   Application for a housing license or for renewal shall
be made in writing by the owner to the Fire Official, on forms furnished by
the Fire Official, and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee established
pursuant to division (E) below. The owner’s signature is required on the
form.



         (a)   If after inspection(s) by the Fire Official, or
designee, the dwelling is found to be in accordance with all provisions of
this Code, and all applicable fees have been paid, a housing license will be
issued.



         (b)   An initial housing license shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of issuance (unless sooner revoked). Any
successive renewal of the housing license shall be valid for a one-year
period from the date of expiration of the initial or any successive license
renewal, except the Fire Official is authorized, for the initial housing
license issued for a dwelling, to issue the housing license for a period of
up to one year and nine months for the purpose of adjusting the time when
such housing license expires.



      (2)   A violation of this Code shall not prevent the issuance
of a housing license, unless the Fire Official determines existing conditions
constitute either: (a) a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of those
who may occupy the dwelling; or (b) a hazard to the health, safety, or
welfare of the community.



      (3)   Applicants shall designate in writing with each
application or renewal, an agent upon whom service or notice under this Code
and service or process for violation of this Code may be made in the absence
of the owner.  The agent designated must reside in the county to receive
such notice.  This designated agent must give written approval for the use
of his/her name as the designated agent.  A violation of this section is a
misdemeanor.



      (4)   Every person holding a housing license shall provide in
the written lease a provision that the tenant or roomer will allow the Fire
Official, or his/her designee, access to the dwelling and/or dwelling unit
for the purpose of inspection required as a prerequisite to granting or
renewal of a housing license, or for the purpose of investigating a complaint.



      (5)   No housing license is transferable to another dwelling,
and each person issued a housing license shall give notice in writing to the
Fire Official within seven days after having conveyed title, or assigned,
transferred, or otherwise disposed of legal control of any licensed
dwelling.  Such notice shall include the name and address of persons
succeeding to the ownership or control of such dwelling, and to whom the
housing license is to be transferred.  Within ten days of any transfer of
ownership, the assigned shall comply with division (D)(3) above.



      (6)   Application for the renewal of a housing license shall
be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the existing housing
license.  Late applications will be charged a late fee.



      (7)   A record of all housing licenses issued shall be kept on
file in the offices of the Fire Official, and copies will be furnished upon
request.  The Commission shall set this fee by resolution from time to time.



   (E)   Housing license fees shall be set by resolution of the
Commission.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 966, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 1022,
passed 3-27-17)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.009  TEMPORARY LICENSE.



   The Fire Official may issue a temporary housing license for all or part
of a dwelling in the process of erection or alteration if the dwelling or
part thereof to be occupied complies with the provisions of this Code. No
temporary housing license may be issued for longer than six months, and no
temporary housing license shall be effective more than five days after the
erection or alteration of the dwelling is completed.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)



§ 152.010  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   General.  The Fire Official shall enforce the provisions of
this Code.



   (B)   Inspections.  The Fire Official, or designee, shall make all
required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals.  All reports of such inspections shall be in
writing and be certified by a responsible Officer of such approved agency or
by the responsible individual.  The Fire Official is authorized to engage
such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical
issues that arise.



   (C)   Right of entry.  The Fire Official, or designee, is
authorized to enter all buildings or structures subject to this Code at
reasonable times in order to inspect the buildings or structures, subject to
constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures.  If entry
is refused or not obtained, the Fire Official is authorized to pursue
recourse as provided by law.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)



§ 152.011  HOUSING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation.  A Housing Board of Appeals is hereby created to
provide a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Code and to
give relief where unnecessary hardship would result from carrying out the
strict letter of this Code.  The duty of the Board shall be to consider
appeals from decisions of officials charged with the enforcement of this Code
and to determine in particular cases whether any deviation from the strict
enforcement of this Code will violate the intent of this Code or jeopardize
the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Membership and appointment.  The Building Fire and Sanitary
Sewer Board of Appeals shall perform the duties of the Housing Board of
Appeals.



   (C)   Public meetings.



      (1)   The Housing Board of Appeals shall meet in a fixed
place, and all meetings shall be open to the public.



      (2)   When an appeal has been properly filed and is to be
considered, the Housing Board of Appeals shall give at least ten days notice
of the time and place of the hearing in a daily newspaper of general
circulation in the city.  The Housing Board of Appeals shall also give five
days notice by personal service or by mail to the applicant, and Fire
Official, and, when an appeal applies to the condition or appearance of the
outside of a building or to conduct by an occupant which the Housing Board of
Appeals reasonably believes may adversely impact neighboring properties, to
any person to whom real property is assessed that is within 100 feet of the
premises of the appeal, and such notice will be addressed to the respective
owners at the address given on the last assessment roll.  Any party may
appear at such hearings in person or by agent.



   (D)   Rules, minutes and records.  The Housing Board of Appeals
shall adopt its owns rules or procedure and keep a record of its proceedings,
showing the action of the Board.  Such records shall be considered public
records.



   (E)   Appeal cases.  Any person affected by any notice and order
which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this Code who has
not otherwise been offered a hearing under this Code may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Housing Board of Appeals, provided
that such person shall file in the office of the Fire Official a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth the name, address, and
phone number of the petitioner and a brief statement of the grounds for such
hearing.  Petition shall be filed within ten days after the day the notice
of order is served.  Upon receipt of such a petition, the Fire Official
shall set a time for the hearing before the Housing Board of Appeals and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof.



   (F)   Fee for appeal cases.  A fee shall be paid to the City
Treasurer before filing a petition as set forth in division (E) above.  The
Commission shall set this fee by resolution.



   (G)   Stay of order.  Any determination made by the Fire Official
which is appealed to the Housing Board of Appeals under division (E) above
shall be stayed until a disposition of the appeals is made by the Housing
Board of Appeals.



   (H)   Action of Board.  After a hearing, the Housing Board of
Appeals shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice and order depending
upon its findings. If it clearly appears that, by reason of special
conditions, undue hardship would result from the strict application of any
section of this Code, the Housing Board of Appeals may permit a variance from
the mandatory provisions thereof in such a manner that the public safety
shall be secured, substantial justice done, and the spirit of the provisions
of this Code upheld.  All decisions to permit a variance under this section
shall be by a majority vote of the total membership of the Board, excluding
the alternate member.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)



§ 152.012  DETERMINATION AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   If upon inspection the Fire Official finds a violation of this
Code, he/she shall issue a notice and order directed to the owner of record
stating the date of inspection, the name of the inspector, the nature of the
violation, and the time within which the correction shall be completed.



   (B)   A violation which is determined by the Fire Official to
constitute a hazard to health or the occupants or the community as a whole,
shall be ordered corrected within the shortest reasonable time, and notice of
having begun compliance shall be given to the Fire Official by the owner
within 48 hours.  All other violations shall be corrected within 30 calendar
days from the date of notice.



   (C)   At the end of the period of time the Fire Official has allowed
for the correction of any violation notice as provided, the Fire Official
shall reinspect the licensed dwelling, and if he/she determines that the
conditions requiring corrections set forth in the notice sent have not been
corrected, the Fire Official may issue an order notifying the owner of the
continuing violation(s) and schedule a hearing to suspend the housing license
under the following procedure:



      (1)   The hearing will be held before the Building Official,
the Department of Public Works Director, and the Planning and Economic
Development Director.



      (2)   Notice of the continuing violation(s) and the date and
place of the hearing will be provided to the owner at least five days before
the hearing.



      (3)   At the hearing, the Fire Official, or designee, shall
present evidence to establish that a violation of the Code exists.



      (4)   The owner shall have the right to present evidence and
ask questions of the Fire Official, or designee.



      (5)   The Fire Official, or designee, shall have the right to
ask questions of the owner.



      (6)   The hearing panel shall determine, by a preponderance of
the evidence, if a violation of the Code exists and if the housing license is
suspended.



      (7)   Within seven days after the hearing, the hearing panel
shall present a written decision to the Fire Official and the owner.



   (D)   Any person whose housing license under this section has been
suspended shall be entitled to an appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals. 
If no appeal is properly presented within 21 days following the issuance of
the order of suspension, the housing license shall be revoked except that if
prior to the revocation of the housing license any person whose housing
license has been ordered suspended may request reinspection, upon a showing
that the violation or violations cited in the notice have been corrected.



   (E)   If, upon reinspection pursuant to the request of the person
whose housing license has been ordered suspended but not yet revoked, the
Fire Official finds the dwelling in connection with which notice was issued
is now in compliance with this Code and with applicable rules and regulations
issued pursuant thereto, he/she shall reinstate the housing license.  A
request for reinspection shall not extend the suspension period.



   (F)   If an appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals is taken, and if
the Housing Board of Appeals does not reverse the decision, the housing
license shall be revoked within ten days following the denial of the appeal
by the Housing Board of Appeals.



   (G)   If an owner or occupant fails to comply with an order of
suspension which has not been appealed, or which the Housing Board of Appeals
has sustained, the Fire Official or his/her agent may take action to abate or
enjoin the violation and enforce the provisions of this Code.



   (H)   When an uncorrected violation creates an imminent danger to
the health and safety of the occupants of the dwelling or premises, the city
may file an action seeking a preliminary injunction or other temporary relief
appropriate to remove such danger during the pendency of any action.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)



§ 152.013  NOTICE.



   (A)   Service and terms. All notices shall be in writing and shall
be deemed given when one of the following is done:



      (1)   Personal service.



      (2)   A copy of such notice is sent by certified mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested.



      (3)   If no address so appears nor is known to the Fire
Official, a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner at the address of
the building or structure and a copy of the notice and order shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the building or structure.



      (4)   Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided
shall be effective on the date of mailing; proof of service of the notices
and the manner of such service shall be made by affidavit sworn to by the
person affecting such service, declaring time, date, and the manner in which
the service was made.  The affidavit, together with any receipt for mailing
and any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail,
shall be affixed to the copy of the notice retained by the Fire Official.



   (B)   Notice.  The failure of any person to receive notice as
provided for above shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken
under this Code.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in the sections above, any person violating
a provision of this Code shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction and subject to a fine set by the court.



   (B)   Fines for permitting occupancy of unlicensed dwellings, in
violation of divisions (B) and (C) of § 152.008, shall be as follows:



      (1)   First offense         $50.



      (2)   Second offense, or offense by an individual who knew or
should have known about the city’s housing licensing requirements. An
individual who owns, manages, or is an employee or principal of an entity
that owns or manages a licensed rental dwelling in the city is presumed to
know about the city’s licensing requirements
                     $2,500.



      (3)   Each subsequent offense   $5,000.



(Ord. 927, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-24-11; Am. Ord. 1022,
passed 3-27-17)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   153.01   Short title



   153.02   Purposes



   153.03   Definitions



   153.04   Compliance required



   153.05   Minimum requirements; greater restrictions



   153.06   Review fees



   153.07   Variance




Subdivision Procedure




   153.20   Introduction



   153.21   Initial plat investigation



   153.22   Preliminary plat (stage 1)



   153.23   Preliminary plat (stage 2)



   153.24   Final plat




Design Layout Standards




   153.35   Development guides



   153.36   Streets



   153.37   Blocks



   153.38   Lots



   153.39   Natural features



   153.40   Flood plains




Improvements




   153.50   General provisions



   153.51   Streets



   153.52   Utilities



   153.53   Sidewalks, public ways and driveways



 



   153.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be designated as the “City of
Mount Pleasant Subdivision Regulations Ordinance.”



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.02  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the orderly growth and
harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic
circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major
thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve
individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; to secure
adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage, and
other health requirements; to secure adequate provisions for recreational
areas, school sites, and other public facilities; and to provide logical
procedures for the achievement of these purposes.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access
to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   BLOCK.  Property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and
railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between
any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development.



   CITY CLERK.  The City Clerk of the City of Mount Pleasant.



   COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Mount Pleasant.



    DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS  The staff engineer of the municipality.



   EASEMENT.  A specific area of land over which a liberty, privilege, or
advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some
particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and
which shall be designated a “public” or “private” easement, depending
on the nature of the user.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The Commission of the City of Mount Pleasant,
Isabella County, Michigan.



   IMPROVEMENTS.  Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, culverts, bridges, and other additions to the natural state of land
which increases its value, utility or habitability.



   LOT.  A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is
described and fixed in a recorded plat.  (M.C.L.A. § 560.102)



   MAJOR STREETS or THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The part of the Master Plan which
sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed
streets and thoroughfares.



   MASTER PLAN.  The comprehensive land use plan for the municipality,
including graphic and written proposals indicating the general locations
recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning
districts, and all physical developments of the municipality, including any
unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such plan
or parts thereof adopted by the Planning Commission.



   MUNICIPAL PLANNER or PLANNER.  The City of Mount Pleasant.



   PERSON.  Individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or association.



   PLAT.  A map or chart of a subdivision of land.



      (1)    PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE 1).  A map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate
basis for review and to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in
this chapter.



      (2)    PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE 2).  A map showing all
requisite details of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving
authority for purposes of preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance
with the Subdivision Act.



      (3)    FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision
providing substantial conformance to the Preliminary Plat (Stage 2) of the
subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Subdivision
Act and this chapter and suitable for recording by the County Register of
Deeds.



   PARCEL or TRACT.  A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
described as provided for in the Subdivision Act.



   PROPRIETOR.  A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or combination of any of them, which may hold any ownership, or
interest in land, whether recorded or not.



   PUBLIC RESERVATION.  A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for
public use and made available for public use and acquisition.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  All persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships, or
municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam,
telephone, sewer, or other services of a similar nature.  (M.C.L.A. §
560.102)



   PUBLIC WALKWAY.  A right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a
pedestrian access through residential acres, and located so as to connect to
two or more streets, or a street and a public land parcel.



   SECRETARY.  The Secretary to the Planning Commission.



   STREET.  Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway;
or, a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
approved by official action; or, a street or way on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds. A street includes the
land between the street right-of-way lines whether improved, or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and
lawns.



      (1)    MAJOR THOROUGHFARE.  An arterial street of great
continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic way for both
the immediate municipality area and region beyond, and may be designated on
the city's Major Thoroughfare Plan, as a major thoroughfare, parkway,
expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic
structure of the street plan.



      (2)    COLLECTOR STREET (SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE).  A street
used primarily to carry traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares.



      (3)    MINOR STREET.  A street of limited continuity used
primarily for access to abutting residential properties.



      (4)    MARGINAL ACCESS STREET.  A minor street paralleling
and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.



      (5)    BOULEVARD STREET. A street developed to 2 two-lane,
one-way pavements, separated by a median.



      (6)    TURN-AROUND. A short boulevard street permanently
terminated by a vehicular turn-around.



      (7)    CUL-DE-SAC STREET.  A minor street of short length,
having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other
end by a vehicular turn-around.



   SUBDIVISION ACT.  The Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 238 of 1967,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq, as amended.



   SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION.  The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or
tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose
of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where
the act of division creates five or more parcels of land, each of which is
ten acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land, each of which is
ten acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period
of ten years. SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION does not include a property transfer
between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel
is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be
considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of
the Subdivision Act or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance. 
(M.C.L.A. § 560.102)



   SURVEYOR.  Either a land surveyor who is registered in this state as a
registered land surveyor or a civil engineer who is registered in the state
as a registered professional engineer.



   ZONING ORDINANCES.  The City of Mount Pleasant Zoning Ordinances.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.04  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   All subdivision or project improvements within the municipality
installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way or public
easements, or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the municipality, shall
comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this chapter or any
other related ordinance.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.05  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and general welfare of the city. These regulations are not intended to
repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any manner interfere with existing regulations
or laws of the city nor conflict with any statutes of the state or the county
except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations
impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or
regulations.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.06  REVIEW FEES.



   Preliminary and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering
fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other
applicable development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as provided
for by ordinance or by resolution of the governing body. All fees shall be
paid to the City Clerk.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.07  VARIANCE.



   (A)   Variance for hardship.  The governing body may authorize a
variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship may
result from strict compliance and provided the variance does not pertain to
requirements of the Zoning Ordinances. In granting any variance, the
governing body shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or
desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required herein
below, the governing body shall take into account the nature of the proposed
use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect
of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No
variance shall be granted unless the governing body or Commission finds:



      (1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions
affecting said property such that the strict application of the provisions of
this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his/her
land.



      (2)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.



      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the
territory in which said property is situated.



   (B)   Variance for complete community.  The governing body may
authorize a variance from these regulations in case of a plat request for a
planned unit development where such development is permitted by the Zoning
Ordinances.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE



§ 153.20  INTRODUCTION.



   The preparation of a subdivision for platting may be preceded by an
initial investigation and shall go through two phases: Preliminary Plat
(Stages 1 and 2) and Final Plat, all in accordance with the procedure as
follows in this subchapter.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.21  INITIAL PLAT INVESTIGATION.



   Prior to the preparation of preliminary plat, it is suggested that the
proprietor meet informally with the municipal departments concerned to
investigate the procedures and standards of the municipality with reference
to this Subdivision Regulations Ordinance and with the proposals of the
master plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is
located. The proprietor should concern himself/herself with the following
factors:



   (A)   The proprietor should secure a copy of the Zoning Ordinances,
Subdivision Regulations, engineering specifications, and other similar
ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so
as to make himself/herself aware of the requirements of the municipality.



   (B)   The area for the proposed subdivision should be properly zoned
for the intended use.



   (C)   An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the
adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the
proposed subdivision should be made by the proprietor.



   (D)   The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to
major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares, should be
investigated by the proprietor.



   (E)   Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of
the municipality should be investigated by the proprietor and their
availability to the proposed subdivision determined.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.22  PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE 1).



   The procedure, under this stage 1, for preparation and submittal of a
preliminary plat of the land area to be subdivided shall be as follows:



   (A)   Identification and description.  The preliminary plat (stage
1) shall include:



      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision.



      (2)   Location by section, town, and range, or by other legal
description.



      (3)   Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner proprietor,
and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision
layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his/her ownership interest in the
land.



      (4)   Scale of plat, 1 inch = 100 feet as minimum acceptable
scale.



      (5)   Date, northpoint.



   (B)   Preparation.  The preliminary plat (stage 1) should be drawn
to scale and show the arrangement of lots, blocks, and streets. Dimensions of
all lots shall be shown, but may be approximated. It is the intent of this
chapter that preliminary plat (stage 1) need not be done in precisely
engineered plans but be only in sufficient detail to permit planning review.
At this stage, the proprietor should expect that the Planning Commission may
require major alterations to be made in the plat if it is found necessary. It
is not necessary that the preliminary plat (stage 1) be prepared by and
sealed by a surveyor; provided, however, that the outside dimensions of the
plat shall be based upon an accurate boundary survey prepared by a surveyor
or detailed by existing available information from previous surveys
acceptable by the Planning Commission.



   (C)   Existing conditions.  The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall
include:



      (1)   An overall area map at a scale of not less than 1" =
1,000€ showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings
within one-half mile such as section lines or major streets or collector
streets shall be provided.



      (2)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or
corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property
dimensions.



      (3)   Property lines and owner's names of adjacent tracts of
subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being
proposed for subdivision, including those of areas across abutting roads.



      (4)   Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted
streets and private streets and private or public easements within, on or
adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located
across abutting roads.



      (5)   Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains
and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being
proposed for subdivision.



      (6)   Topography drawn as contours with an interval of two
feet. Topography to be based on U.S.G.S. datum.



   (D)   Proposed conditions.  The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall
include:



      (1)   Layout of streets indicating proposed street names,
right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also
the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways.



      (2)   Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots,
including building setback lines showing dimensions.



      (3)   Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated
or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the
subdivision.



      (4)   An indication of the ownership, and existing and
proposed use of any parcels identified as “excepted” on the preliminary
plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as
“excepted”, the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could
be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning
district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to layout
of the proposed preliminary plat.



      (5)   An indication of the system proposed for sewage by a
method approved by the Director of Public Works.



      (6)   An indication of system proposed for water supply by a
method approved by the Director of Public Works.



      (7)   An indication of storm drainage proposed by a method
approved by the Director of Public Works and, if involving county drains, the
proposed method of drainage shall be acceptable to the County Drain
Commissioner.



      (8)   In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a
given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the
preliminary plat shall include the proposed layout subdivided first shall be
clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the
method of development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent
plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the
proprietor is subdivided.



   (E)   Filing and review.



      (1)   Ten copies of the preliminary plat (stage 1) of the
proposed subdivision together with written application in triplicate, shall
be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Commission. Application forms
are available from the secretary of the Planning Commission.



      (2)   Submittal with the Secretary shall be at least 21 days
prior to the regular Commission meeting (which meeting shall be considered as
the date of filing) at which the proprietor will be scheduled to appear.
Should any of the data required in this section of this chapter be omitted,
the secretary shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required and
Commission action delayed until the required data is received. The Commission
shall act on the preliminary plat (stage 1) within 30 days after the date of
filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time in writing.



      (3)   The Secretary shall transmit a copy of the preliminary
plat to the Director of Public Works and the Municipal Planner for their
technical review and recommendation and transmit a copy to the school board
having jurisdiction in the area where the plat is located for informational
purposes.



      (4)   The Commission shall review all details of the proposed
subdivision within the framework of the Zoning Ordinances within the various
elements of the Master Plan and within the standards of this Subdivision
Regulations Ordinance.



      (5)   The Commission shall approve conditionally, disapprove,
or approve the preliminary plat.



         (a)   Should the approval be conditional approval, the
Commission shall record the reasons in the minutes of the regular meeting and
said conditions shall be satisfied by the proprietor within a time set by the
Commission or the plat shall be rejected.



         (b)   Should the Commission disapprove the preliminary
plat, it should record the reasons in the minutes of the regular meeting.



         (c)   Should the Commission find that all conditions
have been satisfactorily met, it may give approval to the preliminary plat
and distribute copies of same as follows:



            1.   Return one copy to the proprietor;



            2.   Retain one copy which shall become a matter
of permanent record in the Commission files;



            3.   Forward one copy to the school board having
jurisdiction in the area concerned; and



            4.   File the remaining copies with the City
Clerk's office.



   (F)   Action of Commission.  The action of the Commission shall
become the action of the governing body unless the governing body shall
decide upon a hearing or unless, within ten days after the approval or
rejection of the preliminary plat, the proprietor shall file with the City
Clerk a written request for hearing before the governing body.



   (G)   Hearing; rejection or approval.  Such hearing, if requested,
shall be held by the governing body at its next regular meeting occurring not
less than ten days after filing of said request. Following said hearing, the
governing body shall approve or reject the preliminary plat in accordance
with § 112 of the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, being M.C.L.A. § 560.112.



   (H)   Duration of approval.  Approval of the preliminary plat
(stage 1) shall be effective for a period of nine months. Should a
preliminary plat (stage 2) not be submitted for tentative approval within
this time limit, the preliminary plat (stage 1) must again be submitted for
approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor and such
request is granted in writing by the Planning Commission or governing body;
whichever body gave approval to the preliminary plat (stage 1).



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.23  PRELIMINARY PLAT (STAGE 2).



   The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat
(stage 2) requires tentative and final approval as follows:



   (A)   Preliminary plat (stage 2) tentative approval.



      (1)   Filing.



         (a)   The preliminary plat shall comply with the
provisions of the Subdivision Control Act.



         (b)   The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat (stage 1) as approved and it may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however,
that such portion conforms to this chapter. The preliminary plat (stage 2)
shall show the actual geometries and dimensions or show the approximate lot
dimensions which shall not be decreased on the final plat. This submission
shall include profile drawings drawn at a scale of not less than 1" = 100'
horizontally and 1" = 5' vertically showing the following:



            1.   Proposed street centerline profiles;



            2.   Proposed sanitary sewer profiles;



            3.   Proposed storm sewer profiles.



         (c)   Ten copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, together with written application in triplicate including
proposed deed restrictions if any, shall be submitted to the Secretary at
least ten days prior to the regular Commission meeting (which meeting shall
be considered as the date of filing).



         (d)   The Secretary shall check the proposed plat for
completeness. Should any of the data required in the Subdivision Act be
omitted, the Secretary shall be directed to inform the proprietor of the data
required, and that the application will be delayed until the required data is
received.



         (e)   The Secretary shall transmit a copy of the valid
and complete preliminary plat to the Director of Public Works for technical
review and recommendation.



      (2)   Planning Commission review - tentative approval.



         (a)   The Secretary shall place the preliminary plat on
the next agenda, at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear.
The Planning Commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days
after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension, in
writing, of the time required for approval by the governing body and Planning
Commission.



         (b)   It shall be the duty of the Secretary to send a
notice by registered or certified mail to the owners of land immediately
adjoining the property to be platted of the presentment of the preliminary
plat and the time and place of the meeting of the Commission to consider said
preliminary plat; said notice shall be sent not less than five days before
the date fixed therefor.



         (c)   The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall be reviewed
by the Director of Public Works as to conformity with the approved
preliminary plat (stage 1) as to plans for utilities and other improvements.



         (d)   The Director of Public Works shall notify the
Commission of his/her recommendation for either approval or rejection of the
preliminary plat.



         (e)   The preliminary plat (stage 2) documents shall be
reviewed by the Commission as to conformity with the approved preliminary
plat (stage 1) and compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.



         (f)   Should the Commission find that the preliminary
plat (stage 2) is in satisfactory conformance with the preliminary plat
(stage 1) and with the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve same
and notify the governing body of this action inits official minutes and
forward the same, together with all accompanying data, to the governing body
for review.



         (g)   Should the Commission find that the preliminary
plat (stage 2) does not conform satisfactorily to the previously approved
preliminary plat (stage 1) or with the requirements of this chapter, and that
it is not acceptable, they shall record the reason in their official minutes
and forward same together with all accompanying data to the governing body;
and recommend that the governing body disapprove the preliminary plat until
the objections causing disapproval have been changed to meet the approval of
the Commission.



      (3)   Governing body - tentative approval.



         (a)   The governing body will not review a preliminary
plat (stage 2) until it has received the review and recommendations of the
Commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the governing body
shall consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed
on the regularly scheduled agenda. The governing body shall take action on
the preliminary plat (stage 2) within 60 days of the date of initial filing
of the plat with the Secretary, as required in § 153.23(A)(1)(b) above.



         (b)   Should the governing body tentatively approve the
preliminary plat, they shall record their approval on the plat and return
copy to the proprietor.



         (c)   Tentative approval shall not constitute final
approval of the preliminary plat.



         (d)   Tentative approval of the governing body shall be
effective for a period of 12 months. Should the preliminary plat in whole or
in part not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the
preliminary plat must again be submitted to the Commission and governing body
for approval unless an governing body for approval unless an extension is
applied for by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the
governing body.



   (B)   Preliminary plat (stage 2) review by governing body - final
approval.



      (1)   The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat with
the City Clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required for
approval in Sections 112 to 119 of the Subdivision Act (Public Act 288 of
1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.112 through 560.119). The proprietor shall also
provide approved copies of preliminary plats (stage 2) from each of the
required authorities.



      (2)   The governing body shall take action on the preliminary
plat within 20 days of the submission of all necessary approved plats.



      (3)   If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the
plat tentatively approved by the governing body and meets all conditions laid
down for tentative approval, the governing body shall give final approval to
the preliminary plat.



      (4)   The City Clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of
approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given.



      (5)   Final approval shall be effective for a period of two
years from the date of final approval. The two-year period may be extended if
applied for by the proprietor and granted by the governing body in writing.



      (6)   No installation or construction of any improvements
shall be made before the preliminary plat has received final approval of the
governing body, engineering plans have been approved by the Director of
Public Works, receipt of the state health department permits and any deposits
required under §§ 153.50 through 153.53 of this chapter, have been received
by the municipality.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.24  FINAL PLAT.



   The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Preparation.



      (1)   The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the
Subdivision Act.



      (2)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the
preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop
at the time; provided, however that such portion conforms to this Subdivision
Regulations Ordinance.



      (3)   The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title, an
abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an
attorney-at-law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of
title insurance for examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not
the proper parties have signed the plat.



      (4)   File statement regarding utilities required in §
153.37(D) of this chapter.



   (B)   Final plat review.



      (1)   Original copies of the plat as required by the State
Department of the Treasury and three paper prints of the final plat shall be
filed by the proprietor with the City Clerk and shall deposit such sums of
money as the governing body may require herein or by other ordinances or
resolutions.



      (2)   The final plat shall be reviewed by the Director of
Public Works as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat (stage 2) as
to plans for utilities and other improvements.



      (3)   The Director of Public Works shall notify the governing
body of his/her recommendation for either approval or rejection of the final
plat.



      (4)   The governing body shall review all recommendations and
take action on the final plat within 20 days of its date of filing.



      (5)   Upon the approval of the final plat by the governing
body, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the
Subdivision Act. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded; one
to the City Clerk, one to the Planning Commission, and one to the Building
Department. The original copies shall be forwarded to the Clerk of the County
Plat Board.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS



§ 153.35  DEVELOPMENT GUIDES.



   The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this subchapter
are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans
must be reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



§ 153.36  STREETS.



   Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the
general specifications and typical cross-sections as set forth in this
subchapter and other conditions set forth by the governing body.



   (A)   Location and arrangement.



      (1)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various
elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to the
existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such part
shall be platted in the location and width indicated on such plan.



      (2)   The street layout shall provide for continuation of the
collector thoroughfares in the adjoining subdivisions or the proper
projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform
to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the Commission.



      (3)   The street layout shall include minor streets so laid
out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged.



      (4)   Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an
existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the Commission may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage, or such other treatment as may be necessary
for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation
and reduction of traffic hazards.



      (5)   Should a proposed subdivision border on a railroad,
expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the Commission may
require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side
of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of any use of
the intervening land. Such distances shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future
grade separation.



      (6)   Half streets shall be prohibited except where absolutely
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of these regulations, and where the Commission finds
it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract
to be subdivided, a dedicated or platted and recorded half street, the other
half shall be platted.



   (B)   Right-of-way widths.  Street right-of-way widths shall
conform to at least the following minimum requirements:



 

Street Type
 
Right-of-Way Widths




Major thoroughfare
 
100', or in conformance with the Major Thoroughfare Plan of the Municipality


Collector streets
(secondary thoroughfares)
 
86'


Industrial service streets
 
66'


Industrial collector streets
 
86'


Multiple-family residential streets (where platted)
 
66'


Minor (single-family residential) streets
 
66'


Alley
 
20'


Cul-de-Sac streets - turn arounds
 


Industrial
 
110'


Residential and others
 
110'


 










Length for cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet.




   (C)   Street geometrics.  Standards for maximum and minimum street
grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works.



   (D)   Street intersections.  Streets shall be laid out so as to
intersect as nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets, intersecting
with major thoroughfares and collector thoroughfares, shall do so with a
tangent section of centerline 50 feet in length measured from the
right-of-way line of the major or collector thoroughfare.



   (E)   Street jogs.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less
than 125 feet shall be avoided.



   (F)   Acceleration-deceleration lanes.  Streets which intersect
with major or secondary thoroughfares shall be provided with paved
acceleration and deceleration lanes and passing lanes. Such lanes shall be
provided in keeping with the standards approved by the Director of Public
Works for this type of improvement.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75; Am. Ord. 669, passed 4-4-88)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.37  BLOCKS.



   Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.



   (A)   Sizes.



      (1)   Blocks shall not exceed 1,400 feet in length, except
where, in the opinion of the Commission, conditions may justify a greater
distance.



      (2)   Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of
the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout.



   (B)   Public walkways.



      (1)   Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be
required by the Commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to public
or private facilities or where blocks exceed 900 feet in length.



      (2)   Public walkways shall be in the nature of an easement
for this purpose.



   (C)   Easements.



      (1)   Location of utility line easements shall be provided.
Such easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such
easements shall be a total of not less than 15 feet wide, 7½ feet from each
parcel.



      (2)   Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and
electric company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies
serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit
copies of the preliminary plat (stage 2) to all appropriate public utility
agencies.



      (3)   Easements three feet in width shall be provided where
needed along lot lines so as to provide for street light dropouts. Prior to
the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall
be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements
have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final
plat indicating: “The lot lines between lots (indicating lot number) are
subject to street light dropouts rights granted to the (name of utility
company.)”



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.38  LOTS.



   Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:



   (A)   Sizes and shapes.



      (1)   The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision
proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the
type of development contemplated.



      (2)   Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the
minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinances for the district in which the
subdivision is proposed.



      (3)   Building setback lines shall conform to at least the
minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinances.



      (4)   Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted
at least ten feet wider than the minimum width permitted by the Zoning
Ordinances.



      (5)   Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be
avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of 3 to 1 shall normally be considered a
maximum.



      (6)   Lots intended for purposes other than residential use
shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate
provision for off-street parking, setbacks and other requirements in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinances.



   (B)   Arrangement.



      (1)   Every lot shall front or abut on a street.



      (2)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the
street lines where possible.



      (3)   Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or
collector thoroughfares, where marginal access streets are not desirable or
possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side
lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with
extra depth to permit greater distances between building and such trafficway.



      (4)   Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all
streets where possible.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.39  NATURAL FEATURES.



   The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever
possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large
trees, natural groves, and similar community assets that will add
attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of
drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and
the dedication and provision of adequate barriers where appropriate, shall be
required.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.40  FLOOD PLAINS.



   Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either
wholly or in part within the flood plain of a river, stream, creek or lake,
or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by storm water
shall require specific compliance with the Subdivision Act and its review by
the Water Resources Commission of the Department of Natural Resources.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)



IMPROVEMENTS



§ 153.50  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The improvements set forth under this section are to be
considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for
which standards are not specifically set forth shall have said standards set
by ordinance or published rules of the governing body. All improvements must
meet the approval of the governing body and all improvements must be provided
for prior to final plat approval by the governing body.



   (B)   Prior to the undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor
shall either petition for and receive conformation of a special assessment
district for completion of the improvements or deposit with the City Clerk
cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the
proprietor selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the governing body to
insure faithful completion of all improvements within the time specified. The
amount of deposit shall be set by the governing body based on an estimate by
the Director of Public Works. The governing body shall release funds for the
payment of work as it is completed and approved by the municipality.



   (C)   Construction of improvement may be staged in accordance with
standards set by the Director of Public Works, provided satisfactory
financing of said improvement is approved by the governing body.



   (D)   Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance
with the standards and requirements established in this subchapter and/or any
other such standards and requirements which may from time to time be
established by ordinance, resolution or published rules of the municipality.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.51  STREETS.



   All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in
accordance with details and specifications approved by the governing body.



   (A)   Street pavement widths standards. In accordance with details
and specifications prescribed by the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Curbs and gutters. In accordance with details and
specifications prescribed by the Director of Public Works.



   (C)   Roadway pavements. In accordance with details and
specifications prescribed by the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.52  UTILITIES.



   (A)   Requirements for underground wiring. All lines for telephones,
electric, television and other similar service distributed by wire or cable
to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, except for
major thoroughfare right-of-way. Such conduits or cables shall be placed
within private easements provided to such service companies by the proprietor
or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead lines may be
permitted upon written recommendation of the Director of Public Works,
Planner, Commission, and the approval of the governing body at the time of
final plat approval where it is determined that safety, general welfare, plat
design, and character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in
dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other
underground utilities. All such facilities approved by the Michigan Public
Service Commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which
traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by
the proprietor.



   (B)   Storm drainage system and other drainage improvements. Per
plans approved by the Director of Public Works. Where county drains are
involved, a letter or document of approval from the County Commissioner must
be submitted by the proprietor.



   (C)   Sewerage system. Per plans approved by the Director of Public
Works and the requirements of the County Health Board or other appropriate
public health authority.



   (D)   Water supply. Water distribution system per plans approved by
the Director of Public Works and in conformance with the regulations of
Michigan Department of Health relating to municipal water supplies.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.53  SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC WAYS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on all sides of road
rights-of-way adjacent to and within the subdivision being developed. In
those instances where no good purpose would be served, the governing body may
waive this requirement or may defer sidewalk construction on all or a portion
of the lots being developed until a building permit is issued therefore. No
occupancy permit shall be issued for any structure until sidewalks required
by this section are constructed. All sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with standards and specifications prescribed by the Director of
Public Works.



   (B)   Public walkways. Walkways shall be at least 12 feet in width.
Planting pockets shall be provided in public walkways for tree and shrub
planting. The planting plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval of
the Commission. Fences or other improvements may also be required if the
Commission or governing body determines they are necessary to protect the
adjacent property owners.



   (C)   Driveways. Driveways between the street and property lines
shall be “hard surfaced” before occupancy permit for each structure will
be issued. Driveways shall be constructed with either asphalt or concrete in
accordance with standards and specifications prescribed by the Director of
Public Works.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, persons, firm or corporation or anyone acting in behalf of
said person, persons, firm or corporation, violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 and the costs of prosecution or in
default of the payment thereof, by imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment at the
discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate violation.



(Ord. 492, passed 3-17-75; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-24-11)



CHAPTER 154:  ZONING ORDINANCES



Section



   154.000   Adoption by reference



§ 154.000  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The zoning ordinances of the city, being Ordinance No. 1034, passed
1-22-18, as amended, which is published as a separate document, is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this code, the same as if set forth
in full herein.



Reference:



   Zoning Ordinances and Zoning Map may be viewed at:
http://www.mt-pleasant.org/planning



CHAPTER 155:  LAND DIVISION



Section



   155.01   Title



   155.02   Purpose



   155.03   Definitions



   155.04   Prior approval requirements for land divisions



   155.05   Application for land division approval



   155.06   Procedure for review of applications for land division
approval



   155.07   Standards for approval of land divisions



   155.08   Consequences of compliance and consequences of
noncompliance with land division approval requirement



 



   155.99   Penalty



§ 155.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “City of Mount Pleasant
Land Division Ordinance”.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)



§ 155.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the provisions of the State
Land Division Act (1967 PA 288, as amended, formerly known as the Subdivision
Control Act), to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not
comply with applicable ordinances and said Act, to minimize potential
boundary disputes, to maintain orderly development of the community, and
otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and
property owners of the city by establishing reasonable standards for prior
review and approval of land divisions within the city.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)



Cross reference:



   Subdivision regulations, see Chapter 153



§ 155.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest
in land whether recorded or not.



   CITY LAND DIVISION BOARD.  Members to be the City Assessor, the
Director of Planning and Community Development and the Director of Public
Works.



   DIVIDED or DIVISION.  The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or
tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose
of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that
results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and
that satisfies the requirements of Sections 108 and 109 of the State Land
Division Act.



   EXEMPT SPLIT or EXEMPT DIVISION.  The partitioning or splitting of a
parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by his or her heirs,
executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that
does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the
equivalent; provided that all resulting parcels are accessible for vehicular
travel and utilities from existing public roads through existing adequate
roads or easements, or through areas owned by the owner of the parcel that
can provide such access.



   FORTY ACRES OR THE EQUIVALENT.  Either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter
section containing not less than 30 acres, or a governmental lot containing
not less than 30 acres.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The City Commission of the City of Mount Pleasant.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)



§ 155.04  PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND DIVISIONS.



   Land in the city shall not be divided without prior review and approval
of the City Land Division Board in accordance with this chapter and the State
Land Division Act; provided that the following shall be exempted from this
requirement:



   (A)   A completed application form on such form as may be provided
by the city.



   (B)   A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance
with the city's zoning ordinance and the State Land Division Act.



   (C)   An exempt split as defined in the State Land Division Act.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)



§ 155.05  APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL.



   An applicant shall file all of the following with the City Assessor for
review before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for
more than one year, or for building development:



   (A)   A completed application form on such form as may be provided
by the city.



   (B)   A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared
pursuant to the survey map requirements of 1970 PA 132, as amended
(M.C.L.A.§  54.211) by a land surveyor licensed by the State of Michigan,
and showing the dimensions and legal descriptions of the existing parcel and
the parcels proposed to be created by the division(s), the location or all
existing structures and other land improvements, and accessibility of the
parcels for vehicular traffic and utilities from existing public roads.



      (1)   In lieu of such a survey map, at the applicant's option,
the applicant may waive the 30 day statutory requirement for a decision on
the application until such survey map and legal description are filed with
the city, and submit a tentative preliminary parcel map drawn to scale of not
less than that provided for on the application form including an accurate
legal description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines,
dimensions, and the accessibility of each division from existing or proposed
public roads for automobile traffic and public utilities, for preliminary
review, approval, and/or denial by the City of Mount Pleasant Land Division
Board prior to a final application under § 155.05.



      (2)   The City Land Division Board may waive the survey map
requirement where the foregoing tentative parcel map is deemed to contain
adequate information to approve a proposed land division considering the
size, simple divisions, and the undeveloped character of the territory within
which the proposed divisions are located.  An accurate legal description of
all the proposed divisions, however, shall at all times be required.



   (C)   Proof that all standards of the State Land Division Act and
this chapter have been met.  The City Land Division Board shall create and
follow an appropriate checklist.



   (D)   The history and specifications since March 31, 1997, of any
previous divisions of land proposed to be divided and its parent parcel or
tract as defined by Section 102 of the State Land Division Act.



   (E)   If transfer of division rights are proposed in the land
transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the
proposed division rights transfer.



   (F)   Unless a division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and
declared to be “not buildable” under § 155.05(G), all divisions must
result in “buildable” parcels containing sufficient “buildable” area
outside of unbuildable wetlands, flood plains and other areas where buildings
are prohibited therefrom, and with sufficient area to comply with all
required setback provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces,
on-site sewage disposal and water well locations (where public water and
sewer service is not available), and maximum allowed area coverage of
buildings and structures on the site.



   (G)   A statement showing all the parcels to be created by the
proposed land division(s) fully comply with the applicable lot (parcel), yard
and area requirements of the city zoning ordinance, including, but not
limited to, minimum lot (parcel) frontage/width, minimum road frontage,
minimum lot (parcel) area, minimum lot width to depth ratio, and maximum lot
(parcel) coverage and minimum set-backs for existing building(s)/structures.



      (1)   Notwithstanding disqualification from approval pursuant
to this chapter, a proposed land division which does not fully comply with
the applicable lot, yard, accessibility and area requirements of the city
zoning ordinance or this chapter may be approved in any of the following
circumstances:



         (a)   Where the applicant fails to provide a statement
required by § 155.05(G), any such parcel shall be designated as “not
buildable” in the city records, and, to the extent permitted by law, shall
not thereafter be the subject of a request to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
variance relief from the applicable lot and/or area requirements, and shall
not, by itself, be developed with any building or above ground structure
exceeding four feet in height.



         (b)   The City Land Division Board shall have the right
to waive this requirement if it is persuaded that the substantive
requirements to the city  zoning ordinance will be met by the proposed land
division(s).



   (H)   The fee as may from time to time be established by resolution
of the City Commission for land division reviews pursuant to this chapter to
cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this
chapter and the State Land Division Act.



Cross reference:



   Zoning ordinances, see Chapter 154



§ 155.06  PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed land division application package,
the City Assessor shall forthwith submit the same to the Land Division Board
for decision.  The Land Division Board shall approve, approve with
reasonable conditions to assure compliance with applicable ordinances and the
protection of public health, safety and general welfare, or disapprove the
land division applied for within 30 days after receipt of the application
package conforming to this chapter's requirements, and shall promptly notify
the applicant of the Land Division Board's decision(s) and the reason(s) for
any denial.  If the application package does not conform to this chapter's
requirements and the State Land Division Act, the Land Division Board shall
return the same to the applicant for completion and refiling in accordance
with this chapter and the State Land Division Act.



   (B)   A denial of a land division application shall be reviewed by
the City Commission upon a written request by the applicant filed with the
City Clerk within 30 days of the date of the notice of denial.  The written
request for review shall contain a concise statement of the reasons the
applicant believes the denial was improper.  The standards to be applied by
the City Commission shall be those listed in § 155.07.  The City Land
Division Board shall present to the City Commission a concise written
statement of the reasons for the denial at least ten days prior to the
Commission's review.  A copy shall be mailed to the applicant.  The
decision of the City Commission shall be final.



   (C)   A decision approving a land division is effective for one
year, after which it shall be considered revoked unless within such period a
document is recorded with the Isabella County Register of Deeds office and
filed with the City Assessor accomplishing the land division(s) or transfer.



   (D)   The City Land Division Board shall maintain an official record
of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)



§ 155.07  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF LAND DIVISIONS.



   A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria
are met:



   (A)   The proposed land division(s) comply with all requirements of
the State Land Division Act and this chapter.



   (B)   All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate
accessibility, or an area available therefor, to a public road for public
utilities and emergency and other vehicles not less than the requirements of
the applicable zoning ordinance, major thoroughfare plan, road ordinance, or
this chapter.  In determining adequacy of accessibility, any ordinance
standards applicable to plats shall also apply as a minimum standard whenever
a parcel or tract is proposed to be divided to create four or more parcels.



   (C)   The ratio of depth to width of any parcel, 10 acres or less,
created by the division does not exceed a four to one ratio exclusive of
access roads, easements, or  non-buildable  parcels  created  under §
155.05(G) of this chapter and parcels added to contiguous parcels that result
in all involved parcels complying with said ratio.



   (D)   The permissible depth of a parcel created by a land division
shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road
right-of-way to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the
point of commencement of the measurement.



   (E)   The permissible minimum width shall be as defined in the
applicable zoning ordinance at the time the application is considered.



   (F)   (1)   If applicant fails to fulfill the requirements of §
155.05(G), the applicant must execute and record an affidavit in a form
acceptable to the city stating that the parcels created by this split are in
conformance with this chapter but are not necessarily in compliance with any
other city ordinances.



      (2)   The city reserves the right to record an affidavit with
each granting of a split that the parcels created by such division(s) are in
compliance with this chapter but are not necessarily in compliance with any
other city ordinances.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)



§ 155.08  CONSEQUENCES OF COMPLIANCE AND CONSEQUENCES OF NONCOMPLIANCE WITH
LAND DIVISION APPROVAL REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The granting of a split under this chapter does not ensure
compliance with any other city ordinances or State of Michigan statutes.



   (B)   To the extent permitted by law, any parcel created in
noncompliance with this chapter shall not be eligible for any building
permits, or zoning approvals, such as special land use approval or site plan
approval.  In addition, violation of this chapter shall subject the violator
to the penalties and enforcement action set forth in § 155.99, and as may
otherwise be provided by law.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to civil action seeking invalidation of the land division and
appropriate injunctive or other relief.



(Ord. 848, passed 10-9-00)



CHAPTER 156:  HISTORIC DISTRICTS



Section



   156.01   Short title



   156.02   Statement of purpose



   156.03   Definitions



   156.04   Establishing historic districts



   156.05   Establishing additional, modifying, or eliminating historic
districts



   156.06   This Historic District Commission



   156.07   Historic District Commission meetings, recordkeeping and
rules of procedure



   156.08   Delegation of minor classes of work



   156.09   Ordinary maintenance



   156.10   Review by the Commission



   156.11   Design review standards and guidelines



   156.12   Permit applications



   156.13   Denials



   156.14   Notice to proceed



   156.15   Appeal of a Historic District Commission decision



   156.16   Work without a permit



   156.17   Demolition by neglect



   156.18   Review of work in proposed districts



   156.19   Emergency moratorium



   156.20   Acceptance of gifts or grants



   156.21   Acquisition of historic resources



   156.22   Civil action



§ 156.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Historic District Ordinance of
the City of Mt. Pleasant, Michigan.”



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.02  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving districts
that reflect elements of its history, architecture, archaeology, engineering,
or culture.



   (B)   Stabilize and improve property values in each district and
surrounding areas.



   (C)   Foster civic beauty.



   (D)   Strengthen the local economy.



   (E)   Promote the use of historic districts for the education,
pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.03  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Local Historic Districts Act, 1970 PA 169, M.C.L.A. §§
399.201a et seq., as amended.



   ALTERATION.  Work that changes the detail of a resource, but does not
change its basic size or shape.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  The written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a
resource.



   COMMISSION.  The Historic District Commission of the City of Mt.
Pleasant.



   COMMITTEE.  A historic district study committee appointed by the City
Commission under § 156.04.



   DEMOLITION. The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of
a resource, and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.



   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.  Maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource
in an inadequate manner that results in the deterioration of one of its
exterior features or in the loss of its structural integrity.



   DENIAL. The written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  The area, or group of areas, not necessarily
having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of
resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.



   HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The identification, evaluation, establishment,
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering, or culture.



   HISTORIC RESOURCE. A publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the city, state, or the
United States.



   NOTICE TO PROCEED. Written permission to issue a permit for work that
is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding
under the Act.



   OMA.  The Open Meetings Act, 1976 PA 267, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et
seq., as amended.



   OPEN SPACE.  Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a
formal or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer
between other resources.



   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.  Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time,
in its exterior condition. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not change the external
appearance of the resource, except through the elimination of the usual and
expected effects of weathering. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not constitute WORK
for the purposes of this chapter.



   PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area, or group of areas, not
necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and
that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose
of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a
historic district or added to an established historic district.



   REPAIR. To restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound
condition by any process. A REPAIR that changes the external appearance of a
resource constitutes WORK for the purposes of this chapter.



   RESOURCE.  One or more publicly or privately owned historic or
non-historic buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces
located within a historic district.



   WORK.  Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation,
or demolition.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.04  ESTABLISHING HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The city may by ordinance establish one or more historic
districts, and historic districts already created as of the date of this
chapter pursuant to now-repealed provisions of Chapter 154 shall remain in
full force and effect.



   (B)   Before establishing a historic district, the City Commission
shall appoint a Historic District Study Committee. A majority of the persons
appointed to the Committee shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or
knowledge of historic preservation. The Committee shall contain
representation of at least one member appointed from one or more duly
organized local historic preservation organizations. The Committee shall do
all of the following:



      (1)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within
each proposed historic district following procedures established by the State
Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center.



      (2)   Conduct basic research of each proposed historic
district and historic resources located within that district.



      (3)   Determine the total number of historic and non-historic
resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic
resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic
resources, the Committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for
evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for
inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set
forth in 36 C.F.R. part 60, and criteria established or approved by the State
Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center.



      (4)   Prepare a preliminary Committee report that addresses,
at a minimum, all of the following:



         (a)   The charge of the Committee.



         (b)   The composition of Committee membership.



         (c)   The historic district studied.



         (d)   The boundaries of each proposed historic district,
in writing and on maps.



         (e)   The history of each proposed historic district.



         (f)   The significance of each district as a whole, as
well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent
the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the
evaluation criteria.



         (g)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for
review and recommendations to the local planning body, the State Historic
Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center, the Michigan
Historical Commission, and the State Historic Preservation Review Board.



   (C)   Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the
preliminary report, the Committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance
with the OMA. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail, not less
than 14 calendar days prior to the hearing, to the owners of properties
within the proposed historic district, as listed on the most current tax
rolls.



   (D)   After the date of the public hearing, the Committee and the
City Commission have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by
the City Commission, to take the following actions:



      (1)   The Committee shall prepare and submit a final report
with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local
planning body to the City Commission, as to the establishment of a historic
district. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district, the
final report shall include a draft of the proposed ordinance.



      (2)   After receiving a final report that recommends the
establishment of a historic district, the City Commission, at its discretion,
may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance. If the City Commission passes
an ordinance establishing one or more historic districts, the city shall file
a copy of the ordinance, including a legal description of the property or
properties located within the historic district, with the Register of Deeds.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.05  ESTABLISHING ADDITIONAL, MODIFYING, OR ELIMINATING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The city may at any time establish by ordinance additional
historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and
rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may
eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or
eliminating a historic district, a committee appointed by the City Commission
shall follow the procedures as stated in the Act. To conduct these
activities, the City Commission may retain the initial committee, establish a
standing committee, or establish a committee to consider only specific
proposed districts and then be dissolved. The committee shall consider any
previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action.



   (B)   In considering elimination of a historic district, a committee
shall follow the procedures set forth in the Act for the issuance of a
preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but
with the intent of showing one or more of the following:



      (1)   The historic district has lost those physical
characteristics that enabled the establishment of the district.



      (2)   The historic district was not significant in the way
previously defined.



      (3)   The historic district was established pursuant to
defective procedures.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.06  THE HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.



   (A)   The City Commission may establish by ordinance a commission to
be called a Historic District Commission. The Historic District Commission
may be established at any time, but not later than the time the first
historic district is established. Each member of the Historic District
Commission shall reside within the city limits. The Historic District
Commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall be appointed by the
City Commission. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated
interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Members shall be appointed
for a term of three years, except the initial appointments of three members
for a term of two years, and two members for a term of one year. Subsequent
appointments shall be for three-year terms. Members shall be eligible for
reappointment. In the event of a vacancy on the Historic District Commission,
interim appointments shall be made by the City Commission within 60 calendar
days to complete the unexpired term of such position. Two members shall be
appointed from a list submitted by duly organized local historic preservation
organizations. If such a person is available for appointment, one member
shall be an architect who has two years of architectural experience or who is
duly registered in the state.



   (B)   The Historic District Commission shall administer the historic
districts established or existing pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   The City Commission may prescribe powers and duties of the
Historic District Commission, in addition to those prescribed in this
chapter, that foster historic preservation activities, projects, and programs
in the local unit.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.07  HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION MEETINGS, RECORDKEEPING AND RULES OF
PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Historic District Commission shall meet at least
biannually or more frequently at the call of the Commission.



   (B)   The business that the Historic District Commission may perform
shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the OMA.
Public notice of the date, time, and place of the meeting shall be given in
the manner required by the OMA. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice
and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or
considered by the Historic District Commission.



   (C)   The Historic District Commission shall keep a record of its
resolutions, proceedings and actions.



   (D)   The Historic District Commission shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and shall adopt design review standards and guidelines to carry out
its duties under this act.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.08  DELEGATION OF MINOR CLASSES OF WORK.



   The Historic District Commission may delegate the issuance of
Certificates of Appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its
staff, or to another delegated authority. The Historic District Commission
shall provide to its delegated authority specific written standards for
issuing Certificates of Appropriateness under this section. The Historic
District Commission shall review the Certificates of Appropriateness issued
by the delegate, on at least a quarterly basis, to determine whether or not
the delegated responsibilities should be continued.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.09  ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district or to prevent
work on any resource under a permit issued by the Building Official or other
duly delegated authority before the chapter was enacted.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.10  REVIEW BY THE COMMISSION.



   The Historic District Commission shall review and act upon only
exterior features of a resource, and shall not review and act upon interior
arrangements, unless specifically authorized to do so by the City Commission
or unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the
resource. The Historic District Commission shall not disapprove an
application due to considerations not prescribed in the Act.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.11  DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.



   (A)   In reviewing plans, the Historic District Commission shall
follow the U.S. Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and
guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R.
part 67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design
characteristics of historic districts administered by the Historic District
Commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the
Secretary of Interior’s Standards and guidelines, and are established or
approved by the State Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical
Center.



   (B)   In reviewing plans, the Historic District Commission shall
also consider all of the following:



      (1)   The historic or architectural value and significance of
the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding
area.



      (2)   The relationship of any architectural features of the
resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area.



      (3)   The general compatibility of the design, arrangement,
texture, and materials proposed to be used.



      (4)   Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the
Historic District Commission finds relevant.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.12  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the
exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district.
The person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an
application for a permit with the Building Official. Upon receipt of a
complete application, the inspector of buildings shall immediately refer the
application, along with all required supporting materials that make the
application complete, to the Historic District Commission. A permit shall not
be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the Historic District
Commission has acted on the application by issuing a Certificate of
Appropriateness or a Notice to Proceed as prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   The Historic District Commission shall file Certificates of
Appropriateness, Notices to Proceed, and denials of applications for permits
with the Building Official. A permit shall not be issued until the Historic
District Commission has acted as prescribed by this chapter.



   (C)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect the
exterior of a resource the Historic District Commission considers valuable to
the city, the state, or the nation, and the Historic District Commission
determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect
the public purpose of the city, state, or nation, the Commission shall
attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible
plan for the preservation of the resource.



   (D)   The failure of the Historic District Commission to act on an
application within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is
filed with the Historic District Commission, unless an extension is agreed
upon in writing by the applicant and the Historic District Commission, shall
be considered to constitute approval.



   (E)   The Historic District Commission may charge a reasonable fee
to process a permit application as set by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.13  DENIALS.



   If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the
Building Official or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied by a
written explanation by the Historic District Commission of the reasons for
denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be re-submitted
for Historic District Commission review when the suggested changes have been
made. The denial shall also include the notification of the applicant’s
right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board and to the
circuit court.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.14  NOTICE TO PROCEED.



   Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance
of a Notice to Proceed by the Historic District Commission, if any of the
following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by
a finding of the Historic District Commission to be necessary to
substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions:



   (A)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public
or to the structure’s occupants.



   (B)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program
that will be of substantial benefit to the community, and the applicant
proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals,
financing, and environmental clearances.



   (C)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to
the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond
the owner’s control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for
sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within
the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner.



   (D)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority
of the community.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.15  APPEAL OF A HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION DECISION.



   (A)   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District
Commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the State
Historic Preservation Review Board. The appeal shall be filed within 60
calendar days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant
may submit all or part of the appellant’s evidence and arguments in written
form. The State Historic Preservation Review Board shall consider an appeal
at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit
applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic Preservation Review
Board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over
the historic district commission whose decision was appealed to the State
Historic Preservation Review Board.



   (B)   Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation
organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or
severally aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission, may
appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant
aggrieved by a decision rendered under this chapter may not appeal to the
court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic
Preservation Review Board.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.16  WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the
Historic District Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a
Certificate of Appropriateness, the Historic District Commission may require
an owner to restore the resource to the condition that the resource was in
before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for
a Certificate of Appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the
restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the
Historic District Commission may seek an order from the circuit court to
require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to
modify the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of Appropriateness. If
the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the
Historic District Commission or its agents may, if authorized by court order,
enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its
former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a Certificate of
Appropriateness in accordance with the court’s order. The costs of the work
done shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a
special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of
the circuit court, the Historic District Commission or its agents may enter a
property for purposes of this section.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.17  DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.



   Upon a finding by the Historic District Commission that a historic
resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject
to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the
Historic District Commission may do either of the following:



   (A)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to demolition by neglect.



   (B)   If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time,
the Historic District Commission may seek an order from circuit court to
require the owner to make such repairs as necessary to prevent demolition by
neglect. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the
court, the Historic District Commission, or its agents, if authorized by the
court order, may enter the property and conduct work necessary to prevent
demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner,
and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property.
When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, the Historic District
Commission, or its agents, may enter a property for purposes of this section.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.18  REVIEW OF WORK IN PROPOSED DISTRICTS.



   Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a
proposed historic district, the City Commission may, at its discretion, adopt
a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed
historic district be referred to the Historic District Commission as
prescribed in § 156.12. The Historic District Commission shall review permit
applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic
district was an established historic district. The review may continue in the
proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as
the City Commission approves or rejects the establishment of the historic
district by ordinance, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.19  EMERGENCY MORATORIUM.



   If the City Commission determines that pending work will cause
irreparable harm to resources located within an established or proposed
historic district, the City Commission may by resolution declare an emergency
moratorium on all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The City
Commission may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not
to exceed six months, upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to
resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a
resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.20  ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRANTS.



   The City Commission may accept state or federal grants for historic
preservation purposes; may participate in state and federal programs that
benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for
historic preservation purposes. The City Commission may appoint the Historic
District Commission to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program
responsibilities.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.21  ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES.



   If all efforts by the Historic District Commission to preserve a
resource fail, or if it is determined by the City Commission that public
ownership is most suitable, the City Commission, if considered to be the
public interest, may acquire the resource using public funds, public or
private gifts, grants or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. The
acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the Historic District
Commission. The Historic District Commission is responsible for maintaining
publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated
for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the City
Commission. Upon recommendation of the Historic District Commission, the city
may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements
included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



§ 156.22  CIVIL ACTION.



   Notwithstanding any other provision, the Historic District Commission
may not commence a civil action without permission of the City Commission.



(Ord. 1030, passed 10-23-17)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Table



   I.   FRANCHISES



   II.   TAX EXEMPTIONS



   III.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



   IV.   HISTORIC DISTRICTS



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



Cross-reference:



   Franchises, see Charter Art. XI



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


746
 
3-22-93
 
Granting to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company the right, power, and authority
to lay, maintain, operate, and use gas pipes, mains, conductors, service
pipes, and other necessary equipment in the highways, streets, alleys, and
other public places in the city, and a franchise is hereby granted to the
company, its successors and assigns, to transact local business in said city
for the purposes of conveying gas into and through and supplying and selling
gas in said city and all other matters incidental thereto, for a period of 30
years.


842
 
5-8-00
 
Granting a limited, non-exclusive electric franchise to DTE  Energy for a
term of five years.


 
 



 



TABLE II:  TAX EXEMPTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




477
 
12-24-73
 
Withdrawing exemptions from taxation of portions of a housing development
owned by Midwest Limited Dividend Housing Association, located in part of the
West ½ of the Southwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 23, T14N, R4W, and
providing for payment in lieu of taxes of portions of the development
determined to be exempt.


478
 
12-24-73
 
Withdrawing exemptions from taxation of portions of a housing development
owned by Oak Tree Village Limited Dividend Housing Association, located in
part of the East ½ of the Southwest ¼ of Section 15, T14N, R4W, and
providing for payments in lieu of taxes of portions of the development
determined to be exempt.


549
 
7-3-78
 
Providing for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple
family dwelling project for persons of low income or elderly persons, such
project identified as Winchester and commencing at a point on the North line
of Section 26 that is South 88° 43' East, 732.47 feet from the Northwest
corner of Section 26, T14N, R4W, to be financed or assisted pursuant to the
provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public Act
346 of 1966, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq.).


634
 
9-16-85
 
Providing for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple
family dwelling project for persons of low income, such project identified as
Yorkshire Commons and being a part of the SE ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 23,
T14N, R4W, to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the Sate
Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public Act 346 of 1966, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq.).


796
 
12-16-96
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for persons of low income, such project identified as Chase
Run Apartments, being a part of the E ½ of the SE ¼ of Section 23,
T14N-R4W, to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State
Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public Act 346 of 1966, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq.), as amended.


798
 
4-14-97
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for elderly persons of low income, such project identified
as Windham Woods Senior Apartments, being a part of the E ½ of the NE ¼ of
Section 28, T14N-R4W, to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions
of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public Act 346 of
1966, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq.), as amended.


801
 
6-23-97
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for elderly persons of low income, such project identified
as Dover Court, being a part of the SW ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 23,
T14N-R4W and a part of the SW ¼ of the SE ¼ of Section 23, T14N-R4W, to be
financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public Act 346 of 1966, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.1401 et seq.), as amended.


812
 
2-23-98
 
Ordinance Amending section 10, Duration of Tax Exemption Ordinance No. 801.


831
 
1-24-00
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for persons of low income, such project identified as Chase
Run Apartments to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the
State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, as amended.


832
 
1-24-00
 
Amending section 8, Payment of a Service Charge of Tax Exemption Ordinance
No. 796.


833
 
1-24-00
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for persons of low income, such project identified as the
Brownfield Development Corporation to be financed or assisted pursuant to the
provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, as amended.


840
 
3-27-00
 
Amending sections 1, 2 and 5 of Tax Exemption Ordinance 831, providing a
service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family dwelling
project for persons of low income.


847
 
9-25-00
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for persons of low and moderate income, such project
identified as the Brownfield Development Corporation, to be financed or
assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development
Authority Act of 1966, as amended.


851
 
3-12-01
 
Amending Section 5 of Ordinance No. 847.


856
 
6-25-01
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for persons of low income, such project identified as the
Mill II Limited Partnership, to be financed or assisted pursuant to the
provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, as amended.


897
 
4-12-04
 
Providing a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple-family
dwelling project for persons of low income, such project identified as the
Rivers Bluff Town Homes L.L.C., to be financed or assisted pursuant to the
provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, as amended.


--
 
11-2-04
 
Electorate rejected Ordinance 897, known as the Rivers Bluff Tax Exemption
Ordinance. 


914
 
11-14-05
 
Providing for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a multiple family
dwelling project for elderly persons of low income to be financed or assisted
pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of
1966.


1011
 
7-25-16
 
Providing for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a housing project for low
income persons and families to be financed or assisted pursuant to the
provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




750
 
2-14-94
 
Rezoning Lynnwood Addition, Outlot E, to M-2, Multiple Family Residential


751
 
4-25-94
 
Rezoning the westerly 66 feet of Lots 3 and 4, Block 19, Kinney's Addition to
P-1 Parking District


752
 
4-25-94
 
Rezoning the westerly 25 feet of Lots 12, 13, 14, and the westerly 25 feet of
the southerly 30.78 feet, Lot 15, Block 1, South Mission Heights to C-3
General Business District


755
 
10-24-94
 
Rezoning a certain parcel of property commencing 25 rods south and 150 feet
west of the north quarter post of Section 15, thence west 180 feet, south 11
rods, east 180 feet, north 11 rods to the point of beginning, to I-1
Industrial


759
 
5-8-95
 
Rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 23,
T14N-R4W to R-3 Single-Family Residential


777
 
10-23-95
 
Rezoning certain property located at the corner of Preston Street and
Isabella Road to OS-1 Office Service District


787
 
5-28-96
 
Rezoning several annexed parcels:


 
 
 
 
(1) R-2 Single Family Residential:


 
 
 
 
- All of Smalley Subdivision and the adjacent 33 feet right-of-way of E.
Broadway Street


 
 
 
 
- All of Dimit's Subdivision and the adjacent 33 feet right-of-way of
Isabella Road


 
 
 
 
- All of Greenfield Acres Subdivision and the adjacent 33 feet right-of-way
of E. Broadway Street


 
 
 
 
- Lots 3, 4, 5, and 6, Stone's Outlots, and the adjacent 33 feet right-of-way
of E. Broadway Street


 
 
 
 
- The north 170 feet of the west 160 feet of Lot 11, Stone's Outlots, and the
adjacent 33 feet right-of-way of E. Broadway Street


 
 
 
 
- Cook Road as platted adjacent to Lots 3, 4, 5, and 6, Stone's Outlots


 
 
 
 
(2) OS-1 Office Service District:


 
 
 
 
- Lot 1 and 2, Stone's Outlots


 
 
 
 
- Cook Road as platted adjacent to Lots 1 and 2, Stone's Outlots


 
 
 
 
(3) R-3 Single-Family Residential:


 
 
 
 
- Prospect Park, Lot 1, also known as 1902 and 1906 Lynnwood Drive


797
 
2-10-97
 
Rezoning certain property located on the southwest corner of Isabella Road
and Bellows Street from R-4 Single Family Residential to OS-1 Office Service
District.


806
 
10-13-97
 
Rezoning certain property located on the southwest corner of Pickard and N.
Main Street to OS-1 Office Service District.


807
 
10-27-97
 
Rezoning certain property located between Mission and Briarwood, Fairfield
and Appian Way from C-3 Commercial to M-1 Multiple Family Residential.


808
 
11-10-97
 
Rezoning certain property located on the southwest corner of Bradley and
Broadway from R-3 Residential to OS-1 Office Service District.


810
 
11-24-97
 
Correction to legal description in Ord. 678, passed 8-1-88.


816
 
8-10-98
 
Rezoning certain property located on the southeast corner of Pickard and
Brown Streets from R-3 Single Family Residential to C-3 General Business.


821
 
11-23-98
 
Rezone certain property located at the southwest corner of Lincoln and
University Streets from R-3 Single Family Residential to OS-1 Office Service
District.


824
 
7-26-99
 
Rezone roughly 4 acres in the undeveloped area east of the newly formed
intersection of Abbey Lane and Sweeney Street from M-1 Multiple Family
Residential to R-4 Single Family Residential.


825
 
7-26-99
 
Rezone roughly 24 acres in the Rosewood East Condo area from R-2 and R-4
Single Family Residential to M-1 Multiple FamilyResidential.


826
 
9-13-99
 
Rezone a portion of the former Honnegers site, at 411 W. Broadway Street,
from C-2 Central Business District to OS-1 Office Service District. 


834
 
2-14-00
 
Rezoning certain property located at 301 S. Crapo, from R-2 Single Family
Residential to P-1 Parking District.


835
 
2-14-00
 
Rezoning certain property located at 903 E. High Street, from R-3 Single
Family Residential to OS-2 Office Services District.


843
 
6-12-00
 
Rezoning approximately six acres on the west side of Bradley Street, legally
described as the south 396 feet of the east 660 feet of the north 660 feet of
the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter, Township 14 north, Range 10
west, from R-2 Single-Family Residential to M-1 Multiple-Family Residential.


846
 
8-28-00
 
Rezoning the property at 904 E. High Street to OS-2 Office Services District.


854
 
4-23-01
 
Rezoning the property at 202 E. Pickard to OS-2 Office Service District.


855
 
5-14-01
 
Rezoning the property at 400 S. Crapo to OS-2 Office Service District.


859
 
8-27-01
 
Rezoning the property at 1210 E. Pickard from R-2 and R-3 Single-Family
Residential to C-3 General Business.


867
 
11-26-01
 
Rezoning the property on the north side of Broomfield between Sweeney and
Isabella Road in Project 2000, from M-1 Multiple-Family Residential as
follows:


 
 
 
 
1)  westerly 3+ acres to OS-2 Office Services District;


 
 
 
 
2)  easterly 2+ acres to C-1 Local Business District; and


 
 
 
 
3)  the southerly 200+ feet of the remaining property between the two
parcels to C-1 Local Business District.


872
 
4-8-02
 
Rezoning Lots 1-8, Block 22, Bentley's Addition, to OS-1 Office Service
District.


873
 
4-8-02
 
Rezoning the south 40' of Lot 6, Block 27, Smith's Addition to C-2 Central
Business District.


874
 
4-8-02
 
Rezoning the south 31 feet of Lot 95, Pleasant  View #1 Addition, to OS-1
Office Service District.


875
 
5-13-02
 
Rezoning Lots 9 and 17 and the north ½ of  Lots 8 and 18, Block 1, Poulos
Subdivision, including abandoned Kane Street, to R-3 Single Family
Residential.  (202 N. Brown Street).


876
 
5-13-02
 
Rezoning the north ½ of Lots 6, 7 and 8, Block 10, Hopkins & Lyons Addition
to R-4 Single Family Residential.  (406 S. Adams).


877
 
5-13-02
 
Rezoning the south 1,056' of the west 495' of the northeast ¼ of the
southwest ¼ of Section 14 (251 S. Brown) to R-2 Single Family Residential.


878
 
5-13-02
 
Rezoning the following three parcels to R-1 Single Family Residential:1) 
800 Watson;2)  820 Watson; and3)  902 Watson.


880
 
5-28-02
 
Rezoning 1234 E. Broomfield to M-1 Multiple Family Residential, as
follows:The northerly 475' of the easterly 300' of the NE ¼ of the NW ¼ of
Section 26, T14N-R4W, Isabella County, Michigan, described as beg. at a point
on the North section line which is N88D-43' W, 165.0' from the North ¼
corner of Section 26; thence N88D-43' W, 980.26'; thence S1D-20'-30" W,
225.0' thence N88D-43' W, 175.0'; thence S1D-20'-30" W, 1100.15' along the
West, North and South  line; thence S88D-19'-35" E, 1326.49' along the
North, East and West,  line; thence N1D-04'-30" E, 1020.70' along the North
and South ¼ line; thence N88D-43' W, 165.0'; thence N1D04'-30" E, 313.50' to
the POB.


881
 
5-28-02
 
Rezoning 1001 N. Harris, Lot 21 of Wards Heights, City of Mt. Pleasant,
Isabella County, Michigan to P-1 Parking.


884
 
10-14-02
 
Rezoning a parcel of land on the north side of Broomfield between Sweeney and
Isabella from C-3 General Business and M-1 Multiple Family to Multiple Family
M-1.


887
 
1-27-03
 
Rezoning a parcel of land at the northwest corner of Broomfield and Deming
(906 W. Broomfield) to C-1 Local Business.


891
 
7-14-03
 
Rezoning a portion of the property located at 1422 and 1426 E. Pickard to C-3
General Business.


904
 
11-8-04
 
Rezoning a portion of the property located at 1017 S. Mission to P-1 Parking
District.


908
 
7-11-05
 
Rezoning 1106, 110/1112 E. Broomfield from M-1 Multiple Family Residential to
OS-1 Office Service.


909
 
8-8-05
 
Rezoning 802 E. Palmer from M-1 Multiple Family Residential to C-3 General
Business District.


910
 
8-8-05
 
Rezoning 804 E. Palmer from Multiple Family Residential to OS-2 Office
Service District.


915
 
11-28-05
 
Rezoning 1805 N. Fancher (lots 9-18), 503 N. Industrial, and abutting
unplatted lot, from I-1 Industrial and C-3 General Business to OS-1 Office
Service.


917
 
1-23-06
 
Rezoning property abutting the west lot line of 1011 N. Harris from R-4
Single Family Residential to P-1 Parking (State Employees Credit Union).


918
 
2-13-06
 
Rezoning property at 1637 E. Broomfield from C-1 Local Business District to
C-3 General Business District.


926
 
4-9-07
 
Rezoning property abutting lots 11-18 of N. Fancher Street from OS Officer
Service to OS-1 Office Service District.


933
 
11-26-07
 
Rezoning a portion of 1240 E. Broomfield from M-1 Multiple Family Residential
to C-1 Local Business District.


936
 
10-22-07
 
Rezoning 502 and 506 W. Broadway and adjacent vacant parcel from OS-1 Office
Service District to C-2 Central Business District, and a vacant parcel west
of 506 W. Broadway from OS-1 to R-4 Single Family Residential.


942
 
8-25-08
 
Rezoning 803 Mosher Street and abutting  vacant lot to the west from R-3
Single-Family Residential to C-3 General Business District, as follows:


 
 
 
 
   (1) Parcel #17-000-09657-00 is described as M Brown Addition, east 81
feet of Lot 19, Block 1; and


 
 
 
 
   (2) Parcel #17-000-09658-00 is described as M Brown Addition, west 48
feet of the east 129 feet of Lot 19, Block 1.


949
 
7-13-09
 
Conditional rezoning of a portion of 560 - 616 W. Pickard from I-1 Industrial
to C-3 General Business with self-imposed conditions to allow retail use
accessory to a permitted industrial use.


950
 
7-13-09
 
Rezoning from R-1 Residential to A Agricultural, for the purpose of
constructing a cellular tower, part of the N ½ of the NE ¼ of Section 21,
Township 14 North, Range 4 West, City of Mt. Pleasant, Isabella County,
Michigan, containing 1.08 acres more or less.


953
 
8-25-10
 
Rezoning property at 1400 S. Washington from R-1 Residential to M-2 Multiple
Family Residential to allow construction of a "Covenant Leadership Community"
housing up to eight residents.


954
 
10-27-10
 
Rezoning properties located at 1116 and 1202 E. Pickard and 802 N. Brown from
C-3 General Business and R-3 Residential to C-3 General Business.


962
 
1-24-11
 
Rezoning the property located at 309 N. Main Street from OS-1 Office Service
to C-3 General Business.


968
 
8-22-11
 
Conditionally rezoning the property located at 560-616 W. Pickard Street from
I-1 Industrial to C-3 General Business with the Conditional Rezoning 
Agreement.


969
 
8-22-11
 
Conditionally rezoning a portion of the property located at 210 W. Pickard
Street from I-1 Industrial to C-3 General Business with the Conditional
Rezoning Agreement.


970
 
9-26-11
 
Rezoning the property located at 617-701 E. Pickard Street from I-1
Industrial to C-3 General Business.


991
 
1-12-15
 
Rezoning the property located at 1040 East Broomfield Road from C-3 General
Business to M-2 Multiple Family with the Conditional Rezoning Agreement.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  HISTORIC DISTRICTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


923
 
11-13-06
 
Designating Historic District #1, to be known as the Borden Creamery Historic
District.


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED



 

M.C.L.A. Section
 
Code Section




15.231 to 15.246
 
113.04, 113.17


15.231
 
Charter, Art. II, § 11


15.231 et seq.
 
30.16


15.261
 
Charter, Art. II, § 11


15.261 et seq.
 
156.03


28.451 et seq.
 
133.06


28.466(2)
 
133.05


30.401 et seq.
 
Ch. 35


35.441 - 35.443
 
110.27, 110.28


37.2101 et seq.
 
39.99


54.211
 
155.05


57.1d
 
133.01


117.4i(k)
 
10.99


123.165
 
52.30


125.31 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. XIII, § 3


125.402
 
96.01


125.651 et seq.
 
32.01


125.1401 et seq.
 
T.S.O. II


125.1651 - 125.1680
 
32.16


125.3801 et seq.
 
32.30


169.201 et seq.
 
31.02


211.2(2)
 
33.01


211.7s
 
39.06


211.18 - 211.20
 
33.50


211.21
 
33.51


211.24
 
33.02, 33.50


211.29
 
33.03


211.30
 
33.03


211.30(1)
 
33.03


211.30(4)
 
33.03


247.651 et seq.
 
98.20, 98.22, 98.23


247.651 - 247.675
 
113.13


257.1 - 257.923
 
70.08, 96.09


257.8b
 
133.01


257.212
 
70.04


257.227a
 
70.06


257.319
 
132.06


257.320a, c
 
70.06


257.321a
 
70.04


257.625(6)
 
70.07


257.625a(6)
 
70.07


257.625c - f
 
70.07


257.625e(1)
 
70.07


257.732
 
70.05, 70.06


257.904d
 
70.03


280.01 et seq.
 
54.02, 54.09


287.321 et seq.
 
91.03


324.11103
 
50.01


324.11506
 
50.01


324.11701 et seq.
 
51.027


324.20101(t)
 
38.02


330.1276
 
96.04


333.6107
 
132.03


333.7201 et seq.
 
96.04


333.7212
 
70.03


333.7214
 
70.03


333.12751 - 333.12758
 
51.060


333.26421 et seq.
 
96.04


338.1051 et seq.
 
90.01


338.1083
 
90.04


357.3190
 
132.04


399.201a et seq.
 
156.03


436.33b(6)
 
132.06


436.34
 
132.01


436.1703
 
96.04


445.451 et seq.
 
110.26


446.201 et seq.
 
110.26


446.203
 
110.26


460.701 et seq.
 
111.06, 114.20


460.1301 et seq.
 
113.03


484.2102
 
113.03


484.2251
 
113.04


484.2361
 
111.06


484.3101 et seq.
 
111.02, 114.03


484.3106(1)
 
111.03


484.3106 (7), (8)
 
111.05


484.3115(3)
 
111.09


484.3301 et seq.
 
111.02


484.3303(1)
 
111.02


484.3305(2)
 
111.02


500.3101 - 500.3179
 
70.06


559.101
 
50.01


560.101 et seq.
 
153.03


560.102
 
153.03


560.112
 
153.22


560.112 - 560.119
 
153.23


600.101 et seq.
 
36.01


600.8395
 
71.40


600.8396
 
36.01, 36.05


600.8701 et seq.
 
35.08, Ch. 36


600.8705
 
36.03, 36.05


600.8707(6)
 
36.01


600.8709
 
36.05


712A.1 et seq.
 
10.99, 72.99


722.673
 
96.11


750.167
 
131.01


750.169
 
131.02


750.301 et seq.
 
131.05


750.335a
 
96.04


750.493d
 
131.06


750.552
 
131.10


750.552a
 
96.04


752.362
 
96.11


760.1  - 776.69
 
70.03


764.9c - 764.9g
 
93.02, 97.03, 150.17


772.1 - 772.6
 
132.08


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




—
 
- -
 
51.103


—
 
- -
 
71.01


—
 
- -
 
91.06


—
 
- -
 
92.01, 92.02, 96.05, 96.09, 96.12


—
 
- -
 
110.02


—
 
- -
 
110.11


—
 
- -
 
131.01, 131.04


389
 
11-16-64
 
71.01


394
 
5-23-66
 
32.01, 32.02


422
 
12-30-68
 
71.40 - 71.42, 71.45


439
 
4-20-70
 
96.09, 96.12


450
 
6-7-71
 
34.01 - 34.06


468
 
4-2-73
 
31.15 - 31.20


—
 
12-15-73
 
95.01, 95.02


477
 
12-24-73
 
T.S.O. II


478
 
12-24-73
 
T.S.O. II


483
 
6-3-74
 
97.30 - 97.35


—
 
7-25-74
 
91.06


492
 
3-17-75
 
153.01 - 153.07, 153.20 - 153.24, 153.35 - 153.40, 153.50 - 153.53, 153.99


512
 
12-20-76
 
33.15 - 33.37


513
 
12-20-76
 
30.01 - 30.15, 31.01


514
 
12-20-76
 
33.50, 33.51


522
 
5-2-77
 
33.28


523
 
5-16-77
 
70.01, 70.02


527
 
8-15-77
 
51.103


532
 
9-19-77
 
92.01, 92.02


545
 
3-6-78
 
99.01 - 99.12, 99.25 - 99.32, 99.99


546
 
5-15-78
 
31.01


549
 
7-3-78
 
T.S.O. II


558
 
4-16-79
 
51.103


568
 
4-17-80
 
70.02


577
 
7-21-80
 
131.01


593
 
4-5-82
 
92.01


602
 
3-21-83
 
96.09, 96.12


603
 
5-2-83
 
70.02


611
 
1-14-84
 
96.05


613
 
3-6-84
 
154.000


618
 
9-17-84
 
90.01 - 90.08, 90.99


619
 
10-1-84
 
96.04


622
 
3-4-85
 
51.001 - 51.010, 51.025 - 51.027, 51.040 - 51.045, 51.060 - 51.066, 51.080 -
51.088, 51.100 - 51.104, 51.125 - 51.130, 51.999


633
 
9-3-85
 
131.03


660
 
7-6-87
 
96.05


666
 
4-4-88
 
70.02


667
 
4-4-88
 
71.42, 71.45


668
 
4-4-88
 
91.03, 91.04


669
 
4-4-88
 
153.36


689
 
4-10-89
 
51.128


711
 
10-22-90
 
32.15 - 32.23


704
 
3-12-91
 
51.080 - 51.088, 51.100 - 51.104


704
 
4-11-91
 
51.128


727
 
4-29-91
 
51.002, 51.080 - 51.088, 51.129, 51.130, 51.999


727
 
6-27-91
 
51.128


736
 
4-13-92
 
96.03


738
 
4-13-92
 
96.04


739
 
4-27-92
 
132.01


742
 
9-28-92
 
32.19


745
 
2-8-93
 
50.01 - 50.14, 50.99


746
 
3-22-93
 
T.S.O. I


748
 
5-24-93
 
97.01 - 97.03, 97.15 - 97.20


747
 
6-9-93
 
71.43


750
 
2-14-94
 
T.S.O. III


751
 
4-25-94
 
T.S.O. III


752
 
4-25-94
 
T.S.O. III


753
 
7-11-94
 
110.02 - 110.06, 110.09 - 110.11, 110.27


754
 
8-22-94
 
131.08


755
 
10-24-94
 
T.S.O. III


759
 
5-8-95
 
T.S.O. III


761
 
7-24-95
 
131.04


762
 
8-14-95
 
91.05, 91.99


763
 
8-14-95
 
10.99, 36.01 - 36.07


768
 
8-14-95
 
110.99


769
 
8-14-95
 
97.99


770
 
8-14-95
 
50.99


771
 
8-14-95
 
99.99


772
 
8-28-95
 
98.01 - 98.14, 98.99


773
 
8-28-95
 
98.25 - 98.38, 98.99


774
 
8-28-95
 
52.01 - 52.11, 52.25 - 52.33, 52.99


776
 
10-9-95
 
96.99


778
 
10-9-95
 
51.103


777
 
10-23-95
 
T.S.O. III


779
 
11-27-95
 
150.15


783
 
3-11-96
 
96.11, 96.99


784
 
3-11-96
 
71.44, 71.99


785
 
5-13-96
 
96.10, 96.99


787
 
5-28-96
 
T.S.O. III


789
 
10-14-96
 
132.02 - 132.08


793
 
10-14-96
 
98.37


794
 
12-9-96
 
150.01, 150.99


796
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


797
 
2-10-97
 
T.S.O. III


798
 
4-14-97
 
T.S.O. II


800
 
6-23-97
 
50.06


801
 
1-23-97
 
T.S.O. II


802
 
7-14-97
 
Adopting Ordinance, 71.27 - 71.31


803
 
7-28-97
 
50.99


804
 
8-25-97
 
70.02, 71.45, 71.99, 131.01, 131.09


805
 
10-13-97
 
98.15, 98.16


806
 
10-13-97
 
T.S.O. III


807
 
10-27-97
 
T.S.O. III


808
 
11-10-97
 
T.S.O. III


809
 
11-24-97
 
50.06(B)(5)


810
 
11-24-97
 
T.S.O. III


811
 
11-24-97
 
71.45(B)


812
 
2-23-98
 
T.S.O. II


813
 
2-23-98
 
92.01, 92.03, 92.99


816
 
8-10-98
 
T.S.O. III


821
 
11-23-98
 
T.S.O. III


822
 
3-22-99
 
Chapter 113


823
 
4-26-99
 
71.44


824
 
7-26-99
 
T.S.O III


825
 
7-26-99
 
T.S.O III


826
 
9-13-99
 
T.S.O III


827
 
10-25-99
 
70.03


828
 
10-25-99
 
131.10


829
 
10-25-99
 
131.11


831
 
1-24-00
 
T.S.O. II


832
 
1-24-00
 
T.S.O. II


833
 
1-24-00
 
T.S.O. II


834
 
2-14-00
 
T.S.O. III


835
 
2-14-00
 
T.S.O. III


837
 
2-28-00
 
131.12


838
 
2-28-00
 
132.04


839
 
2-28-00
 
70.04 - 70.07


840
 
3-27-00
 
T.S.O. II


842
 
5-8-00
 
T.S.O. I


843
 
6-12-00
 
T.S.O. III


844
 
6-26-00
 
71.27, 71.32, 71.45


846
 
8-28-00
 
T.S.O. III


847
 
9-25-00
 
T.S.O. II


848
 
10-9-00
 
155.01 - 155.08, 155.99


850
 
12-11-00
 
51.100 - 51.104


851
 
3-12-01
 
T.S.O. II


852
 
3-26-01
 
96.04


853
 
3-26-01
 
96.03


854
 
4-23-01
 
T.S.O. III


855
 
5-12-01
 
T.S.O. III


856
 
6-25-01
 
T.S.O. II


859
 
8-27-01
 
T.S.O. III


860
 
9-10-01
 
131.04


862
 
9-10-01
 
150.15 - 150.18, 150.99


863
 
10-22-01
 
131.04


864
 
10-22-01
 
150.15


865
 
11-12-01
 
52.05, 52.25, 52.27


866
 
11-26-01
 
51.101, Ch. 51 Appendix


867
 
11-26-01
 
T.S.O. III


869
 
2-25-02
 
96.03


870
 
3-11-02
 
50.06


872
 
4-8-02
 
T.S.O. III


873
 
4-8-02
 
T.S.O. III


874
 
4-8-02
 
T.S.O. III


875
 
5-13-02
 
T.S.O. III


876
 
5-13-02
 
T.S.O. III


877
 
5-13-02
 
T.S.O. III


878
 
5-13-02
 
T.S.O. III


880
 
5-28-02
 
T.S.O. III


881
 
5-28-02
 
T.S.O. III


884
 
10-14-02
 
T.S.O. III


885
 
10-28-02
 
113.01 - 113.20, 113.99


886
 
11-11-02
 
37.01 - 37.08, 37.20 - 37.36, 37.50 - 37.60


887
 
1-27-03
 
T.S.O. III


888
 
2-24-03
 
110.01 - 110.11, 110.25, 110.27, 110.99


889
 
4-14-03
 
131.13


890
 
6-9-03
 
30.04, 30.08, 30.11, 30.15


891
 
7-14-03
 
T.S.O. III


892
 
7-28-03
 
38.01 - 38.06


894
 
8-11-03
 
154.000


895
 
10-13-03
 
114.01 - 114.03, 114.15 - 114.26, 114.35 - 114.37, 114.99


896
 
2-9-04
 
70.03


897
 
4-12-04
 
T.S.O. II


898
 
6-14-04
 
96.03


899
 
7-26-04
 
52.01, 52.05, 52.08, 52.11, 52.12, 52.25 - 52.27, 52.30, 52.32, 52.34


900
 
9-13-04
 
131.02


902
 
9-13-04
 
96.13


—
 
11-2-04
 
T.S.O. II


—
 
11-4-04
 
52.34


904
 
11-8-04
 
T.S.O. III


905
 
12-13-04
 
50.01 - 50.14, 50.99


906
 
2-14-05
 
110.26


908
 
7-11-05
 
T.S.O. III


909
 
8-8-05
 
T.S.O. III


910
 
8-8-05
 
T.S.O. III


911
 
9-12-05
 
70.01, 70.08


912
 
9-12-05
 
71.45, 71.46


914
 
11-14-05
 
T.S.O. II


915
 
11-28-05
 
T.S.O. III


917
 
1-23-06
 
T.S.O. III


918
 
2-13-06
 
T.S.O. III


—
 
11-8-05
 
52.35


919
 
4-24-06
 
93.01 - 93.13, 93.15, 93.17 - 93.19, 93.99


921
 
10-9-06
 
71.27


923
 
11-13-06
 
T.S.O. IV


925
 
3-12-07
 
98.04, 98.13, 98.99


926
 
4-9-07
 
T.S.O. III


927
 
5-14-07
 
152.001 - 152.013, 152.999


933
 
11-26-07
 
T.S.O. III


936
 
10-22-07
 
T.S.O. III


941
 
2-25-08
 
30.04


942
 
8-25-08
 
T.S.O. III


943
 
9-22-08
 
93.01, 93.02


946
 
4-13-09
 
72.35


947
 
4-13-09
 
50.10


948
 
5-11-09
 
96.05


949
 
7-13-09
 
T.S.O. III


950
 
7-13-09
 
T.S.O. III


952
 
8-24-09
 
52.51


953
 
8-25-10
 
T.S.O. III


954
 
10-27-10
 
T.S.O. III


956
 
10-11-10
 
71.02


959
 
11-8-10
 
111.01 - 111.12, 111.99


960
 
11-8-10
 
114.01, 114.03, 114.15, 114.16, 114.20


 
 
 
 
114.21, 114.38


961
 
11-8-10
 
97.18


962
 
1-24-11
 
T.S.O. III


963
 
3-24-11
 
10.05, 10.99, 36.01, 36.04, 36.05, 152.999, 153.99, 154.000


964
 
4-25-11
 
131.09, 131.11


965
 
4-25-11
 
132.03


966
 
4-25-11
 
152.003, 152.008


968
 
8-22-11
 
T.S.O. III


969
 
8-22-11
 
T.S.O. III


970
 
9-26-11
 
T.S.O. III


972
 
6-11-12
 
70.03


973
 
7-9-12
 
39.01 - 39.10, 39.98, 39.99


975
 
8-13-12
 
133.01 - 133.07, 133.98, 133.99


977
 
1-28-13
 
96.05, 96.99


979
 
5-28-13
 
51.100, 51.104, 52.25


981
 
7-22-13
 
96.04


982
 
10-14-13
 
110.11, 110.27, 110.28, 110.99


984
 
1-13-14
 
151.01 - 151.04


985
 
1-13-14
 
93.02, 93.12


986
 
1-13-14
 
152.004


987
 
4-28-14
 
93.08


988
 
6-23-14
 
93.08


989
 
8-25-14
 
133.02


990
 
10-13-14
 
110.27, 110.28


991
 
1-12-15
 
T.S.O. III


992
 
1-12-15
 
54.01 - 54.13


995
 
6-22-15
 
96.04


996
 
6-22-15
 
98.20 - 98.23


997
 
6-22-15
 
71.27


999
 
7-13-15
 
110.11, 110.29, 110.99


1001
 
8-10-15
 
50.06, 50.15, 50.99


1003
 
9-28-15
 
154.054, 154.095, 154.121


1004
 
11-9-15
 
154.021


1005
 
11-9-15
 
154.095


1006
 
11-9-15
 
154.162 - 154.166, 154.171


1007
 
12-14-15
 
131.01, 131.14, 131.15


1008
 
4-11-16
 
93.01, 93.02, 93.12


1009
 
4-25-16
 
98.13, 131.14


1010
 
5-23-16
 
54.09


1011
 
7-25-16
 
T.S.O. II


1014
 
8-8-16
 
50.15


1015
 
9-12-16
 
50.15


1017
 
10-12-16
 
152.004, 152.007


1018
 
10-12-16
 
130.01, 131.10, 132.03, 132.04


1019
 
11-14-16
 
51.126


1021
 
1-23-17
 
50.12, 50.99


1022
 
3-27-17
 
152.008, 152.999


1023
 
4-24-17
 
93.03


1026
 
9-11-17
 
131.04


1028
 
10-9-17
 
54.02 - 54.04, 54.09


1029
 
10-23-17
 
150.02


1030
 
10-23-17
 
156.01 - 156.22


1031
 
10-23-17
 
32.30


1032
 
1-8-18
 
132.03, 132.04, 132.06


1033
 
1-22-18
 
50.12, 50.99


1034
 
1-22-18
 
154.000


1035
 
3-12-18
 
150.02


1038
 
6-11-18
 
112.01 - 112.07


1041
 
10-8-18
 
30.04 - 30.13, 30.15, 30.16, 31.01


1042
 
4-8-19
 
113.01 - 113.20, 113.99


 
mOUNT pleasant, michigan 
zoning ordinances
chapter 154:   zoning ordinances



This page intentionally left blank

PrEFACE
 I
 
SECTION 1. Introduction 
 II
 
SECTION 2. Overview 
 III
 
SECTION 3. Informational Only 
 III
 

Article I: General
 1
 
SECTION 154.101. Common Reference 
 2
 
SECTION 154.102. Authority, purpose & intent 
 2
 
SECTION 154.103. EFFECTIVE DATE
 2
 
A. General.  
 2
 
B. Exclusive Zoning Regulation.
 2
 
C. Plans Under This Code.
 2
 
D. Relationship to Other Provisions.
 3
 
E. Compliance.
 3
 
F.  Conformance with Chapter Required.
 3
 
G. Restorations & Repairs.
 3
 
SECTION 154.104. Tables, Maps, Photographs, Images, Illustrations, Figures, Graphics, Diagrams & Depictions 
 3
 
SECTION 154.105. Definitions 
 4
 
SECTION 154.106. Preparation and Adoption of zoning map
 4
 
SECTION 154.107. zoning map Amendment
 4
 
SECTION 154.108. Determination of Standards
 4
 
SECTION 154.109. Administration
 4
 
SECTION 154.110. Applications
 4
 
A. Building Permits.
 4
 
B. Zoning Map & Amendments.
 4
 
C. Building and Lot Plans.
 4
 
D. Development Parcel Plans.
 4
 
E. Site Plans.
 5
 
SECTION 154.111. waivers, special uses, special regulated uses & Variances
 5
 
A. Waivers.
 5
 
B. Special Uses.
 5
 
C. Special Regulated Use.
 5
 
D. Variances.
 5
 
SECTION 154.112. Appeals
 5
 
SECTION 154.113. Violations
 5
 
SECTION 154.114. Non-Conforming lots, uses, Structures & Improvements
 5
 
A. Non-Conforming Lots.
 5
 
B. Non-Conforming Uses, Structures & Improvements.
 6
 
C. Extension of Legal Non-Conformity Status for Certain Subdivisions, Development, Etc.
 6
 
SECTION 154.115. performance guarantees
 8
 
A. Security for Compliance & Completion.
 8
 
B. Security for Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
 8
 
SECTION 154.116. separability
 8
 

Article II: zoning map
 9
 
SECTION 154.201. Adoption of zoning map
 10
 
SECTION 154.202. Compliance
 10
 
SECTION 154.203. Special Requirements
 10
 
A. Shopfront Frontage.
 10
 
B. Terminated Vista.
 10
 
C. Cross Block Passage.
 10
 
D. Buildings of Value.
 10
 
E. Special Height Range.
 10
 
F. Residential/Dwelling Use Restriction.
 10
 
G. Residential/Dwelling Use Only.
 10
 
H. Student Organization Dwelling & Rooming Dwelling Restriction.
 11
 
SECTION 154.204. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
 11
 

Article III: Character Districts, special districts & civic Zones
 13
 
SECTION 154.301. General
 14
 
A. Applicability and Compliance.
 14
 
B. Character District Defined.
 14
 
C. Special District Defined.
 14
 
D. Civic Zone Defined.
 14
 
E. Character District Descriptions.
 14
 
F. Special District Descriptions.
 16
 
SECTION 154.302. Assignment of Districts and Civic Zones
 16
 
A. General.
 16
 
B. Assignment of Character Districts for Development Parcel.
 16
 
C. Assignment of Civic Zones for Development Parcel.
 16
 
D. Assignment of Special Districts for Development Parcel.
 16
 
E. Establishment of Local Historic Districts.
 16
 
SECTION 154.303. Establishment of additional districts
 17
 
SECTION 154.304. Elements and Standards
 17
 
SECTION 154.305. additional requirements
 17
 

Article IV: building and lot plans & standards
 19
 
SECTION 154.401. General
 20
 
SECTION 154.402. building and lot plans
 20
 
A. Plan Required.
 20
 
B. Preparation and Requirements.
 20
 
C. Plan Submission.
 20
 
D. Plan Approval.
 20
 
SECTION 154.403. preparation
 20
 
SECTION 154.404. Plan requirements
 20
 
A. Compliance.
 20
 
B. Contents.
 20
 
SECTION 154.405. building and lot standards
 21
 
A. District Buildings & Lots.
 21
 
B. Civic Zone Buildings & Lots.
 65
 
SECTION 154.406. LOTs
 70
 
A. Lot Layers.
 70
 
B. Lot Dimensions.
 70
 
C. Lot Enfrontment.
 70
 
D. Corner Clearance.
 70
 
E. Double Fronted Lots.
 70
 
F. Required Spaces or Areas.
 70
 
G. Yards Along District Boundaries.
 70
 
SECTION 154.407. Building Placement, Number & Facades
 70
 
A. Building Placement.
 70
 
B. Principal Building.
 71
 
C. Accessory Buildings.
 71
 
D. Rear Dwellings.
 72
 
E. Building Facades.
 72
 
F. Fences & Walls.
 72
 
SECTION 154.408. Private Frontage, Building Form & Building Type; Floor Elevation
 72
 
A. Private Frontage – General.
 72
 
B. Private Frontage on Corner Lots.
 77
 
C. Building & Ceiling Height; Floor Finish Elevation.
 77
 
D. Roof Type & Pitch.
 77
 
E. Façade Standards.
 77
 
F. Screens and Streetscreens.
 77
 
G. Principal Building Types.
 78
 
SECTION 154.409. Encroachments
 90
 
SECTION 154.410. Uses
 90
 
A. Principal Uses.
 90
 
B. Special Uses.
 90
 
C. Special Regulated Uses.
 101
 
D. Accessory Uses.
 109
 
E. Permitted Temporary Uses.
 111
 
F. Mobile Home Parks.
 111
 
G. Basement Dwellings.
 111
 
H. Camping Dwellings.
 111
 
SECTION 154.411. BICYCLE Parking, Loading & Trash Receptacle Requirements
 112
 
A. Bicycle Parking Requirement.
 112
 
B. Loading Space.
 113
 
C. Solid Waste Receptacle Requirement.
 113
 
D. Dumpster and Trash Receptacle Enclosures.
 113
 
SECTION 154.412. Parking, Loading, Driveway, Service, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/DUMPSTER, Equipment, & Other Items Locations & Standards
 113
 
A. Provision; Location; Access; Design.
 113
 
B. Screens.
 115
 
C. Driveway Width.
 115
 
D. Pedestrian Exits.
 115
 
E. Liner Buildings Required.
 115
 
SECTION 154.413. Private Lot Landscape Standards
 116
 
A. General.
 116
 
B. Plant Materials.
 116
 
C. Tree Size.
 116
 
D. Placement of Shrubs.
 116
 
E. Shrub Size.
 116
 
F. Hazardous Landscape.
 116
 
G. Bare / Exposed Ground.
 116
 
H. Artificial Plants / Turf.
 116
 
I. Establishment.
 116
 
J. Screens.
 116
 
K. Mitigation of Wind Erosion.
 116
 
L. Compacted Soils.
 116
 
M. Condition of Plants.
 116
 
N. Maintenance.
 117
 
O. Planted Trees.
 117
 
P. Paving.
 117
 
Q. Trees Required.
 117
 
R. Lawns.
 117
 
S. Minimum Landscaped Area.
 117
 
T. Preservation of Existing Trees & Vegetation.
 117
 
U. Preservation of Root Zones.
 117
 
V. No Noxious or Invasive Species.
 117
 
W. Existing Vegetation.
 117
 
X. Significant Trees.
 117
 
Y. Open Space & Civic Space.
 117
 
Z. Remediation of Compaction.
 117
 
AA. Amendment of Topsoil.
 117
 
BB. Parking Areas / Parking Lots.
 117
 
CC. Location.
 118
 
SECTION 154.414. Sign Standards
 118
 
A. Purpose; General.
 118
 
B. General Sign Provisions.
 119
 
C. Exempt Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit.
 121
 
D. Sign Area Computation.
 121
 
E. Responsibility for Signs.
 121
 
F. Non-Conforming Signs.
 121
 
SECTION 154.415. Private Lighting Standards
 140
 
SECTION 154.416. Streetscape repairs, replacements & Improvements
 140
 
A. Applicability.
 140
 
B. Streetscape Repairs, Replacements & Improvements.
 140
 

Article V: Development Parcel Plans & Standards
 141
 
SECTION 154.501. General
 142
 
A. Definition.
 142
 
SECTION 154.502. Development Parcel Plans
 142
 
A. When Development Parcel Plan Required.
 142
 
B. Preparation and Requirements.
 142
 
C. Plan Submission.
 142
 
D. Action on Plan.
 142
 
SECTION 154.503. Preparation
 142
 
SECTION 154.504. Plan Requirements
 142
 
A. General.
 142
 
B. Items Required on/with Development Parcel Plan.
 142
 
C. Pedestrian Sheds.
 143
 
D. Civic Zones.
 143
 
E. Character Districts.
 143
 
F. Special Districts.
 143
 
G. Thoroughfare Network.
 144
 
H. District Density.
 144
 
SECTION 154.505. Thoroughfares
 144
 
A. General.
 144
 
B. Thoroughfare Standards.
 144
 
C. Bicycle Accommodations.
 154
 
D. Public Frontages
 157
 
E. Placement of Trees.
 157
 
F. Tree Size.
 157
 
G. Shrub Size.
 157
 
H. Bare / Exposed Ground.
 157
 
I. Artificial Plants / Turf.
 157
 
J. Irrigation.
 157
 
K. Temporary Spray Irrigation.
 157
 
L. Water Features.
 158
 
M. Minimum Requirements.
 158
 
N. Prevention of Compaction.
 158
 
O. Mitigation of Wind Erosion.
 158
 
P. Compacted Soils.
 158
 
Q. Condition of Plants.
 158
 
SECTION 154.506. Block Perimeter
 158
 
SECTION 154.507. Civic Zones
 158
 
A. Civic Space Requirement; Civic Zone Designation.
 158
 
B. Civic Spaces - Design.
 158
 
C. Civic Spaces Required.
 163
 
D. Civic Spaces in or Adjacent to Special Districts.
 163
 
E. Civic Buildings (CB) Required.
 163
 
F. Civic Building Standards.
 163
 
G. Civic Buildings in Special Districts.
 163
 
H. Maintenance of Civic Buildings and Civic Space.
 163
 
SECTION 154.508. District Density
 163
 
A. Density Calculations.
 163
 
B. Maximum District Density.
 164
 
SECTION 154.509. Character Districts
 164
 
SECTION 154.510. Special Districts
 164
 
SECTION 154.511. Special Requirements
 164
 

Article VI: ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
 165
 
SECTION 154.601. AUTHORIZATION OF zoning administrator
 166
 
SECTION 154.602. BUILDING AND LOT PLANS
 166
 
A. Building and Lot Plan Required.
 166
 
B. Submission with Application for Building Permit.
 166
 
C. Requirements.
 166
 
D. Review and Action; Issuance of Certificate of Compliance.
 166
 
SECTION 154.603. development parcel PLANS
 166
 
A. Development Parcel Plan Required.
 166
 
B. Applications.
 166
 
C. Requirements.
 166
 
D. Review and Action; Issuance of Certificate of Compliance.
 166
 
SECTION 154.604. administrative waivers
 167
 
SECTION 154.605. building permits, certificates of occupancy, and sign permits
 167
 
A. Building Permit Required.
 167
 
B. Applications.
 167
 
C. Reliance of Certificate of Compliance and Site Plan Approval.
 167
 
D. Certificate of Occupancy.
 167
 
E. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
 167
 
F. Issuance of Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
 167
 
G. Sign Permit Required.
 167
 
H. Applications.
 167
 
I. Application Requirements.
 167
 
J. Issuance of Sign Permit.
 167
 
SECTION 154.606. zoning board of appeals
 168
 
A. Powers.
 168
 
B. Composition.
 168
 
C. Meetings.
 168
 
D. Applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
 168
 
E. Quorum.
 168
 
F. Voting Requirements and Procedures.
 168
 
G. Assistance from City Departments.
 168
 
SECTION 154.607. appeals
 169
 
A. Appellate Authority.
 169
 
B. Application to Appeal.
 169
 
C. Standard for Deciding Appeal.
 169
 
D. Stay of Enforcement.
 169
 
SECTION 154.608. VARIANCES
 169
 
A. Variance Authority.
 169
 
B. Non-Use (Dimensional) Variances.
 169
 
C. Conditions.
 170
 
D. Performance Guarantee.
 170
 
E. Variance Implementation.
 170
 
SECTION 154.609. decisions interpreting the zoning ordinance oR map
 170
 
A. Applications Requesting Advisory Decisions.
 170
 
B. Standards for Interpreting Zoning Map.
 170
 
SECTION 154.610. hearing procedure
 171
 
A. Notice.
 171
 
B. Recess.
 171
 
SECTION 154.611. decisions final; appeal
 171
 
SECTION 154.612. planning commission
 171
 
SECTION 154.613. site plan review
 171
 
A. Planning Commission Authorized.
 171
 
B. Pre-Application Meeting.
 171
 
C. Action on Site Plan.
 172
 
D. Types of Improvements/Applications Requiring Site Plan Approval.
 172
 
E. Application Requirements & Procedures.
 172
 
F. Performance Guarantees.
 174
 
SECTION 154.614. planned residential development agreement
 174
 
A. PRD Agreement Remains in Effect.
 174
 
B. Compliance.
 174
 
C. Termination Prior to Development.
 174
 
D. Termination After Commencement of Development.
 174
 
E. Termination By City.
 174
 
F. Zoning Upon Termination.
 174
 
G. Issuance of Building Permits.
 174
 
H. Planning Commission Review of Final Plats and Plans.
 175
 
I. Development Not Completed within Three Years.
 175
 
J. Fees.
 175
 
K. Changes or Amendments.
 175
 
SECTION 154.615. special use permits & special regulated use permits
 175
 
A. Special Use Permits & Special Regulated Use Permits.
 175
 
B. Criteria for Special Use Permits and Special Regulated Use Permits.
 175
 
C. Conditions for Special Use Permits & Special Regulated Use Permits.
 176
 
D. Application Procedures.
 176
 
E. Revocation.
 178
 
SECTION 154.616. ZONING Amendments and Map changes
 178
 
A. Amendments, Supplements or Changes.
 178
 
B. Procedure for Requests for Zoning Amendment.
 178
 
C. Criteria for Amendment of the Official Zoning Map.
 180
 
SECTION 154.617. notice OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
 180
 
SECTION 154.618. Properties in historic districts
 180
 
SECTION 154.619. nuisance per se; abatement
 181
 
SECTION 154.620. additional remedies
 181
 
SECTION 154.621. penalty
 181 
 

Article VII: DEFINITIONS
 183
 




PrEFACE
 
SECTION 1. Introduction 
 
Illustration P.1.1 Thoroughfare and Frontages
 II
 

Article I: General
 
SECTION 154.114. Non-Conforming Uses, Lots, Structures & Improvements
 
Illustration 154.114.C Special Legal Non-conformity Status for Certain Subdivisions & Improvements
 7
 

Article II: ZONING MAP
 

Article III: Character Districts, Special Districts & Civic Zones
 
SECTION 154.301. General
 
Table 154.301.E Character District Descriptions
 15
 
Table 154.301.F Special District Descriptions
 16
 
SECTION 154.302. Assignment of Character Districts
 
Table 154.302 Assignment of Character Districts for Development Parcels > 80 Acres
 17
 

Article IV: Building And Lot Plans & Standards
 
SECTION 154.405. Civic Buildings and Lots
 
Table 154.405.A District Standards
 22-64
 
Table 154.405.B Civic Zone Standards
 66-69
 
SECTION 154.406. Lots
 
Illustration 154.406.A Lot Layers
 70
 
SECTION 154.407. Building Placement, Number, & Facades
 
Illustration 154.407.A Setback Designations
 71
 
Illustration 154.407.B Principal Building / Accessory Building
 71
 
SECTION 154.408 Private Frontage, Building Form & Building Type; Floor Elevation
 
Table 154.408.A Private Frontage Types
 73-76
 
Illustration 154.408.B Frontage & Lot Lines
 77
 
Illustration 154.408.D1 Roof Type
 77
 
Illustration 154.408.D2 Roof Pitch
 77
 
Table 154.408.G1 Principal Building Types - Summary
 78-79
 
Table 154.408.G2 Principal Building Types - Specific Standards
 80-89
 
SECTION 154.410. Uses
 
Table 154.410.A Building and Lot Principal Use
 104-108
 
Table 154.410.D Building and Lot Accessory Uses
 109-111
 
SECTION 154.411. BICYCLE Parking, Loading, & Trash Receptacle Requirements
 
Table 154.411.A Bicycle Parking
 112
 
SECTION 154.412. Parking, loading, driveway, service, storage, drive-through, trash receptacle/dumpster, equipment, & other items locations & standards
 
Table 154.412.A.14 Off-Street Parking Accommodations - Design
 114
 
Illustration 154.412.A.11 Drive-Through
 115
 
SECTION 154.414. Sign Standards
 
Table 154.414A Sign Types - Summary
 122-124
 
Table 154.414B Sign Types - Specific Standards
 125-139
 

Article V: Development Parcel Plans & Standards
 
SECTION 154.504. Plan Requirements
 
Illustration 154.504.C Pedestrian Sheds
 143
 
SECTION 154.505. Thoroughfares
 
Illustration 154.505.B1 Turning Radius
 144
 
Table 154.505.B2 Thoroughfare Types - Summary
 145-146
 
Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards
 147-153
 
Table 154.505.C Bikeway Types
 155-156
 
SECTION 154.506. Block Perimeter
 
Table 154.506 Block Perimeter Standards
 158
 
SECTION 154.507.B1 Civic space types - summary
 
Table 154.507.B1 Civic Space Types - Summary
 159
 
Table 154.507.B2 Civic Space - Specific Standards
 160-162
 
SECTION 154.508. District Density
 
Table 154.508.A1 District Density
 163
 
Table 154.508.A2 Density Equivalencies
 164
 



preface

SECTION 1. Introduction 
 II
 
SECTION 2. Overview 
 III
 
SECTION 3. Informational Only 
 III
 



SECTION 1.     
INTRODUCTION 
Chapter 154, the City’s Zoning Code, is a character- or form-based code. This type of code is intended to facilitate predictable, contextually-based planning and development of walkable, mixed use, human-scaled places of character. This is accomplished by providing a range of standards for Use and the other elements of Development that define a place. Examples of these are Public Frontage, Private Frontage, Building Configuration, Building Placement, Thoroughfare, Yard Type, Building Type, Density, Civic Space, and Parking Standards. The following Illustration P.1.1. (Thoroughfare and Frontages) shows the general relationships among the Private Frontage and the Public Frontage and other parts of the public realm.
Additionally, Chapter 154 provides for five Special Districts: Hospital, Industrial, Research Center, Agricultural, and University.
ILLUSTRATION P.1.1 THOROUGHFARE AND FRONTAGES


Vehicular
Lanes

Public
Frontage

Private
Frontage

Public
Frontage

Private
Frontage

Parking

Parking

Thoroughfare
(Right-of-Way)


SECTION 2.    
OVERVIEW
Chapter 154 provides standards and requirements for (a) Development Parcels and (b) Buildings and Lots within Character Districts, Special Districts, and Civic Zones. Those for Buildings and Lots apply whenever a Lot is subdivided and/or a Building is built. Those for Development Parcels apply only under certain circumstances, as described in Article V of the Code. 
Chapter 154 is organized into Articles as follows:
Article I, “General” includes provisions concerning purpose, applicability, existing conditions, interpretation, amendment, definitions, and plan requirements.
Article II, “Zoning Map” includes requirements for  the City’s Zoning Map and its amendment. The adopted Zoning Map is the official zoning map for the City. 
Article III, “Character Districts, Special Districts & Civic Zones” includes provisions regarding the Character Districts, Special Districts, and Civic Zones and their elements and standards, as well as provisions relating to the assignment of Character Districts, Special Districts, and Civic Zones on the Regulating Plan, Regulating Plan amendments, and Development Parcel Plans.  
Article IV, “Building and Lot Plans & Standards” includes provisions for Building and Lot Plan preparation, submission and approval, and Lot and Building standards.
Article V, “Development Parcel Plans & Standards” specifies the circumstances under which a Development Parcel Plan is required, preparation, submission and approval of Development Parcel Plans, and standards and requirements for Thoroughfares, Block Perimeter, Civic Zones, District Density, Special Districts and Special Requirements.
Article VI, “Administration & Enforcement” includes administrative, procedural, and enforcement provisions.  
Article	VII, “Definitions” includes definitions of certain terms used in the Code.
SECTION 3.    
INFORMATIONAL ONLY
This Preface is informational, not regulatory. It is intended to assist users of the Code. The governing regulations of Chapter 154 are contained in the Articles that follow.  

page left intentionally blank

Article I: 
General

SECTION 154.101. Common Reference 
 2
 
SECTION 154.102. Authority, purpose & intent 
 2
 
SECTION 154.103. EFFECTIVE DATE
 2
 
SECTION 154.104. Tables, Maps, Photographs, Images, Illustrations, Figures, Graphics, Diagrams & Depictions 
 3
 
SECTION 154.105. Definitions 
 4
 
SECTION 154.106. Preparation and Adoption of zoning map
 4
 
SECTION 154.107. zoning map Amendment
 4
 
SECTION 154.108. Determination of Standards
 4
 
SECTION 154.109. Administration
 4
 
SECTION 154.110. Applications
 4
 
SECTION 154.111. waivers, special uses, special regulated uses & Variances
 5
 
SECTION 154.112. Appeals
 5
 
SECTION 154.113. Violations
 5
 
SECTION 154.114. Non-Conforming lots, uses, Structures & Improvements
 5
 
SECTION 154.115. performance guarantees
 8
 
SECTION 154.116. separability
 8
 



SECTION 154.101. 
COMMON REFERENCE
This Chapter 154, as the same may be amended from time to time, is referred to herein and otherwise may be referred to as the “Mount Pleasant Zoning Ordinances”.
 
SECTION 154.102. 	
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE & INTENT
This Chapter has been adopted pursuant to Michigan Compiled Laws Sections 125.3101 - 125.3702 (2016).
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the location of land Uses and the location of Buildings designed for specific Uses, to regulate and limit the Height and bulk of Buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and determine the minimum area of yards, courts and other open spaces surrounding Buildings, to regulate and limit the density of population, to provide for safe and convenient access, to lessen congestion in the streets, to provide and regulate parking for vehicles, to secure safety from fire and other hazards, to regulate the erection and maintenance of Signs, to conserve the value of property, to encourage the appropriate Use of land, and to provide for orderly growth and Development, and in order to promote these purposes, this Chapter divides the City into zoning Districts and Civic Zones. It is the further purpose and intent of this Code to provide for walkable, Mixed Use, character-based, Development and re-Development in certain parts of the City to which Character Districts are assigned. 
SECTION 154.103. 
EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICABILITY
A. General.	
1.	This Chapter shall become effective in accordance with Article V, subsection 4(e) of the City Charter.
2.	This Chapter, the Zoning Map, and the standards and requirements of this Chapter, are applicable to all Development, re-Development, Improvements, land, Structures, modifications, construction, re-construction, Buildings and Lots, and Uses within the CIty.
3.	This Chapter supersedes and replaces in its entirety Chapter 154 as the same has heretofore been in effect.  
B. Exclusive Zoning Regulation. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in Section 154.103.C, this Chapter shall be the exclusive and mandatory zoning regulation for the City.
C. Plans Under this Code.
This Code contemplates several types of plans, as follows: 
1.	Building and Lot Plans - A Building and Lot Plan is a plan that includes the information required by Section 154.404 and demonstrates compliance with all requirements of this Code related to such requirements, specifically as related to the building and lot-scale requirements of this Code.
	A Building and Lot Plan certified by the City Planner as being in compliance with this Code is a condition to issuance of a Building Permit.  A Building and Lot Plan is required as part of an application for Site Plan approval. 
2.	Development Parcel Plan - A Development Parcel Plan is a plan that includes the information required by Section 154.504 and demonstrates compliance with all requirements of this Code related to such requirements, specifically with respect to a proposal that involves a Development Parcel with the Development Parcel requirements of this Code. A Development Parcel is a parcel: 
a. Which, either alone or together with one or more parcels under a common Development scheme, program or plan, is four (4) or more gross acres; 
b. With respect to the Development of which any new Thoroughfare or extension or change of the design of any existing Thoroughfare is required or will be made or proposed; or 
c. With respect to which any Character District assignment, Special District assignment, Civic Zone assignment or Thoroughfare alignment is proposed to be made or changed by a Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment.
	A Development Parcel Plan is required as part of any application for issuance or approval of a subdivision or plat, Building Permit, Building and Lot Plan, or Site Plan that relates to a Development Parcel and as part of each application for Zoning Map amendment other than one prepared by or on behalf of the City. 
3.	Zoning Map - When adopted, the Zoning Map shall be the City’s Official Zoning Map. It includes designations of Character Districts, Special Districts, Civic Zones, and Special Requirements. 
4.	Site Plans - A Site Plan is a plan that includes the information required by Section 154.613.E and demonstrates compliance with all requirements of this Code related to such information. 
	A Site Plan is required for all: 
a.	New Buildings; 
b.	Additions to Buildings that increase the exterior dimensions or the Useable Floor Area; 
c. Alterations or modifications to the site such as changes to parking layout, Driveways, landscaped areas, Screening walls, and public walkways; 
d.	Any Development or application involving a Development Parcel; and
e.	Any other Improvement or application for which a Site Plan is specifically required by this Chapter.
5.	Sign Plans - A Sign Plan is a plan that demonstrates compliance with Sign standards of this Code. A Sign Plan is required as part of each Sign Permit Application.
D. Relationship to Other Provisions. 
1.	The provisions of this Chapter shall take precedence over those of other codes, ordinances, regulations, and standards that may be in conflict with this Chapter, except City, County, and State Health and Safety Codes.
2.	Except as expressly superseded hereby, the Existing Local Codes, including without limitation, the City Subdivision Regulations and Land Division Ordinance shall continue to be applicable to matters not covered by this Chapter, except where the Existing Local Codes are inconsistent with, or in conflict with, this Chapter. 
E. Compliance.	 
Except for non-conformances allowed pursuant to Section 154.114, all Development, re-Development, land, Improvements, construction, re-construction, modifications, Structures, Buildings and Lots, all Use thereof, and all plans, applications and submissions required or submitted under this Chapter must comply with this Chapter and the standards hereof made applicable to the Character Districts, Special Districts, Special Requirements, and Civic Zones pursuant to the approved Zoning Map, any applicable approved Development Parcel Plan, and any applicable approved Building and Lot Plan.
F. Conformance with Chapter Required.
No Building, Structure or land shall be Used and no Building, Structure or part thereof shall be constructed, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or Altered except in conformity with this Chapter.
G.  Restorations & Repairs.
When any Building is declared unsafe by the Fire Marshal or Building Official, nothing in this Chapter shall prevent compliance with lawful requirements or the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition in accordance with Section 154.114.B.7.
SECTION 154.104. 
TABLES, MAPS, PHOTOGRAPHS, 
IMAGES, ILLUSTRATIONS, FIGURES, GRAPHICS, DIAGRAMS & DEPICTIONS 
1.	The standards and requirements of Tables herein and the adopted Zoning Map are integral parts of this Chapter. 
2.	The diagrams, photographs and illustrations in Table 154.405.A (District Standards), Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types), Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types), Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards), Table 154.505.B2 (Thoroughfare Types - Summary), Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies & Standards), Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types), Table 154.505.D (Public Planting), Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary), and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space Types - Specific Standards) are provided only to indicate the general character or placement of and/or reference to the various Character Districts, Civic Zones, and Civic Spaces, and elements thereof, shown thereon, and they shall have regulatory force and effect only to that extent.
3.	The illustrations in Table 154.505.D (Public Planting) are provided only as an approximation of the Public Planting Types and Public Lighting Types and they shall have regulatory force and effect only to that extent.
4.	All graphical and tabular depictions entitled “Illustration” or “Figure”, or denoted as “illustrative” are provided for illustrative, explanatory purposes only and are not regulatory. 
5.	Where in conflict, numerical metrics shall take precedence over graphic metrics.
SECTION 154.105.
DEFINITIONS
Certain capitalized terms used throughout this Chapter are defined in Article VII. Such definitions are integral to this Chapter. Uncapitalized terms and terms not so defined shall be accorded their commonly accepted meanings unless otherwise provided in this Chapter. In the event of conflicts between the definitions in this Chapter and the definitions of the Existing Local Codes, those of this Chapter shall take precedence as applied to this Chapter.
SECTION 154.106.
PREPARATION AND ADOPTION OF 
Zoning Map
Each Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment must conform to the requirements of Section 154.201. 
The initial Zoning Map for the City shall be prepared by or on behalf of the City and approved immediately after the effective date of this Chapter. 
SECTION 154.107. 
Zoning Map AMENDMENT
The Zoning Map in effect from time to time, may be amended upon initiative of the City or upon application of the Owner of the parcel for which a zoning change is proposed if such Zoning Map amendment is approved by the City Commission as a zoning map amendment in accordance with Article VI. 
SECTION 154.108. 
DETERMINATION OF STANDARDS	
The City Commission has established the standards in this Chapter and, upon approval of the Zoning Map or any amendment thereof, will have made such standards applicable to the City.
SECTION 154.109.
ADMINISTRATION
Except as otherwise provided herein, this Chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator. 
SECTION 154.110. 
Applications
A. Building Permits.
An application for issuance of a Building Permit shall be processed, reviewed, and acted upon in accordance with applicable state law; provided that no Building Permit shall be issued unless and until the Building or Development complies with this Chapter.
B.  Zoning Maps & Amendments.
Applications for approval of Zoning Map amendments that are determined by the City Planner to be complete shall be forwarded for further processing, review, consideration and/or action, as applicable, as a zoning map amendment under Article VI.
C. Building and Lot Plans. 
In addition to satisfaction of all other applicable Building Permit application requirements, a Building Permit may be issued only upon the Zoning Administrator’s determination and certification that the Building and Lot Plan complies with all applicable standards and requirements of this Chapter, the Zoning Map, and any applicable Development Parcel Plan, taking into account any applicable approved Deviations.
No Development, re-Development, Improvement, subdivision, re-subdivision, construction, re-construction, or modification of or on any Building, Lot or parcel of land shall occur without prior submission of a complete application for review and issuance of a Certificate of Compliance with respect to a Building and Lot Plan that complies with Section 154.402 and issuance of such Certificate of Compliance pursuant to Section 154.602. A Building and Lot Plan is not required for Ordinary Maintenance or Repair of an existing Structure.
D. Development Parcel Plans. 
A Development Parcel Plan, if required by Article V, shall be submitted:
1.	if not related to a request for zoning map amendment, as a part of the application for approval of the Site Plan, and in addition to satisfaction of all other applicable Site Plan application requirements, such Site Plan may be approved only upon the City Planner’s determination that the Development Parcel Plan complies with all applicable standards and requirements of this Chapter and the Zoning Map, taking into account any applicable approved Deviations; or
2.	if  related to a request for zoning map amendment, as a part of the application for approval of the applicable Zoning Map and zoning map amendment, and in addition to satisfaction of all other applicable zoning application requirements, such Zoning Map and zoning map amendment may be approved only upon the City Planner’s determination that the Development Parcel Plan complies with all applicable standards and requirements of this Chapter and the applicable proposed re-zoning as reflected in the proposed Zoning Map amendment. 
If required by Section 154.502.A, no Development, re-Development, Improvement, subdivision,  re-subdivision, construction, re-construction or modification of or on any Building, Lot, or parcel of land shall occur without prior submission of a complete application for review and issuance of a Certificate of Compliance with respect to a Development Parcel Plan that complies with Section 154.502.B and issuance of such Certificate of Compliance pursuant to Section 154.603.
E. Site Plans.
An application for approval of a Site Plan shall be processed, reviewed, and acted upon pursuant to Article VI.
No Development, re-Development, Improvement, subdivision, re-subdivision, construction, re-construction, or modification of or on any Building, Lot or parcel of land shall occur unless a Site Plan has been approved therefor.  A Site Plan is not required for Ordinary Maintenance or Repair of an existing Structure.
SECTION 154.111. 
WAIVERS, Special uses, special 
regulated uses & VARIANCES 
A. Waivers. 
To the extent expressly provided in this Chapter with respect to any standard or requirement hereof, a Waiver of such standard or requirement may be granted by the designated City official upon written request of an applicant if allowance of such Waiver is determined by the City Planner to be consistent with the intent of this Chapter.
B. Special Uses. 
A Special Use may be permitted by the Planning Commission for those Uses indicated for a District or Civic Zone as “SUP” on Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Permitted Use) in accordance with Section 154.615. 
C. Special Regulated Use.
A Special Regulated Use may be permitted by the Planning Commission for those Uses indicated for a District or Civic Zone as “SRU” on Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Permitted Use) in accordance with Section 154.615.
D. Variances.
Variances may be granted by the Board pursuant to Article VI to deviate from a standard or requirement otherwise applicable under this Chapter, or otherwise applicable to any land, Lot, Improvement, Building, or Structure regulated under this Chapter.
SECTION 154.112.
APPEALS
Appeals from decisions or determinations under this Chapter may be taken in accordance with Article VI.
SECTION 154.113.
VIOLATIONS
Penalties for and enforcement of any violation of this Chapter shall be as provided in Article VI.
SECTION 154.114. 
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES,
STRUCTURES & IMPROVEMENTS
A. Non-Conforming Lots.
Any Lot existing on the effective date of this Chapter that fails to comply with one or more minimum Lot dimensional standards of this Chapter may be Used for a permitted Principal Use provided it is in Single Ownership and either the lot was created as part of an approved plat or the departure from any such minimal Lot dimensional standard is no more than 10% of such standard.
B. Non-Conforming Uses, Structures & Improvements.
1.	Any Structure, Improvement, or Use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Chapter, or any subsequent amendment, that does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter may be continued provided that there is no increase or enlargement in the degree or manner of non-conformance.
2.	A conforming Use or Structure that does not meet the area, yard or Height standards of this Chapter may be changed or enlarged provided there is no increase in the specific non-conformity. 
3.	A Parking Area lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Chapter that does not meet the parking locations requirements of Table 154.405.A may be reconstructed provided it complies with all other vehicular parking standards and there is no increase or enlargement in the degree or manner of non-conformance. 
4.	If a non-conforming Use is discontinued or ceased for a period of one year, any subsequent Use must conform to the provisions of this Chapter. 
5.	Damaged or demolished Structures may be repaired or rebuilt as follows:
a.	When a Structure is voluntarily demolished, the Structure may be repaired or rebuilt only if the dimensions and Use of the Structure are in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
b.	When a Structure is damaged by a fire or another casualty event beyond the owner’s control and the total destruction is equal to or greater than 50% of the Structure’s replacement value, the Structure may be repaired or rebuilt only:
i.	If the dimensions and Use of the Structure are in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter; or
ii.	the Board approves such work pursuant to Section 154.114.B.6 below.
c.	When a Structure is damaged by a fire or another casualty event beyond the owner’s control and the total destruction is less than 50% of the Structure’s replacement value, the Structure may be repaired or rebuilt so long as there is no increase or enlargement in the degree or manner of non-conformance.  If such repairs or rebuilding are completed within 2 years of the date of the destruction, a lawful nonconforming Use that was in existence immediately prior to the destruction may be continued.
d.	For purposes of this Section, the percentage of replacement value shall be calculated by taking the documented cost for the reconstruction or repairs (the numerator) and dividing that number by the pre-damage fair market value of the property (the denominator) and multiplying the result by 100.
6.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the following work may be done without affecting the lawful non-conforming status of a Use, Structure or Improvement:
a.	Ordinary Maintenance
b.	Strengthening or restoring any portion of a Structure or Improvement to a safe condition, provided no material enlargement results.
c.	Repairing or replacing interior walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing.
d.	Repaving driveways and parking lots, replacing exterior windows and siding, and painting exterior structures and fixtures.
7. 	In addition to any other allowance under this Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals may allow the resumption, restoration, or reconstruction of a Structure if:
a.	The Board determines that the resumption, restoration, or reconstruction results in a marked decrease in the degree of non-conformance, improves the character of the neighborhood and is of decided benefit to Adjacent conforming Uses; and
b.	The Structure is used for a Use permitted under this Chapter or for a non-conforming Use lawfully existing at the time the application to the Board is filed. The Board may impose conditions on the applicant to ensure these standards are met. 
C. Extension of Legal Non-Conformity Status for Certain Subdivisions, Development, Etc.	
1.	Without limitation to Section 154.114.A. and 154.114.B, and in addition thereto, if the conditions of clause 154.114.C.2 below are met, an Existing Parcel:  
a. may be subdivided in such a manner that creates
i. a Non-Conformity-Bearing Lot; and 
ii. one or more Remainder Lots; and
b. the Remainder Lots (may be Developed or re-Developed.
2.	The following are the conditions which must be satisfied to be eligible under Section 154.114.C.1:
a.	the Remainder Lots, and all Development, re-Development, Structures, Improvements and Buildings thereon and thereto, and all Uses thereof, must conform to all standards and requirements of this Chapter; 
b.	the Non-Conformity-Bearing Lot and all Buildings, Structures and Improvements thereon
	i. must meet all Building and Lot standards and requirements of this Chapter 154 other than the following standards and requirements as set forth in Table 154.405.A (District Standards): Private Frontage Type, Lot Occupation, Building Height, Ceiling Height, Facade, Finished Floor Level, Roof Type and Pitch, Principal Building Type, Vehicular Parking,  Bicycle Parking,  Private Landscaping and Fencing, Signs, Lighting, and Screens; and
	ii. are not required to meet any additional requirements applicable to only to Development Parcels; and
3.	The effect of subdivision, Development or re-Development pursuant to Sections 154.114.C.1 and 154.114.C.2 is as follows:
a.	the Non-Conformity-Bearing Lot shall thereafter constitute a legal non-conforming Lot and the legal non-conforming status of the Structure, Improvement or Use of or on the Non-Conformity-Bearing Lot shall continue notwithstanding such subdivision, Development or re-Development; and
b.	the legal non-conforming status of any Structure, Improvement or Use on or of all other portions of the Existing Parcel other than the Non-Conformity-Bearing Lot (i.e., the Remainder Lots), and of the Remainder Lots themselves, shall cease.
Illustration 154.114.C Special Legal Non-conformity Status for Certain Subdivisions & Improvements

Existing Parcel 

Existing 
Non-Conforming
Structure 

Remainder Lots A, B, & C
must be Conforming Lots
and are available for
Conforming Improvements

Legal Non-Conforming Lot 1

Legal 
Non-Conforming
Lot 1 and 
Existing 
Non-Conforming 
Structure 

Existing 
Non-Conforming
Structure 

Remainder 
Lot A 

Remainder 
Lot B

Remainder 
Lot C


SECTION 154.115. 
perFORMANCE GUARANTEES
A. Security for Compliance & Completion.  
To ensure compliance with this Chapter and any conditions imposed under this Chapter the City may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the City (each, a “Performance Guarantee”) covering the estimated costs of Improvements, performance, and/or compliance be deposited with the Finance Director or Treasurer to ensure faithful completion of the Improvements.  The Performance Guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The City may not require the deposit of the Performance Guarantee until it is prepared to issue the permit.  The City shall establish procedures by which a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required Improvements shall be made as work progresses.
B. Security for Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.  
Additionally, the Building Official may require Performance Guarantees for incomplete projects where temporary certificates of occupancy are requested and non-health and safety items remain to be completed.
SECTION 154.116.
SEPARABILITY
In case any provision of this Chapter shall be held invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect any other Article, Section or provision as long as the invalid or unenforceable portion can be separated from the remainder of the provisions.

Article II: 
Zoning Map

SECTION 154.201. Adoption of zoning map
 10
 
SECTION 154.202. Compliance
 10
 
SECTION 154.203. Special Requirements
 10
 
SECTION 154.204. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
 11
 



SECTION 154.201.	
ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
The Character Districts, Thoroughfares, Civic Zones, Special Requirements, Special Districts, Planned Residential Developments, and Local Historic Districts referred to in this Chapter are bounded and defined on the Zoning Map adopted by the Mt. Pleasant City Commission at the time of the initial adoption of this Chapter. The Zoning Map, which may be subsequently amended from time to time, and all explanatory matter theron is incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter by reference. The City Planner shall maintain an official copy of the Zoning Map (which may be in a digital format), reflecting all amendments approved by the City Commission. 
SECTION 154.202.	
COMPLIANCE
Except for legal non-conformances pursuant to Article 154.114, all Development, re-Development, land, construction, re-construction, modifications, Structures, Improvements, Buildings and Lots, all Uses thereof, and all submissions required under this Chapter, must comply with this Chapter and the applicable standards hereof, as the same are in effect at the time of submission of the complete application.
SECTION 154.203.	
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS   
A Zoning Map may designate any of the Special Requirements listed in Section 154.203.A-154.203.H below. 
If there is any conflict between an applicable Special Requirement and another standard or reqiurement,the Special Requirement shall be controlling. 
If a Zoning Map designates any one or more of such Special Requirements, such designation indicates that the following standards shall be applied as follows:	
A. Shopfront Frontage. 
A Retail Frontage designation requires that each Private Frontage within the designated area be provided a Shopfront Frontage at Sidewalk level, except at any allowed Driveways or Streetscreen areas, as provided in Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types) and specified in Article IV.
B. Terminated Vista. 
A Terminated Vista designation requires that a Building be provided with a cupola, chimney, entry feature or habitable tower that intersects the centerline axis of the view to which they respond. 
C. Cross Block Passage. 
A Cross Block Passage designation requires that a minimum 10-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between Buildings.
D. Buildings of Value. 
A designation for Buildings of Value requires that such Buildings and Structures may be altered or demolished only in accordance with City historic preservation standards and procedures. Without limitation, no construction, addition, Alteration, Repair, moving, excavation, or Demolition of any Resource in a Local Historic District may occur except and defined by and in compliance with Chapter 156.
E. Special Height Range.
A designation of Special Height Range requires that Buildings within the designated area comply with the Height noted rather than the Height standard that otherwise would be applicable within the District or Civic Zone, as applicable.
F.  Residential/Dwelling Use Restriction.
A designation of Residential/Dwelling Use Restriction prohibits Uses categorized as Residential/Dwelling Uses within the ground floor of Buildings within the designated area, irrespective of whether Residential/Dwelling Use would otherwise be permitted within the applicable District or Civic Zone. 
G.  Residential/Dwelling Use Only.
A designation of Residential/Dwelling Use Only requires that the only Principal Uses that are allowed within the designated area are Uses categorized as such in Table 154.410.A (Building & Lot Principal Use), irrespective of whether other Principal Uses would otherwise be permitted within the applicable District or Civic Zone.
H.  Student Organization Dwelling & Rooming Dwelling Restriction.
A designation of Student Organization Dwelling & Rooming Dwelling Restriction permits Student Organization Dwelling and Rooming Dwelling Uses within the designated Special Requirement area only, irrespective of whether Student Organization Dwelling & Rooming Dwelling Uses would otherwise be permitted within the applicable District or Civic Zone.
SECTION 154.204
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
Any property subject to a Planned Residential Development Agreement as of the effective date of this Chapter shall remain subject to such Agreement in accordance with its terms pursuant to Section 154.614 unless such property is included within a Character District, Special District, or Civic Zone pursuant to the approved Zoing Map or appproved Zoning Map amendment.  

page left intentionally blank

Article III: 
CHARACTER DISTRICTS, SPECIAL DISTRICTS & CIVIC ZONES

SECTION 154.301. General
 14
 
SECTION 154.302. Assignment of Districts and Civic Zones
 16
 
SECTION 154.303. Establishment of additional districts
 17
 
SECTION 154.304. Elements and Standards
 17
 
SECTION 154.305. additional requirements
 17
 



SECTION 154.301.	
GENERAL
A. Applicability and Compliance. 
This Article applies to Character Districts, Special Districts,  Local Historic Districts, and Civic Zones to the extent provided herein. 
Development, re-Development, land, Improvements, construction, re-construction, modification, subdivision, re-subdivision, Structures, Buildings and Lots, and Use thereof within each Character District, Special District, or Civic Zone, as applicable, shall include the respective elements and shall comply with the respective standards and requirements applicable to each. 
In addition to all other standards and requirements applicable under this Chapter, Chapter 156, related to Local Historic Districts, shall be applicable to all Development, re-Development, Improvements, construction, re-construction, Alteration (as defined in such Section), Work (as defined in such Section, Demolition (as defined in such Section) or modification of Structures or Buildings in a Local Historic District and shall be subject to compliance with such Chapter 156, including without limitation, issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness and a Notice to Proceed. 
B. Character District Defined. 
Character District is defined in Article VII.
C. Special District Defined.
Special District is defined in Article VII. 
Special Districts shall not be used to avoid compliance with standards and requirements for Character Districts, and instead, shall be used sparingly.  If a Special District is designated for an area, it is one of several areas on the Zoning Map to which certain Special District Development, Lot and Building standards are applied.
D. Civic Zone Defined. 
Civic Zone is defined in Article VII. 
Provisions regarding Civic Zones are included in Article V.
E. Character District Descriptions. 
This Chapter provides for the following Character Districts, each of which is described generally in Table 154.301.E (Character District Descriptions):
1.	Character District CD-3L (Sub-Urban Large Lot) 
2.	Character District CD-3 (Sub-Urban)
3.	Character District CD-4 (General Urban)
4. 	Character District CD-5 (Urban Center)

TABLE 154.301.E character district descriptions
 
Character District
 Description
 


 CD-3L: Sub-Urban Large Lot
The CD-3L Sub-Urban Large District consists of primarily a low density single family detached Residential area in which the House is the predominant Building Type.  It has medium to deep front Setbacks and medium to wide side Setbacks.  Its Thoroughfares have curbs and may include sidewalks and/or street trees, and form medium to large blocks.
 


 CD-3: Sub-Urban
The CD-3 Sub-Urban District consists primarily of a low density single family detached Residential area in which the House is the predominant Building Type.  It has medium front Setbacks and medium side Setbacks.  Its Thoroughfares have curbs and may include sidewalks and/or street trees, and form medium to large blocks.
 


 CD-4: General Urban
The CD-4 General Urban District consists of a medium density area that has a mix of Building Types and Residential, Retail/Personal Service, Office and Business/Commercial Uses; there are medium, shallow or no front Setbacks and narrow to medium side Setbacks; it has variable private landscaping; and it has streets with curbs, sidewalks, and Thoroughfare Trees that define medium-sized blocks. 
 


 CD-5: Urban Center
The CD-5 Urban Center District consists of higher density Mixed Use areas. It has a tight network of Thoroughfares with wide sidewalks, street lights and regular Thoroughfare Tree spacing, defining medium-sized blocks. Buildings are set close to the sidewalks.
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 



F. Special District Descriptions. 
This Chapter provides for the following Special Districts, each of which is described generally in Table 154.301.F (Special District Descriptions):
1.	Special District SD-H (Hospital)
2.	Special District SD-I (Industrial)
3.	Special District SD-RC (Research Center)
4.	Special District SD-A (Agricultural)
5.	Special District SD-U (University)
TABLE 154.301.F SPECIAL district descriptions
 
Special District
 Description
 
SD-H: Hospital
 The SD-H Hospital Special District is intended for a small hospital campus.
 
SD-I: Industrial
 The SD-I Industrial Special District is intended for light Manufacturing.
 
SD-RC: Research Center
 The SD-RC Research Center Special District is intended for scientific, business and industrial research operations and related testing and production in a park-like setting.
 
SD-A: Agricultural
 The SD-A Agriculture Special District is intended for agricultural use.
 
SD-U: University
 The SD-U University Special District is intended for University use.
 




SECTION 154.302.	
ASSIGNMENT OF DISTRICTS AND Civic Zones
A. General.  
Character Districts, Special Districts, and Civic Zones, as well as any Local Historic Districts, shall be assigned for and mapped on the Zoning Map, for and on each proposed Zoning Map amendment, and for and on each Development Parcel Plan, in each case subject to review and certification and/or approval as provided in this Chapter.
Assignment of District and Civic Zones on the initial Zoning Map shall be as determined by the City Commission at the time of adoption of such initial Zoning Map.  
Any change to the adopted Zoning Map shall be subject to compliance with the requirements and procedures of this Chapter, including without limitation, submission, review and approval of an application for approval of a proposed Zoning Map amendment that complies with all standards, conditions, and requirements of this Chapter, in accordance with Section 154.616 and related provisions of Article VI.
B. Assignment of Character Districts for Development Parcel.
For any Development Parcel over 80 gross acres excluding any Special Districts, assignment of each Character District type (i.e., CD-3L, CD-3, CD-4, or CD-5) for any Zoning Map amendment not prepared by the City shall be in accordance with the percentages of Net Site Area indicated in Table 154.302 (Assignment of Character Districts).
All applications for and approvals of a zoning amendment covering a Development Parcel over 80 acres excluding any Special Districts must be in accordance with this Section 154.301.B.
C. Assignment of Civic Zones for Development Parcel.
Civic Zones shall be assigned within Development Parcels in accordance with Article VI.
D.  Assignment of Special Districts for Development Parcel.
A Special District may be assigned to an area within a Development Parcel only if such area, due to the intrinsic size, Use, Building Placement, Building Elements, Building Configuration, Building type, or other Building and Development characteristics, cannot conform to one or more of the applicable Character Districts or standards therefor specified in this Chapter.  Special Districts shall not be used to avoid compliance with standards and requirements for Character Districts, and instead, shall be used sparingly.
Assignment of Special Districts shall be subject to approval as a zoning map amendment.
E.  Establishment of Local Historic Districts.
Local Historic Districts may be assigned by the City Commission pursuant to Chapter 156. 
TABLE 154.302 ASSIGNMENT OF CHARACTER DISTRICTS for Development parcels > 80 ACRES
 
% of Development Parcel Net Site Area
 
CD District
 
Aggregate of 
CD-3L &CD-3
 10-30%
 
CD-4
 30-60%
 
CD-5
 10-30%
 
See Article VI for Civic Zone Requirements
 




SECTION 154.303.	
ESTABLISHMENT OF Additional 
DISTRICTS
Districts in addition to those described in Sections 154.301.E and 154.301.F shall be subject to City Commission establishment and assignment of standards and requirements by zoning text amendment pursuant to Section 154.119 and Section 154.616.  Zoning or re-zoning of property to any District established pursuant to this Section shall be subject to approval of a Zoning Map amendment pursuant to Section 154.616.
SECTION 154.304.	
ELEMENTS AND STANDARDS
Development, re-Development, land, Structures, Buildings, Improvements, and Lots within each Character District, Special District, and Civic Zone shall include the elements indicated for such District or Civic Zone throughout this Chapter and shall comply with the applicable District or Civic Zone general description and intent thereof and the standards applicable to such District or Civic Zone set forth in Table 154.405.A (District Standards) or Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards) and elsewhere in this Chapter.
SECTION 154.305.	
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
In addition to all standards and requirements that are applicable to a specific Character District, Special District, or Civic Zone, all Development, re-Development, land, Structures, Buildings, Improvements, and Lots within Districts or Civic Zones must comply with all other applicable standards and requirements of this Chapter.

page left intentionally blank

Article IV: 
BUILDING AND LOT PLANS & STANDARDS

SECTION 154.401. General
 20
 
SECTION 154.402. building and lot plans
 20
 
SECTION 154.403. preparation
 20
 
SECTION 154.404. Plan requirements
 20
 
SECTION 154.405. building and lot standards
 21
 
SECTION 154.406. LOTs
 70
 
SECTION 154.407. Building Placement, Number, & Facades
 71
 
SECTION 154.408. Private Frontage, Building Form & Building Type; Floor Elevation
 72
 
SECTION 154.409. Encroachments
 90
 
SECTION 154.410. Uses
 90
 
SECTION 154.411. BICYCLE Parking, Loading & Trash Receptacle Requirements
 112
 
SECTION 154.412. Parking, Loading, Driveway, Service, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/DUMPSTER, Equipment, & Other Items Locations & Standards
 113
 
SECTION 154.413. Private Lot Landscape Standards
 116
 
SECTION 154.414. Sign Standards
 118
 
SECTION 154.415. Private Lighting Standards
 140
 
SECTION 154.416. Streetscape repairs, replacements & Improvements
 140
 



SECTION 154.401.	
GENERAL
This Article applies to all Buildings and Lots located or proposed within the City, except as otherwise provided in Section 154.114 with respect to legal non-conformities.
 
SECTION 154.402.	
Building and Lot PLANS 
A. Plan Required. 
No Building shall be constructed, re-constructed, or modified, and no Lot or other land shall be Developed, Improved, subdivided, or re-subdivided, and none of the same shall be used, except in compliance with this Article, the Zoning Map, and any applicable Development Parcel Plan, and pursuant to a Building and Lot Plan that has been prepared, submitted, reviewed and certified or approved in accordance with this Article and all standards and requirements applicable thereto.
B. Preparation and Requirements. 
Each Building and Lot Plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 154.403 below and shall conform to the requirements of Section 154.404 and other provisions hereof.
C. Plan Submission.   
Each Building and Lot Plan shall be submitted for review and action in accordance with Section 154.110. 
D. Plan Approval. 
Action shall be taken on each Building and Lot Plan application in accordance with Section 154.110 hereof. 
SECTION 154.403.	
PREPARATION
Each Building and Lot Plan required under this Article shall be prepared and submitted by or on behalf of the Owner of the applicable property.
SECTION 154.404.	
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Each Building and Lot Plan submitted under this Article shall:
A. Compliance. 
Comply with any applicable Development Parcel Plan, the Zoning Map, and all standards and requirements of this Chapter, including without limitation those applicable to the Character District, Civic Zone, or Special District in which the land covered by such Building and Lot Plan is situated; and
B. Contents. 
Show and include the following, in compliance with the standards and requirements of the Zoning Map, any applicable Development Parcel Plan, and this Chapter, including without limitation those applicable to the Character District, Civic Zone, or Special District in which the land covered by such Building and Lot Plan is situated:
1.	Lot Width and Area
2.	Lot Layers
3.	Frontage Buildout
4.	Principal Buildings
5.	Accessory Buildings
6.	Setbacks 
7.	Encroachments
8.	Building Type 
9.	Building Height
10.	Private Frontage and Façade Elements
11.	Building Roof Type & Pitch
12.	Building and Lot Principal Uses and Accessory Uses
13.	Vehicular Parking Accommodations, including parking spaces and their dimensions within the Lot, layout, design and landscaping of Parking Lots, Parking Areas and Parking Structures, Parking Location, Location of any Garage, Driveway to Off-Street Parking,  Passenger Dropoff Location, Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Width, any Parking Structures, Pedestrian Parking Structure Exit Location, any Parking Screen, and points of vehicular ingress and egress to and from Lot, including cross access easements
14.  Driveways 
15.	Any Streetscreens
16.	Bicycle Parking Accommodations, including number spaces on the Lot
17.	Off-Street Loading Space calculations and location, and Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle, Utility Box and Service Meter Accommodations and Locations
18.	Other personal property or fixtures not affixed to a Building, if any
19.	Private Landscaping, Walls, and Fencing
20.	All Screens, including all vegetative Screens, and all Fences and Walls to be used as Screens, including heights
21.	Signage, including location, type, and detailed, dimensioned drawing
22.  Exterior lighting, including type and location 
23.	Any applicable Special Requirements elements
24.	Any Public Frontage improvement or replacement elements required under Section 154.416
25. 	A Certificate of Compliance with any required Development Parcel Plan
26.	Zoning classification for the property
27.	Recorded Subdivision Plat consistent with Building and Lot Plan
28.	If within a Local Historic District, a copy of the Certificate of Appropriateness or Notice to Proceed issued by the Historic District Commission
						
SECTION 154.405.	
Building and Lot Standards   
A. District Buildings & Lots.
The standards for Buildings and Lots within Districts are set forth in Tables 154.405.A (District Standards), Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards), and elsewhere in this Article IV.

CD-3L

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3L SUB-URBAn LARGE character district


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

General Description
 
The CD-3L Sub-Urban Large District consists of primarily a low density single family detached Residential area in which the House is the predominant Building Type.  It has medium to deep front Setbacks and medium to wide side Setbacks.  Its Thoroughfares have curbs and may include Sidewalks and/or street trees, and form medium to large blocks.
 







CD-3L

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3L SUB-URBAn LARGE character district

District Density
 
4 units per acre, gross, max
 




Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 




Block Size
 
Block Perimeter
 2400 ft. max
 




Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 90 ft. min; 140 ft. max
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Impervious Surface Coverage
 50% max
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare, except = 20% of the Lots within each type of Character District of a Development Parcel may Enfront a Pedestrian Path, Passage, pedestrian walkway or water body if such Lots have legal and physical vehicular access to a vehicular Thoroughfare via Driveway or Easement.
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Common Yard
 P
 
Porch
 P
 
Fence
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 NP
 
Forecourt
 NP
 
Stoop
 P
 
Shopfront
 NP
 
Gallery
 NP
 
Arcade
 NP
 
Officefront
 NP
 
See Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types) 
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 1 max
 
Accessory Buildings
 Not Regulated
 




Civic Space Types
 
Natural Area
 P
 
Green
 P
 
Square
 NP
 
Plaza
 NP
 
Playground
 P
 
Community Garden
 P
 
See Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3L

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3L SUB-URBAn LARGE character district

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot



H

H

D

D

G

G

C

C

Secondary Frontage

Secondary Frontage

Buildable
Area
 (Accessory Building)

Buildable
Area
 (Accessory Building)

B

F

buildable area (Principal Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

C

E

A

A

E

Principal Frontage

Principal Frontage

Setbacks - Principal Building
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage:
 30 ft. min, 50 ft. max
 A


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 20 ft. min 
 B


 
Side Setback
 10 ft. min
 C


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. min; or 15 ft min from center line of Rear Lane or Rear Alley
 D


 




Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
Principal Building
 2 Stories (35 ft) max
 
Accessory Building
 2 Stories (35 ft) max
 
Facade
 
Frontage Buildout
 40% min
 
Entrances
 Main Entrance must be in Facade of Principal Frontages
 
Location of Building at Frontage
 Parallel to Frontage Lines
 
Facade Position
 Parallel to straight Frontage Line or to tangent of curved Frontage Line
 
Blank Walls
 NP at Frontage
 
Building Standards (continued)
 
Facade Glazing
 Minimum of 10% total Facade area
 
Finished Floor Level
 18”-36” above avg. grade at Facade
 
Facade Window Sill Height
 5 ft. min above avg. grade at Facade
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 
Flat
 NP
 
Shed
 P at rear only and if ridge is attached to an exterior Building wall; except for dormers which may have a shed roof anywhere on the Building
 
Hip
 P
 
Gable
 P
 
Pitch
 6:12 - 14:12, except for shed roofs which may be 3:12 - 14:12 and that roof pitch may match the primary roof pitch of an existing building that is less than 6:12
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 




Setbacks - Accessory Building
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage
 20 ft. min + Principal Building Front Setback
 E


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 20 ft. min 
 F


 
Side Setback
 0 ft. min
 G


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. min or 5 ft min if Garage door faces Rear Lane or Rear Alley
 H


 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3L

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3L SUB-URBAn LARGE character district

Building Types
 
House
 P
 Commercial
 NP
 
Duplex
 P
 Mixed Use
 NP
 
Townhouse
 NP
 Flex
 NP
 
Multifamily
 NP
 Mid-Rise
 NP
 
Live/Work
 NP
 Civic
 NP
 
See Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types - Summary) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3L

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3L SUB-URBAn LARGE character district

Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Encroachment Type
 Front
 Side
 Rear
 
Steps to Building Entrance
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Open Porches, including steps
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Patio Decks, in permitted applicable Lot Layer
 NP
 P
 P
 
Openwork Fire Balconies
 NP
 P
 P
 
Chimney flues, sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses eaves and other Architectural Features
 P
 P
 P
 
Satellite dishes/ antennae
 P
 P
 P
 
Mechanical equipment, including HVAC
 NP
 P
 P
 
Utility lines, wires and associated Structures (e.g. poles)
 P
 P
 P
 
Fences, hedges, walls, Shrubbery, and other landscape features
 P
 P
 P
 
Parking Areas, Loading Areas and Driveways in 3rd Lot Layer
 P
 P
 P
 
Bicycle Parking
 P
 P
 P
 
Stoops
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Balconies and Bay Windows
 P
 P
 P
 




Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* Requirements
 
Off-Street Loading, Storage, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Drive-Through Locations 
 NA
 
Trash Receptacle Loca­tions 
 Per Chapter 50 (Solid Wastes)
 
Dumpster Locations 
 NA
 
* Not including water meters
 




Non-Building Components
 
Heating and Air Conditioning Equipment, Utility, Service and Mechanical Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 2nd Lot Layer if Screened from Frontage; NP in 1st Lot Layer
 
Solar Panels
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 1st or 2nd Lot Layer if parallel to and integrated into roof design
 
Antennas & Satellite Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 1st or 2nd Lot Layer if such Lot Layer is only possible location possible for satisfactory reception.
 
Recreation or Play Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Spas
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Transmitting and/or receiving towers or antennas and wind-generating machines
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 



Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only, except for driveway
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Prepared surface of gravel, asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 18 ft max at Frontage Line
 
Parking Structures
 NP
 



CD-3L

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3L SUB-URBAn LARGE character district

Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
Minimum of 30% of 1st Lot Layer must be landscaped in compliance with Section 154.413.
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 Height 4 ft. max at Principal Frontage; otherwise 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Vinyl
 P
 
Chain Link
 P
 
Barbed/razor
 NP
 




Screens
 
Not Regulated
 




Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3 SUB-URBAn character district


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

General Description
 
The CD-3 Sub-Urban District consists primarily of a low density single family detached Residential area in which the House is the predominant Building Type.  It has medium front Setbacks and medium side Setbacks.  Its Thoroughfares have curbs and may include Sidewalks and/or street trees, and form medium to large blocks.
 







CD-3

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3 SUB-URBAn character district

Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 




District Density
 
6 units per acre, gross, max
 




Block Size
 
Block Perimeter
 2400 ft. max
 




Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 50 ft. min; 100 ft. max
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Impervious Surface Coverage
 55% max
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare, except = 20% of the Lots within each type of Character District of a Development Parcel may Enfront a Pedestrian Path, Passage, pedestrian walkway or water body if such Lots have legal and physical vehicular access to a vehicular Thoroughfare via Driveway or Easement.
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Common Yard
 P
 
Porch
 P
 
Fence
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 NP
 
Forecourt
 NP
 
Stoop
 P
 
Shopfront
 NP
 
Gallery
 NP
 
Arcade
 NP
 
Officefront
 NP
 
See Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types) 
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 1 max
 
Accessory Buildings
 Not Regulated
 



Civic Space Types
 
Natural Area
 P
 
Green
 P
 
Square
 NP
 
Plaza
 NP
 
Playground
 P
 
Community Garden
 P
 
See Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3 SUB-URBAn character district

Mid-Block
Lot

Corner
Lot

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot



H

H

D

D

Buildable
Area
 (Accessory Building)

C

C

G

G

Secondary Frontage

Secondary Frontage

B

Buildable
Area
 (Accessory Building)

C

F

buildable area (Principal Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

E

E

A

A

Principal Frontage

Principal Frontage

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
Principal Building
 2 Stories (35 ft) max
 
Accessory Building
 2 Stories (35 ft) max
 
Facade
 
Frontage Buildout
 40% min
 
Entrances
 Main Entrance must be in Facade of Principal Frontages
 
Location of Building at Frontage
 Parallel to Frontage Lines
 
Facade Position
 Parallel to straight Frontage Line or to tangent of curved Frontage Line
 
Blank Walls
 NP at Frontage
 
Building Standards (continued)
 
Facade Glazing
 Minimum of 10% total Facade area
 
Finished Floor Level
 If Residential: 18”-36” above avg. grade at Facade
 
Facade Window Sill Height
 If Residential: 5 ft. min above avg. grade at Facade
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 
Flat
 NP
 
Shed
 P at rear only and if ridge is attached to an exterior Building wall; except for dormers which may have a shed roof anywhere on the Building
 
Hip
 P
 
Gable
 P
 
Pitch
 6:12 - 14:12, except for shed roofs which may be 3:12 - 14:12 and that roof pitch may match the primary roof pitch of an existing building that is less than 6:12
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 




Setbacks - Principal Building
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage
 10 ft. min, 30 ft. max
 A


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 10 ft. min, 30 ft. max
 B


 
Side Setback
 6 ft. min
 C


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. min; or 15 ft from center line of Rear Lane or Rear Alley
 D


 



Setbacks - Accessory Building
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage
 20 ft. min + Principal Building Front Setback
 E


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 10 ft. min 
 F


 
Side Setback
 0 ft. min
 G


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. min or 5 ft min if Garage door faces Rear Lane or Rear Alley
 H


 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3 SUB-URBAn character district

Building Types
 
House
 P
 Commercial
 NP
 
Duplex
 P
 Mixed Use
 NP
 
Townhouse
 NP
 Flex
 NP
 
Multifamily
 NP
 Mid-Rise
 NP
 
Live/Work
 NP
 Civic
 NP
 
See Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types - Summary) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3 SUB-URBAn character district

Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Encroachment Type
 Front
 Side
 Rear
 
Steps to Building Entrance
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Open Porches, including steps
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Patio Decks, in permitted applicable Lot Layer
 NP
 P
 P
 
Openwork Fire Balconies
 NP
 P
 P
 
Chimney flues, sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses eaves and other Architectural Features
 P
 P
 P
 
Satellite dishes/ antennae
 P
 P
 P
 
Mechanical equipment, including HVAC
 NP
 P
 P
 
Utility lines, wires and associated Structures (e.g. poles)
 P
 P
 P
 
Fences, hedges, walls, Shrubbery, and other landscape features
 P
 P
 P
 
Driveways
 P
 P
 P
 
Bicycle Parking
 P
 P
 P
 
Stoops
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Balconies and Bay Windows
 P
 P
 P
 




Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* Requirements
 
Off-Street Loading, Storage, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Drive-Through Locations 
 NA
 
Trash Receptacle Loca­tions 
 Per Chapter 50 (Solid Wastes)
 
Dumpster Locations 
 NA
 
* Not including water meters
 




Non-Building Components
 
Heating and Air Conditioning Equipment, Utility, Service and Mechanical Equipment
 NP in 1st Lot Layer
 
Solar Panels
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 1st or 2nd Lot Layer if parallel to and integrated into roof design
 
Antennas & Satellite Equipment
 NP in 1st Lot Layer unless such Lot Layer is only possible location possible for satisfactory reception.
 
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Spas
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Transmitting and/or receiving towers or antennas and wind-generating machines
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 



Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only, except for driveway
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Prepared surface of gravel, asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 18 ft max at Frontage Line
 
Parking Structures
 NP
 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-3

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-3 SUB-URBAn character district

Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
Minimum of 30% of 1st Lot Layer must be landscaped in compliance with Section 154.413.
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 Height 4 ft. max at Principal Frontage; otherwise 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Vinyl
 P
 
Chain Link
 P
 
Barbed/razor
 NP
 




Screens
 
Not Regulated
 




Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 




CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

General Description
 
The CD-4 General Urban District consists of a medium density area that has a mix of Building Types and Residential, Retail/Personal Service, Office and Business/Commercial Uses; there are medium, shallow or no front Setbacks and narrow to medium side Setbacks; it has variable private landscaping; and it has streets with curbs, Sidewalks, and Thoroughfare Trees that define medium-sized blocks. 
 








CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 




District Density
 
15 units per acre, gross, max
 




Block Size
 
Block Perimeter
 2400 ft. max
 




Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 18 ft. min; 140 ft. max
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare, except = 20% of the Lots within each type of Character District of a Development Parcel may Enfront a Pedestrian Path, Passage, pedestrian walkway or water body if such Lots have legal and physical vehicular access to a vehicular Thoroughfare via Driveway or Easement.
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Common Yard
 P
 
Porch
 P
 
Fence
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 
Forecourt
 P
 
Stoop
 P
 
Shopfront
 P
 
Gallery
 P
 
Arcade
 NP
 
Officefront
 P
 
See Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types) 
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 1 max
 
Accessory Buildings
 1 max
 




Civic Space Types
 
Natural Area
 P
 
Green
 P
 
Square
 P
 
Plaza
 NP
 
Playground
 P
 
Community Garden
 P
 
See Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot



Alley

Alley

H

H

H

D

D

D

Secondary Frontage

Secondary Frontage

F

G

G

G

G

B

C

C

C

Buildable
Area
 (Accessory Building)

Buildable
Area
 (Accessory Building)

Buildable
Area
 (Accessory Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

A

A

A

E

E

E

Principal Frontage

Principal Frontage

Setbacks - Principal Building
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage:
 0 ft. min; 20 ft. max
 A


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 0 ft. min; 20 ft. max
 B


 
Side Setback
 0 ft. min per side
 C


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. min; or 15 ft min from center line of Rear Lane or Rear Alley
 D


 




Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
Principal Building
 2 Stories (40 ft) max
 
Accessory Building
 2 Stories (35 ft) max
 
Ceiling Height
 May not exceed 14 ft. from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for a first floor Business/Commercial, Office, Retail/Personal Service, or Lodging Use which must be a minimum of 11 ft with a maximum of 25 ft.
 
Facade
 
Frontage Buildout
 60% min
 
Entrances
 Main Entrance must be in Facade of Principal Frontages. If Shopfront Frontage at corner, Main Entrance may be at Principal Frontage or at corner.
 
Location of Building at Frontage
 Parallel to Frontage Lines
 
Building Standards (continued)
 
Facade Position
 Parallel to straight Frontage Line or to tangent of curved Frontage Line
 
Facade Design Proportions
 Must be simple, e.g. rational (1:1, 2:1, 3:2, 4:3, etc) or irrational (v2 [1.414]:1 and 1.618:1 [“Golden Mean”]
 
Blank Walls
 NP at Frontage
 
Facade Void Area %
 20-60% of total Facade area, except for first Story of Shopfront Frontages, where it must be = 70% min.
 
Facade Openings
 Windows and/or doors spaced = 20 ft. apart
Square or vertical in proportion
Except in Shopfront or Gallery Frontage, and except for transoms and sidelights, Windows in Facade and 1st & 2nd Lot Layers must be single-hung, double-hung, casement or awning types.
In Stories above first, Facade openings must be = 50% of total Facade area.
 
Facade Glazing
 20%  – 60% of total Facade area for non-Shopfront; 70% of total Facade area, min for Shopfront
 
Window Alignment
 Upper floor windows and other features must be aligned with those of first floor.
 
Facade Articulation
 Facades greater than 100 ft in width shall be articulated with Building offsets every 18-60 ft. Offset depth shall be either (a) between 10 and 12 in.; or (b) between 4 and 6 ft. The entire Facade shall be placed within the front setback range (see illustration below).
 

4-6 ft offset
example

10-12”
offset
example

 > 100’ Building Facade

 > 100’ Building Facade


 
Building Standards (continued)
 
Finished Floor Level
 If Residential: 2 ft.-6 ft. above avg. grade at Facade
 
Facade Window Sill Height
 If Residential: 5 ft. min above avg. grade at Facade
Shopfront Frontages: at knee wall
 
Shopfront Frontages
 12”-24” knee wall required at Frontage
 
Decks
 NP at Frontage
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 
Flat
 P
 
Shed
 P at rear only and if ridge is attached to an exterior Building wall; except for dormers which may have a shed roof anywhere on the Building
 
Hip
 P
 
Gable
 P
 
Pitch
 8:12 - 14:12, except for shed roofs which may be 3:12 - 14:12
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 




Setbacks - Accessory Building
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage
 20 ft. min + Principal Building Front Setback
 E


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 0 ft. min 
 F


 
Side Setback
 0 ft. min
 G


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. min or 5 ft min if Garage door faces Rear Lane or Rear Alley
 H


 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

Building Types
 
House
 P
 Commercial
 P
 
Duplex
 P
 Mixed Use
 P
 
Townhouse
 P
 Flex
 P
 
Multifamily
 P
 Mid-Rise
 NP
 
Live/Work
 P
 Civic
 NP
 
See Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types - Summary) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Encroachment Type
 Front
 Side
 Rear
 
Steps to Building Entrance
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Open Porches, including steps
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Patio Decks, in permitted applicable Lot Layer
 NP
 P
 P
 
Openwork Fire Balconies
 NP
 P
 P
 
Chimney flues, sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses eaves and other Architectural Features
 P
 P
 P
 
Satellite dishes/ antennae
 P
 P
 P
 
Mechanical equipment, including HVAC
 NP
 P
 P
 
Utility lines, wires and associated Structures (e.g. poles)
 P
 P
 P
 
Fences, hedges, walls, Shrubbery, and other landscape features
 P
 P
 P
 
Parking Areas, Loading Areas and Driveways in 3rd Lot Layer
 NA
 P
 P
 
Bicycle Parking
 P
 P
 P
 
Stoops, Lightwells, Terraces
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Balconies and Bay Windows
 P
 P
 P
 




Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Driveway to Off-Street Park­ing & Passenger Drop-off Location
 P in any Lot Layer
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 10 ft max in 1st Lot Layer if Resi­dential; 24 ft max in 1st Lot Layer if non-Residential, regardless if shared or not 
 
Parking Structures
 P, if Screened from Frontage by Liner Buildings
 
Parking Structure Pedestrian Exit Location
 Via pedestrian access to Frontage
 



Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* 
Requirements
 
Off-Street Trash Recep­tacle/Dumpster
 R for all Building types except house or duplex and must be fully enclosed on 3 sides and enclosed on the 4th side with self-closing gate
 
Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 For Lots with Building Types other than House or Duplex: P in 3rd Lot Layer only.
For Lots with House or Duplex: P in 2nd or 3rd Lot Layer.
 
* Not including water meters
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

Non-Building Components
 
Heating and Air Conditioning Equipment, Utility, Service and Mechanical Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 2nd Lot Layer if Screened from Frontage; NP in 1st Lot Layer
 
Solar Panels
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 1st or 2nd Lot Layer if parallel to and integrated into roof design
 
Antennas & Satellite Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 1st or 2nd Lot Layer if such Lot Layer is only possible location possible for satisfactory reception.
 
Outdoor Grilling Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Recreation or Play Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Animal Enclosures, Runs or Shelters
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Spas
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Transmitting and/or receiving towers or antennas and wind-generating machines
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 



Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
R; 1 Tree per 50 feet of Frontage if 1st Lot Layer = 15 ft deep, planted in 1st Lot Layer
 
If First Lot Layer =  10 ft, Minimum of 30% of 1st Lot Layer must be landscaped in compliance with Section 154.413.
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 3.5-4 ft. at Frontage; otherwise 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 Only picket type allowed at Frontage; other types allowed on sides and at rear
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Chain Link
 P at rear and sides only
 
Barbed/razor
 NP
 




Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

Screens
 
Wall Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft
 
Hedge Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Wall or fence Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft; Min. 6’ for Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
 
Hedge Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Non-Residential & Multi-Family Residential Screen Adjacent to or across Thoroughfare from Non-Multi-Family Residential
 None Required
 
Parking, Loading Areas, Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, Drive-Throughs, Trash Receptacles/Dumpsters, HVAC and other equipment Screened from Frontage, Civic Space and Adjacent Property
 R; except at Driveways: 
•	
Parking Lots and Parking Areas shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building or Streetscreen; 

•	
Parking Structures shall be Screened from Frontages by Liner Buildings. 

•	
Otherwise, Screening shall be by Building, wall, hedge or fence at Frontage or Building, Wall, hedge or fence not at Frontages or Adjacent to Civic Space.


 
Satellite Dish Screen
 R
 
Rooftop Antennas and HVAC, Mechanical and other Equipment Screening
 R; shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building parapet or other Building Element
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CD-4

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-4 general urban character district

page left intentionally blank

table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-5 urban center character district

CD-5


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

General Description
 
The CD-5 Urban Center District consists of higher density Mixed Use areas. It has a tight network of Thoroughfares with wide Sidewalks, street lights and regular Thoroughfare Tree spacing, defining medium-sized blocks. Buildings are set close to the Sidewalks.
 






table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-5 urban center character district

CD-5

District Density
 
96 units per acre, gross, max
 




Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 




Block Size
 
Block Perimeter
 2000 ft. max or 3,000 ft. max if a Parking Structure provided within Block
 




Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 18 ft. min; 180 ft. max
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare, except = 20% of the Lots within each type of Character District of a Development Parcel may Enfront a Pedestrian Path, Passage, pedestrian walkway or water body if such Lots have legal and physical vehicular access to a vehicular Thoroughfare via Driveway or Easement.
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Common Yard
 NP
 
Porch
 NP
 
Fence
 NP
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 
Forecourt
 P
 
Stoop
 P
 
Shopfront
 P
 
Gallery
 P
 
Arcade
 P
 
Officefront
 P
 
See Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types) 
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 1 max
 
Accessory Buildings
 1 max
 



Civic Space Types
 
Natural Area
 NP
 
Green
 NP
 
Square
 P
 
Plaza
 P
 
Playground
 P
 
Community Garden
 P
 
See Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-5 urban center character district

CD-5

Mid-Block
Lot

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot

Corner
Lot

Mid-Block
Lot

Corner
Lot



Alley

Alley

G

G

G

G

D

D

D

D

Secondary Frontage

C

C

C

B

E

C

E

Buildable Area (Accessory Building)

Secondary Frontage

F

F

F

F

buildable area (Principal Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

buildable area (Principal Building)

A

A

A

A

Principal Frontage

Principal Frontage

Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
Principal Building
 2 Stories min in 2nd Lot Layer, 5 Stories max; 25 ft min in 2nd Lot Layer, 75 ft max
 
Accessory Building
 35 ft max
 
Ceiling Height
 May not exceed 14 ft. from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for a first floor Business/Commercial, Office, Retail/Personal Service, or Lodging Use which must be a minimum of 11 ft with a maximum of 25 ft.
 
Facade
 
Frontage Buildout
 60% min
 
Entrances
 Main Entrance must be in Facade of Principal Frontages. If Shopfront Frontage at corner, Main Entrance may be at Principal Frontage or at corner.
 
Location of Building at Frontage
 Parallel to Frontage Lines
 
Building Standards (continued)
 
Facade Position
 Parallel to straight Frontage Line or to tangent of curved Frontage Line
 
Facade Design Proportions
 Must be simple, e.g. rational (1:1, 2:1, 3:2, 4:3, etc) or irrational (v2 [1.414]:1 and 1.618:1 [“Golden Mean”]
 
Blank Walls
 NP at Frontage
 
Facade Void Area %
 20-60% of total Facade area, except for first Story of Shopfront Frontages, where it must be = 70% min
 
Facade Openings
 Windows and/or doors spaced = 20 ft. apart
Square or vertical in proportion except for transoms and sidelights
In Stories above first, Facade openings must be = 50% of total Facade area.
 
Facade Glazing
 20%  – 60% of total Facade area for non-Shopfront; 70% of total Facade area, min for Shopfront
 
Window Alignment
 Upper floor windows and other features must be aligned with those of first floor.
 
Facade Articulation
 Facades greater than 100 ft in width shall be articulated with Building offsets every 18-60 ft. Offset depth shall be either (a) between 10 and 12 in; or (b) between 4 and 6 ft. The entire Facade shall be placed within the front setback range (see illustration below).
 

4-6 ft offset
example

10-12”
offset
example

 > 100’ Building Facade

 > 100’ Building Facade


 
Finished Floor Level
 If Residential: 2 ft.-6 ft. above avg. grade at Facade
 
Building Standards (continued)
 
Facade Window Sill Height
 If Residential: 5 ft. min above avg. grade at Facade
Shopfront Frontages: at knee wall
 
Shopfront Frontages
 12”-24” knee wall required at Frontage
 
Decks
 NP at Frontage
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 
Flat
 P
 
Shed
 P at rear only and if ridge is attached to an exterior Building wall; except for dormers which may have a shed roof anywhere on the Building
 
Hip
 P
 
Gable
 P
 
Pitch
 8:12 - 14:12, except for shed roofs which may be 3:12 - 14:12
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 




Setbacks - Principal Building
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage:
 0 ft at corners; 0 ft. min; 15 ft. max elsewhere
 A


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 0 ft at corners; 0 ft. min; 15 ft. max elsewhere
 B


 
Side Setback
 0 ft. min; 24 ft. max per side
 C


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. min; or 15 ft from center line of Rear Lane or Rear Alley
 D


 




Setbacks - Accessory Building
 
Front Setback
 40 ft. max from rear property line
 E


 
Side Setback
 0 ft. min
 F


 
Rear Setback
 3 ft. max
 G


 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-5 urban center character district

CD-5

Building Types
 
House
 NP
 Commercial
 NP
 
Duplex
 NP
 Mixed Use
 P
 
Townhouse
 P
 Flex
 P
 
Multifamily
 P
 Mid-Rise
 P
 
Live/Work
 P
 Civic
 NP
 
See Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types - Summary) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-5 urban center character district

CD-5

Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Encroachment Type
 Front
 Side
 Rear
 
Steps to Building Entrance
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Open Porches, including steps
 NP
 P
 P
 
Patio Decks, in permitted applicable Lot Layer
 NP
 P
 P
 
Openwork Fire Balconies
 NP
 P
 P
 
Chimney flues, sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses eaves and other Architectural Features
 P
 P
 P
 
Satellite dishes/ antennae
 P
 P
 P
 
Mechanical equipment, including HVAC
 NP
 P
 P
 
Utility lines, wires and associated Structures (e.g. poles)
 P
 P
 P
 
Fences, hedges, walls, Shrubbery, and other landscape features
 P
 P
 P
 
Parking Areas, Loading Areas and Driveways in 3rd Lot Layer
 NA
 P
 P
 
Bicycle Parking
 P
 P
 P
 
Stoops, Lightwells, Terraces
 P
 P
 P
 
Balconies and Bay Windows
 P
 P
 P
 




Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* 
Requirements
 
Off-Street Trash Recep­tacle/Dumpster
 R and must be fully enclosed on 3 sides and enclosed on the 4th side with self-closing gate. 
 
Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only.
 
* Not including water meters
 




Non-Building Components
 
Heating and Air Conditioning Equipment, Utility, Service and Mechanical Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 2nd Lot Layer if Screened from Frontage; NP in 1st Lot Layer
 
Solar Panels
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 1st or 2nd Lot Layer if parallel to and integrated into roof design
 
Antennas & Satellite Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer; P in 1st or 2nd Lot Layer only if such Lot Layer is only possible location possible for satisfactory reception.
 
Outdoor Grilling Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Recreation or Play Equipment
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Animal Enclosures, Runs or Shelters
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Spas
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Transmitting and/or receiving towers or antennas and wind-generating machines
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 



Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Driveway to Off-Street
Parking & Passenger Drop-off Location
 P in any Lot Layer
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 24 ft in 1st Lot Layer and 2nd Lot Layer, regardless if shared or not
 
Parking Structures
 P, if Screened from Frontage by Liner Buildings
 
Parking Structure Pedestrian Exit Location
 Via pedestrian access to Frontage
 




table 154.405.A District standards: 
CD-5 urban center character district

CD-5

Screens
 
Wall Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft
 
Hedge Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Wall or fence Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft; Min. 6’ for Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
 
Hedge Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Non-Residential & Multi-Family Residential Screen Adjacent to or across Thoroughfare from Non-Multi-Family Residential
 None Required
 
Parking, Loading Areas, Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, Drive-Throughs, Trash Receptacles/Dumpsters, HVAC and other equipment Screened from Frontage, Civic Space and Adjacent Property
 R; except at Driveways: 
•	
Parking Lots and Parking Areas shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building or Streetscreen; 

•	
Parking Structures shall be Screened from Frontages by Liner Buildings. 

•	
Otherwise, Screening shall be by Building, wall, hedge or fence at Frontage or Building, Wall, hedge or fence not at Frontages or Adjacent to Civic Space.


 
Satellite Dish Screen
 R
 
Rooftop Antennas and HVAC, Mechanical and other Equipment Screening
 R; shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building parapet or other Building Element
 




Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
NR; Unless paved or =3 ft front setback: Shrubs continuous around foundation at Frontage.
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 3.5-4 ft. at Frontage; otherwise 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P at side & rear only
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P at side & rear only
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Chain Link
 P at side & rear only
 
Barbed/razor
 NP
 




Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-H hospital special district

SD-H

General Description
 
The SD-H Hospital Special District is intended for a small hospital campus.
 



District Density
 
Not Regulated
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 Not Regulated
 
Accessory Buildings
 Not Regulated
 




Block Size
 
Not Regulated
 




Setbacks - All Buildings
 
Not Regulated
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
All Buildings
 5 Stories (75 ft) max
 
Ceiling Height
 Not Regulated
 
Facade
 Not Regulated
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 Not Regulated
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 




Civic Space Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 



Building Types
 
Not Regulated
 



Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-H hospital special district

SD-H

Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Not Applicable
 




Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* 
Requirements
 
Off-Street Trash Recep­tacle/Dumpster
 R, fully enclosed on 3 sides and en­closed on the 4th side with self-closing gate. 
 
Off-Street Loading, Stor­age, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 Not Regulated
 
* Not including water meters
 




Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 Not Regulated
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Driveway to Off-Street Park­ing & Passenger Drop-off Location
 P in any Lot Layer
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 24 ft
 
Parking Structures
 P, if Screened from Frontage by Liner Buildings
 
Parking Structure Pedestrian Exit Location
 Via pedestrian access to Frontage
 



Non-Building Components
 
Not Regulated
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-H hospital special district

SD-H

Screens
 
Wall Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft
 
Hedge Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Wall or fence Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft; Min. 6’ for Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
 
Hedge Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Non-Residential & Multi-Family Residential Screen Adjacent to or across Thoroughfare from Non-Multi-Family Residential
 R
 
Parking, Loading Areas, Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, Drive-Throughs, Trash Receptacles/Dumpsters, HVAC and other equipment Screened from Frontage, Civic Space and Adjacent Property
 R; except at Driveways: 
•	
Parking Lots and Parking Areas shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building or Streetscreen; 

•	
Parking Structures shall be Screened from Frontages by Liner Buildings. 

•	
Otherwise, Screen shall be by Building, wall, hedge or fence at Frontage or Building, Wall, hedge or fence not at Frontages or Adjacent to Civic Space.


 
Satellite Dish Screen
 R
 
Rooftop Antennas and HVAC, Mechanical and other Equipment Screening
 R; shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building parapet or other Building Element
 




Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
Not Regulated except per Screens and Parking Lot Landscaping requirements
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Vinyl
 NP
 
Chain Link
 NP
 



Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



page left intentionally blank

table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-I Industrial special district

SD-I

General Description
 
The SD-I Industrial Special District is intended for light Manufacturing.
 



District Density
 
Not Regulated
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 Not Regulated
 




Block Size
 
Not Regulated
 




Setbacks - All Buildings
 
Not Regulated
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
All Buildings
 75 ft max
 
Ceiling Height
 Not Regulated
 
Facade
 Not Regulated
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 Not Regulated
 




Civic Space Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 



Building Types
 
Not Regulated
 



Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 50 ft. min.
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-I Industrial special district

SD-I

Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Not Applicable
 




Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 Not Regulated
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Prepared surface of gravel, asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 Not Regulated
 
Driveway to Off-Street Park­ing & Passenger Drop-off Location
 P in any Lot Layer
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 30 ft
 
Parking Structures
 NP
 



Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* 
Requirements
 
Off-Street Trash Recep­tacle/Dumpster
 R, fully enclosed on 3 sides and en­closed on the 4th side with self-closing gate. 
 
Off-Street Loading, Stor­age, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 Not Regulated
 
* Not including water meters
 




Non-Building Components
 
Not Regulated
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-I Industrial special district

SD-I

Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
R; 1 Tree per 40 feet of Frontage if 1st Lot Layer = 15 ft deep, planted in 1st Lot Layer
 
1st Lot Layer must be landscaped with exception of Sidewalk and Driveway
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 3.5-4 ft. at Frontage; otherwise 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Vinyl
 P in Third Lot Layer only
 
Chain Link
 P
 
Barbed/razor
 P in 3rd Lot Layer and if Screened from Alley, Thoroughfares and Adjacent property
 



Screens
 
Wall Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft
 
Hedge Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Wall or fence Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft; Min. 6’ for Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
 
Hedge Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Non-Residential & Multi-Family Residential Screen Adjacent to or across Thoroughfare from Non-Multi-Family Residential
 R
 
Parking, Loading Areas, Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, Drive-Throughs, Trash Receptacles/Dumpsters, HVAC and other equipment Screened from Frontage, Civic Space and Adjacent Property
 R; except at Driveways: 
•	
Parking Lots and Parking Areas shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building or Streetscreen; 

•	
Parking Structures shall be Screened from Frontages by Liner Buildings. 

•	
Otherwise, Screen shall be by Building, wall, hedge or fence at Frontage or Building, Wall, hedge or fence not at Frontages or Adjacent to Civic Space.


 
Rooftop Antennas and HVAC, Mechanical and other Equipment Screening
 R; shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building parapet or other Building Element
 




Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



page left intentionally blank

table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-RC research center special district

SD-RC

General Description
 
The SD-RC Research Center Special District is intended for scientific, business and industrial research operations and related testing and production in a park-like setting.
 



District Density
 
Not Regulated
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 Not Regulated
 




Block Size
 
Not Regulated
 




Setbacks - All Buildings
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage:
 75 ft. min
 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 75 ft. min
 
Side Setback
 50 ft. min
 
Rear Setback
 75 ft. min
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
All Buildings
 75 ft max
 
Ceiling Height
 Not Regulated
 
Facade
 Not Regulated
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 Not Regulated
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 




Civic Space Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 



Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 50 ft min
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare
 




Building Types
 
Not Regulated
 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-RC research center special district

SD-RC

Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 Not Regulated
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 Not Regulated
 
Driveway to Off-Street Park­ing & Passenger Drop-off Location
 P in any Lot Layer
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 30 ft
 
Parking Structures
 Not Regulated
 
Parking Structure Pedestrian Exit Location
 Not Regulated
 



Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Encroachment Type
 Front
 Side
 Rear
 
Steps to Building Entrance
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Open Porches, including steps
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Patio Decks, in permitted applicable Lot Layer
 NP
 P
 P
 
Openwork Fire Balconies
 NP
 P
 P
 
Chimney flues, sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses eaves and other Architectural Features
 P
 P
 P
 
Satellite dishes/ antennae
 P
 P
 P
 
Mechanical equipment, including HVAC
 NP
 P
 P
 
Utility lines, wires and associated Structures (e.g. poles)
 P
 P
 P
 
Fences, hedges, walls, Shrubbery, and other landscape features
 P
 P
 P
 
Parking Areas, Loading Areas and Driveways in 3rd Lot Layer
 NA
 P
 P
 
Bicycle Parking
 P
 P
 P
 
Stoops, Lightwells, Terraces
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Balconies and Bay Windows
 P
 P
 P
 




Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* 
Requirements
 
Off-Street Trash Recep­tacle/Dumpster
 R, fully enclosed on 3 sides and en­closed on the 4th side with self-closing gate. 
 
Off-Street Loading, Stor­age, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 Not Regulated
 
* Not including water meters
 




Non-Building Components
 
Not Regulated
 




table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-RC research center special district

SD-RC

Screens
 
Wall Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft
 
Hedge Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Wall or fence Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft; Min. 6’ for Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
 
Hedge Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Non-Residential & Multi-Family Residential Screen Adjacent to or across Thoroughfare from Non-Multi-Family Residential
 None Required
 
Parking, Loading Areas, Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, Drive-Throughs, Trash Receptacles/Dumpsters, HVAC and other equipment Screened from Frontage, Civic Space and Adjacent Property
 R; except at Driveways: 
•	
Parking Lots and Parking Areas shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building or Streetscreen; 

•	
Parking Structures shall be Screened from Frontages by Liner Buildings. 

•	
Otherwise, Screen shall be by Building, wall, hedge or fence at Frontage or Building, Wall, hedge or fence not at Frontages or Adjacent to Civic Space.


 
Rooftop Antennas and HVAC, Mechanical and other Equipment Screening
 R; shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building parapet or other Building Element
 




Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
R; 1 Tree per 40 feet of Frontage if front Setback = 15 ft, planted in 1st Lot Layer
 
Minimum of 30% of 1st Lot Layer must be landscaped in compliance with Section 154.413.
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 3.5-4 ft. at Frontage; otherwise 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Vinyl
 P
 
Chain Link
 P
 
Barbed/razor
 P at rear only and if Screened from Alley, Thoroughfares and Adjacent property
 



Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



page left intentionally blank

table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-A Agriculture special district

SD-A

General Description
 
The SD-A Agriculture Special District is intended for agricultural use.
 



District Density
 
Not Regulated
 




Number of Buildings
 
Principal Building
 Not Regulated
 
Accessory Buildings
 Not Regulated
 




Block Size
 
Not Regulated
 




Setbacks - All Buildings
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage:
 200 ft
 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 200 ft
 
Side Setback
 200 ft
 
Rear Setback
 200 ft
 




Private Frontage Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Civic Space Types
 
Not Regulated
 




Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
Principal Building
 2.5 Stories (40 ft) max
 
Accessory Building
 2.5 Stories (40 ft) max
 
Ceiling Height
 Not Regulated
 
Facade
 Not Regulated
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 Not Regulated
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 




Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 



Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 Not Regulated
 
Agricultural district Lot Area
 25 acres gross minimum
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare
 




Building Types
 
Not Regulated
 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-A AGRICULTURE special district

SD-A

Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 Not Regulated
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Prepared surface of gravel, asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 Not Regulated
 
Driveway to Off-Street Park­ing & Passenger Drop-off Location
 P in any Lot Layer
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 30 ft
 
Parking Structures
 NP
 
Parking Structure Pedestrian Exit Location
 Not Regulated
 



Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Encroachment Type
 Front
 Side
 Rear
 
Steps to Building Entrance
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Open Porches, including steps
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Patio Decks, in permitted applicable Lot Layer
 NP
 P
 P
 
Openwork Fire Balconies
 NP
 P
 P
 
Chimney flues, sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses eaves and other Architectural Features
 P
 P
 P
 
Satellite dishes/ antennae
 P
 P
 P
 
Mechanical equipment, including HVAC
 NP
 P
 P
 
Utility lines, wires and associated Structures (e.g. poles)
 P
 P
 P
 
Fences, hedges, walls, Shrubbery, and other landscape features
 P
 P
 P
 
Parking Areas, Loading Areas and Driveways in 3rd Lot Layer
 NA
 P
 P
 
Bicycle Parking
 P
 P
 P
 
Stoops, Lightwells, Terraces
 P, up to 50% of Setback
 P
 P
 
Balconies and Bay Windows
 P
 P
 P
 




Bicycle Parking Standards
 
See Bicycle Parking Standards in Section 154.411 and Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 




Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* 
Requirements
 
Off-Street Trash Recep­tacle/Dumpster
 R, fully enclosed on 3 sides and en­closed on the 4th side with self-closing gate. P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
Off-Street Loading, Stor­age, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
* Not including water meters
 




Non-Building Components
 
Not Regulated
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-A AGRICULTURE special district

SD-A

Screens
 
Wall Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft
 
Hedge Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Wall or fence Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft; Min. 6’ for Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
 
Hedge Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Non-Residential & Multi-Family Residential Screen Adjacent to or across Thoroughfare from Non-Multi-Family Residential
 Not Regulated
 
Parking, Loading Areas, Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, Drive-Throughs, Trash Receptacles, HVAC and other equipment Screened from Frontage, Civic Space and Adjacent Property
 R; except at Driveways: 
•	
Parking Lots and Parking Areas shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building or Streetscreen; 

•	
Parking Structures shall be Screened from Frontages by Liner Buildings. 

•	
Otherwise, Screen shall be by Building, wall, hedge or fence at Frontage or Building, Wall, hedge or fence not at Frontages or Adjacent to Civic Space.


 
Rooftop Antennas and HVAC, Mechanical and other Equipment Screening
 R; shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building parapet or other Building Element
 




Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
Not Regulated except per Screens and Parking Lot Landscaping requirements
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Vinyl
 P
 
Chain Link
 P
 



Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



page left intentionally blank

table 154.405.A District standards: 
SD-U UNIVERSITY special district

SD-U

(A) In general. The SD-U University Special District recognizes the unique character and development of a central campus of state universities. Accordingly, regardless of any other provisions of this Chapter, no regulations, procedures, Site Plan requirements or other provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any property, Building or premises located in the SD-U University Special District. 
(B) SD-U University Special District. The SD-U University Special District shall be comprised of the main campus of Central Michigan University and certain other parcels in the area known as University Park, as separately shown on the Zoning Map.
(C) Non-University ownership.
(1) If Central Michigan University conveys any portion of the land within the main campus and ceases to use that conveyed land as part of the University, until that land is zoned otherwise by the City Commission, that land will be subject to all provisions of this Chapter as if it were in the CD-5 District.
(2) If Central Michigan University conveys any portion of the land within University Park that is within the SD-U University Special District, until that land is zoned otherwise by the City Commission, that land will be subject to the provisions of this Chapter as if it were in the SD-RC Research Center Special District.

SECTION 154.405.	
Building and Lot Standards 
(continued)
B. Civic Zone Buildings & Lots.
The terms Civic Zone, Civic Space and Civic Building are defined in Article VII.
If a Building or Lot is located within an area designated on the applicable Zoning Map as Civic Zone, Civic Space or Civic Building:
1.	Civic Space shall be designed generally as described in Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary), as related to the Adjacent Character District, or if Adjacent more than one, as related to the Adjacent Character District with the largest number of linear feet of common boundary with the Civic Space; and
2.	Development, re-Development, Lots, Buildings, Structures, and Improvements and use thereof within Civic Zones shall comply with the applicable standards and requirements of Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards), subject, however, to the second paragraph of Section 154.405.B.3. 
3.	Without limitation to Sections 154.405.B.1 or 154.405.B.2, Civic Buildings within Civic Zones shall comply with the standards and requirements of Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards) and any other requirements as may be determined by the City Commission. 
	Buildings operated for Civic purposes but not located within a Civic Zone must comply with the applicable Character District or Special District standards of the Character District or Special District in which they are situated.


CZ

Table 154.405.B CIVIC ZONE standards

Image TBD

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.




General Description
 
Civic Zone is assigned to areas designated for Civic purposes. These may be Open Space of one or more Civic Space Types allowed within any specific Character District or Special District, as well as sites dedicated to Buildings and Structures for Civic purposes, such as town halls, post offices, libraries, meeting halls, churches or community centers.
 



Permitted Uses
 
See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) and Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses)
 



CZ

Table 154.405.B CIVIC ZONE standards


LOT DEPTH

FRONT SETBACK MAY BE 
WITHIN 50% OF LOT DEPTH


Adjacent 
Buildings

Civic Building - 20’ taller

B

A

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Building Standards
 
Building Height
 
Principal Building
 20 ft higher than maximum Height of any Adjacent Character District, max.
 B


 
Accessory Building
 30 ft max
 
Ceiling Height
 Not Regulated
 
Facade
 
Frontage Buildout
 Not Regulated
 
Entrances
 Main Entrance must be in Facade of Principal Frontage
 
Location of Building at Frontage
 Parallel to Frontage Line
 
Facade Position
 Parallel to straight Frontage Line or to tangent of curved Frontage Line
 
Facade Design Proportions
 Must be simple, e.g. rational (1:1, 2:1, 3:2, 4:3, etc) or irrational (v2 [1.414]:1 and 1.618:1 [“Golden Mean”]
 
Blank Walls
 NP at Frontage
 
Facade Void Area %
 20-60% of total Facade area
 
Facade Openings
 Square or vertical in proportion
In Stories above first, Facade openings must be = 50%.
 
Facade Glazing
 20% min – 60% max
 
Window Alignment
 Upper floor windows and other features must be aligned with those of first floor.
 
Building Standards (continued)
 
Facade Articulation
 Not Regulated
 
Finished Floor Level
 Not Regulated
 
Facade Window Sill Height
 Not Regulated
 
Shopfront Frontages
 NA
 
Decks
 NP at Frontage
 
Roof Type & Roof Pitch
 
Flat, enclosed by 42” min parapet
 P
 
Shed
 P at rear only; except for dormers which may have a shed roof anywhere on the Building
 
Hip
 P
 
Gable
 P
 
Pitch, if any
 8:12 - 14:12, except for shed roofs which may be 3:12 - 14:12
 
Notes:
 
*Stories do not include Attics and Basements.
 



Lot Occupation
 
Lot Width
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Area
 Not Regulated
 
Lot Enfrontment
 Must enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare
 



Setbacks
 
Front Setback, Principal Frontage:
 0 ft min; 50% of Lot Depth max
 A


 
Front Setback, Secondary Frontage
 0 ft min.
 
Side Setback
 0 ft min.
 
Rear Setback
 0 ft min.
 



Private Frontages
 
Not Regulated
 NP
 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CZ

Table 154.405.B CIVIC ZONE standards

Encroachments - Required Setbacks
 
Not Regulated
 




Vehicular Parking Standards
 
Off-Street Parking Location
 3rd Lot Layer
 
Off-Street Parking Surface
 Asphalt, concrete or other hard surface
 
Garage Location
 3rd Lot Layer
 
Driveway to Off-Street
Parking & Passenger Drop-off Location
 Any Lot Layer
 
Driveway/Vehicular Entrance Maximum Width
 24 ft in 1st Lot Layer and 2nd Lot Layer
 
Parking Structures
 P, if Screened from Frontage by Liner Building
 
Parking Structure Pedestrian Exit Location
 Via pedestrian access to Frontage
 



Bicycle Parking Requirements 
 
Required Bicycle Parking
 See Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking)
 



Building Types
 
House
 NP
 Commercial
 NP
 
Duplex
 NP
 Mixed Use
 NP
 
Townhouse
 NP
 Flex
 NP
 
Multifamily
 NP
 Mid-Rise
 NP
 
Live/Work
 NP
 Civic
 P
 



Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* 
Requirements
 
Off-Street Trash Recep­tacle/Dumpster
 R, fully enclosed on 3 sides and en­closed on the 4th side with self-closing gate.
 
Off-Street Loading, Storage, Drive-Through, Trash Receptacle (except public trash cans)/Dumpster, Utility Box & Service Meter* Locations 
 P in 3rd Lot Layer only
 
* Not including water meters
 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



CZ

Table 154.405.B CIVIC ZONE standards

Non-Building Components
 
Heating and Air Conditioning Equipment, Utility, Service and Mechanical Equipment
 Not Regulated
 
Solar Panels
 Not Regulated
 
Antennas & Satellite Equipment
 Not Regulated
 
Recreation or Play Equipment
 Not Regulated
 
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Spas
 Not Regulated
 



Signs
 
See Sign Standards in Section 154.414 and Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards)
 




Lighting
 
See Private Lighting Standards in Section 154.415
 




Screens
 
Wall Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft
 
Hedge Screen Height at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 3.5 ft to 5 ft at installation; Min. 80% opacity within 12 in of grade.
 
Wall or fence Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft; Min. 6’ for Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
 
Hedge Screen Height not at Frontage or Adjacent to Civic Space
 5 ft to 6 ft at installation; Min 80% opacity.
 
Parking, Loading Areas, Service Areas, Outdoor Storage, Drive-Throughs, Trash Receptacles, HVAC and other equipment Screened from Frontage, Civic Space and Adjacent Property
 R; except at Driveways: 
•	
Parking Lots and Parking Areas shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building or Streetscreen; 

•	
Parking Structures shall be Screened from Frontages by Liner Buildings. 

•	
Otherwise, Screen shall be by Building, wall, hedge or fence at Frontage or Building, Wall, hedge or fence not at Frontages or Adjacent to Civic Space.


 
Rooftop Antennas and HVAC, Mechanical and other Equipment Screening
 R; shall be Screened from Frontage and Civic Space by Building parapet or other Building Element
 




Private Landscaping and Fencing
 
Landscaping
 
Not Regulated
 
Walls & Fencing (not including Screens)
 
Height
 3.5-4 ft. at Frontage; otherwise 6 ft. max; height measured from avg. undisturbed grade of Adjacent property at property line
 
Construction
 Finished side must face Adjacent property, Thoroughfare, Path, Passage or Waterbody
 
Allowed Materials
 Natural Wood
 P at side & rear only
 
Brick or Stucco over Masonry
 P
 
Wrought Iron or Aluminum
 P
 
Vinyl
 P in Third Lot Layer only
 
Chain Link
 P at rear only
 
Barbed/razor
 NP
 
Maintenance
 Must be well-maintained, in upright condition and free of missing or broken parts and graffiti.
 



LEGEND
 
P
 Permitted
 NA
 Not Applicable
 
NP
 Not Permitted
 R
 Required
 



SECTION 154.406.	
LOTS
A. Lot Layers. 
Lots are comprised of three Lot Layers, the First Lot Layer, the Second Lot Layer, and the Third Lot Layer, as related to the Lot Frontage, as shown in Illustration 154.406.A (Lot Layers) and as defined in Article VII.  
Lot Layers are used to regulate in what parts of a Lot certain Development, Building elements, and Uses are allowed or required, as set forth in Table 5.A.1-16 (Development Site Standards).  
For corner Lots, which have both a Principal Frontage and a Secondary Frontage:
1.	standards and prescriptions for the First Lot Layer  apply with respect to the First Lot Layer as related to both  Frontages; and
2.	standards and prescriptions for the Second Lot Layer and Third Lot Layer pertain only to such Layers as related to the Principal Frontage.  See Article VII definitions of Principal Frontage and Secondary Frontage. 
Illustration 154.406.A Lot Layers

PRINCIPAL FRONTAGE LAYERS

SECONDARY FRONTAGE

3rd
Layer

PRINCIPAL FRONTAGE

2nd
Layer

1st
Layer

1st Layer

Property Line

SECONDARY FRONTAGE LAYER


B. Lot Dimensions. 
Lots:
1.	within each Character District shall be dimensioned according to Table 154.405.A (District Standards);
2.	within each Civic Zone shall be dimensioned according to Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards); and
3.	within each Special District shall be dimensioned as set forth or referenced in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
C. Lot Enfrontment.
Within all Districts and Civic Zones, each Lot shall Enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare as provided in Table 154.405A (District Standards).
D. Corner Clearance.
In all Districts and Civic Zones, where a Front Setback is required Adjacent to the intersection of two Thoroughfares or a Thoroughfare and an Alley, within a triangle formed by the property line Adjacent to the intersecting Thoroughfare or Alley and a line between two points located 20 feet from such intersecting lines, no Structure, planting, or fence shall be erected or maintained which is higher than three feet above the curb grade or more than 10% solid.
E. Double Fronted Lots.
Within all Districts and Civic Zones, where a Lot runs through a Block from Thoroughfare to Thoroughfare and Front Setbacks are required, such Front Setback shall be provided along each Lot Line Adjacent to all Adjacent Thoroughfares.
F. Required Spaces or Areas.
No Lot shall be divided or reduced so as to make the required area or dimensions less than the minimum required by Section 154.406.B, nor shall any Setback required for a Principal Building be included as part of a Setback required under this Chapter for any other Building.
G. Yards Along District Boundaries.
Where two Lots are in different Districts or a District and a Civic Zone and have abutting Side Lot Lines, both Lots shall have their abutting common Side Setbacks as wide as the largest Side Setback required by either of the two Districts or the District and the Civic Zone.
SECTION 154.407.	
BUILDING PLACEMENT, NUMBER & 
FACADES
A. Building Placement. 
Buildings shall be located in relation to the boundaries of their Lots and shall comply with the Setback standards:
1.	within each Character District according to Table 154.405.A (District Standards); 
2.	within each Civic Zone, according to the applicable standards set forth on Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards); and
3.	within each Special District, according to Table 154.405.A (District Standards). 
To accommodate slopes over ten percent, relief from front Setback requirements may be granted by Waiver of the City Planner.

Illustration 154.407.A SETBACK DESIGNATIONS

3

2

1

1

1


 Front Setback
 
2


 Side Setback
 
3


 Rear Setback
 



B. Principal Building.
Within each Character District and Special District:
1.	the number of Principal Buildings on each Lot shall not exceed that indicated in Table 154.405.A (District Standards); and
2.	Principal Buildings shall be oriented and situated as specified in Table 154.405.A (District Standards)  and illustrated in Illustration 154.407.B (Principal Building / Accessory Building).
Illustration 154.407.B principal building / Accessory BUILDING


2

2

1

1

1


 Principal Building
 
2


 Accessory Building
 



Property Line


C. Accessory Buildings. 
1.	Within each Character District and Special District:
a.	the number of Accessory Buildings on each Lot shall not exceed that indicated in Table 154.405.A (District Standards); and
b.	any such Accessory Buildings shall be located as specified in Table 154.405.A (District Standards) as applicable and illustrated generally in Illustration 154.407.B (Principal Building / Accessory Building).
2.  	Except within Civic Zones, Accessory Buildings or other Structures may not be erected on a Lot on which there is no Principal Building. 
3.  The following regulations shall apply where Accessory Buildings and Structures are permitted:
a.	Except within Civic Zones, the cumulative footprint of all detached Accessory Buildings shall not exceed the greater of 10% of the gross area of the Lot or 440 square feet, and shall not exceed 60% of the habitable square footage of the Principal Building on the Lot.
b.	Any Accessory Building must be located in the Lot Layer indicated in Table 154.405.A (District Standards) for the applicable District.
c. Transmitting and/or receiving towers or antennas and wind turbines shall not be located in the First Lot Layer or Second Lot Layer. Guy wires or any other structural supports shall not encroach upon any right-of-way, adjoining property, easements, or yard areas. 
d. No Structure may exceed the FAA Surface limitations as shown on the “Part 77 Surfaces” map, as amended on file at the Department of Public Works.
D. Rear Dwellings. 
Within all Districts, no Building on the same Lot and in the rear of a Principal Building shall be used as a Dwelling, except in accordance with the standards of Section 154.410 (Uses).
E. Building Facades. 
1.	Within each Character District, Building Facades shall be built as required in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
2.	In each Character District, the Façade of the Principal Building shall be built along the minimum percentage of the Front Lot Line width at the Setback, specified as Frontage Buildout on Table 154.405.A (District Standards). A Streetscreen may be substituted for a Façade for up to 20% of the applicable Frontage Buildout requirement.
F. Fences & Walls.
Within each District and Civic Zone, fences and walls shall comply with the applicable standards in Table 154.405.A (District Standards) and Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards).
SECTION 154.408.	
PRIVATE FRONTAGE, BUILDING FORM & BUILDING TYPE; FLOOR ELEVATION
A. Private Frontage - General. 
Within each Character District, the Private Frontage of Buildings shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types) and Table 154.405.A (District Standards).

TABLE 154.408.A Private Frontage Types
 
Common Yard
 Permitted 
Districts: 
 


 A planted Frontage wherein the Facade is set back substantially from the Frontage Line. The front yard created remains unfenced and is visually continuous with Adjacent yards, supporting a common landscape. 
 
Porch
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A planted Frontage wherein the Facade is set back from the Frontage Line with an attached exterior covered area large enough to accommodate outdoor furniture and/or gathering, and that is permitted to Encroach. This may be used with or without a fence to maintain Thoroughfare spatial definition. 
 
Fence
 Permitted Districts:
 


 A planted Frontage wherein the Facade is set back from the Frontage Line and a fence is used to maintain Thoroughfare spatial definition. This may be used with or without a porch.
 
TABLE 154.408.A Private Frontage Types
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein the Facade is set back from the Frontage Line by an elevated landing and a sunken Lightwell. This type buffers Residential Uses from urban Sidewalks and may allow for activation of below grade space.
 
Forecourt
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein a portion of the Facade is close to the Frontage Line and the central portion is set back. The Forecourt creates an intimate gathering space for the residents or additional shopping or restaurant seating area within Retail/Personal Service areas. This type should be used sparingly and may be allocated in conjunction with other Frontage types.
 
Stoop
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein the Facade is aligned close to the Frontage Line with the first Story elevated from the Sidewalk sufficiently to secure privacy for the windows. An exterior stair and landing provides access to the entrance. This type is recommended for ground-floor Residential Use.
 
TABLE 154.408.A Private Frontage Types
 
Shopfront
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein the Facade is aligned close to or at the Frontage Line with the Building entrance at Sidewalk grade. This type is conventional for Retail/Personal Service Use. It has a substantial glazing at the Sidewalk level and may include an awning that may over-lap the Sidewalk.
 
Gallery
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein the Facade is aligned close to the Frontage Line with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight colonnade. This type is intended for Buildings with ground floor Business/Commercial, Office, Lodging or Retail/Personal Service Uses and the Gallery may be one or two Stories.
 
Arcade
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein a colonnade supports habitable space and the Façade is set back from the Frontage Line and the arcade meets the Sidewalk. Any Encroachment into the Public Right-of-Way is subject to approval by the City Commission or applicable road agency.
 
TABLE 154.408.A Private Frontage Types
 
Dooryard
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein the Façade of the Building is set back a small distance and the Frontage Line is defined by a low wall, decorative fence or hedge, creating a small dooryard. The dooryard shall not be used to provide public circulation along a ROW. The dooryard may be raised, sunken, or at grade and is intended for ground floor Residential.
 
Officefront
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 A Frontage wherein the Facade is aligned close to or at the Frontage Line with the Building entrance at or above Sidewalk grade. This type is conventional for Office Use. It may have a substantial glazing on the Facade.
 



CD-3

CD-3L

CD-4

CD-3

CD-3L

CD-4

CD-3

CD-3L

CD-4

CD-4

CD-5

CD-4

CD-5

CD-3

CD-4

CD-3L

CD-5

CD-4

CD-5

CD-4

CD-5

CD-5

CD-4

CD-5

CD-4

CD-5

B. Private Frontage on Corner Lots.
Principal Buildings on Corner Lots shall have two Private Frontages: (a) a Principal Frontage and (b) a Secondary Frontage, as illustrated generally in Illustration 154.408.B (Frontage & Lot Lines). 

Illustration 154.408.B Frontage & Lot Lines

4

4

3

2

Secondary Frontage

3

3

2

1

Principal Frontage

1

Property Line

1


 Frontage Line
 
2


 Lot Line
 
3


 Facades
 
4


 Elevations
 




C. Building & Ceiling Height; Floor Finish Elevation. 
1.	Building Heights and ceiling heights:
a.	within each Character District shall conform to Table 154.405.A (District Standards);
b.	within each Civic Zone shall conform to any applicable standards set forth or referenced in Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards); and 
c.	within each Special District shall conform to Table 154.405.A (District Standards). 
2.	In calculating the Height of a Building, none of the following shall be considered:
a.	Attics under 14 feet in height at their tallest point;
b.	Raised Basements; or
c.	Masts, belfries, clock towers, chimneys, chimney flues, silos, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads.
3. 	Building ground finish floor elevation within each Character District shall conform to Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
D. Roof Type & Pitch. 
Within each Character District, Building roof type and pitch shall conform to Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
Illustration 154.408.D1 ROOF TYPES


Gable Roof

Hip Roof

Shed Roof

Flat Roof



Illustration 154.408.D2 ROOF PITCh

Rise (x)

12

Rise (x)

12

Roof Pitch = X :12


E. Façade Standards.
Within each Character District, the Facades of Buildings shall conform to Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
F. Screens and Streetscreens. 
Any Screen or Streetscreen shall comply with the applicable standards in Table 154.405.A (District Standards) and shall be built within the Second Lot Layer. 
A wall Screen or Streetscreen shall be constructed from masonry.  A fence Screen or Streetscreen shall be constructed from wood.
Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
G. Principal Building Types.
Principal Buildings in each Character District and Civic Zone shall be of one or more of the Principal Building Types specified for such Character District in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Principal Building Types - Summary) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types – Specific Standards).

TABLE 154.408.G1 Principal BUILDING TYPES -   SUMMARY
 
Principal Building Type
 Permitted 
Districts
 


 House: 
A detached Building having an Edgeyard yard type that may be shared with an Accessory Building in the backyard. This Building type typically incorporates a single Residential unit.
 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
 


 Duplex: 
A small to medium sized Building that consists of two attached units, with separate entrances at least one of which faces the Thoroughfare. Both of the units, side-by-side, front-to-back or over-and-under, are contained within a single Building Massing. This Building type sits on a small to medium sized Lot having an Edgeyard or Sideyard yard type that may be shared with an Accessory Building in the backyard.
 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
 


 Townhouse: 
A collection of very narrow- to medium-sized attached Buildings with a Rearyard yard type (or Sideyard if an end unit) that consists of side-by-side units with individual entries facing the Thoroughfare. This type shares at least one party wall with another Building of the same type and occupies the full Frontage Line.
 CD-4
CD-5
 


 Multifamily: 
A Building that consists of 3 or more side-by-side and/or horizontally stacked units, typically with one or more shared entries.
 CD-4
CD-5
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
TABLE 154.408.G1 Principal BUILDING TYPES -   SUMMARY
 
Principal Building Type
 Permitted 
Districts
 


 Live/Work: 
A small- to medium-sized attached or detached Building that consists of a flexible space used for artisan, studio, or Retail/Personal Service Uses, and a Residential unit above and/or behind. The flexible space and the Residential unit are internally connected. This type is appropriate for providing affordable and flexible Mixed Use space for incubating neighborhood-serving Retail/Personal Service Uses, artists and other craftspeople.
 CD-4
CD-5
 


 Commercial: 
A small- to medium-sized attached or detached non-Residential Building typically designed to facilitate pedestrian-oriented Retail/Personal Service, Business/Commercial, or Office Uses.
 CD-4
 


 Mixed Use: 
A typically attached Building that provides a vertical and/or horizontal mix of Uses typically designed to facilitate pedestrian-oriented Retail/Personal Service, Lodging, Business/Commercial, or Office Uses on the ground floor, with upper floors typically designed for Residential or Office Uses.
 CD-4
CD-5
 


 Flex: 
A large footprint Building designed to accommodate a single Use or a vertical or horizontal mix of Uses.
 CD-4
CD-5
 


 Mid-Rise: 
An attached or detached Building that may provide a vertical and/or horizontal mix of Uses, typically designed to facilitate pedestrian-oriented Retail/Personal Service, Lodging, Business/Commercial, or Office Uses on the ground floor, with upper floors typically designed for Residential or Office Uses.
 CD-5
 


 Civic:
A medium- to large-sized attached or detached Building designed to stand apart from its surroundings due to the specialized nature of its public or quasi-public function for public assembly and activity. Examples include libraries, churches, courthouses, schools, centers of government, performing arts, and museums. They are often the most prominently sited and architecturally significant Structures in a community.
 CZ
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 Principal Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
House
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-3

CD-3L

CD-4

(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
2 Stories max
 
Width:
 
Not Regulated
 



(a) General Description
 
A detached Building having an Edgeyard yard type that may be shared with an Accessory Building in the backyard. This Building type typically incorporates a single Residential unit.
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Main Entrance Location
 Principal Frontage
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Building
 1 max
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Common Yard
 P
 
Porch
 P
 
Fence
 P
 
Stoop
 P
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Duplex
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-3

CD-3L

CD-4

(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
2 Stories max
 
Width:
 
48 ft max
 



(a) General Description
 
A small to medium sized Building that consists of two attached units, with separate entrances at least one of which faces the Thoroughfare. Both of the units, side-by-side, front-to-back or over-and-under, are contained within a single Building Massing. This Building type sits on a small to medium sized Lot having an Edgeyard or Sideyard yard type that may be shared with an Accessory Building in the backyard.
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Main Entrance Location
 Principal Frontage
 
At least one unit shall have an individual entry at the Principal Frontage.
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Building
 2
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Common Yard
 P
 
Porch
 P
 
Fence
 P
 
Stoop
 P
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Townhouse
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

(a) General Description
 
A collection of very narrow- to medium-sized attached Buildings with a Rearyard yard type (or Sideyard if an end unit) that consists of side-by-side units with individual entries facing the Thoroughfare. This type shares at least one party wall with another Building of the same type and occupies the full Frontage Line.
 



(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
Per Character District Height Standards
 
Width:
 
12 ft min. - 36 ft max per Townhouse
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Main Entrance Location
 Principal Frontage
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Townhouse
 1 max
 
Number of Townhouses connected to other Townhouses
 3 min. - 8 max
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Porch
 P
 
Stoop
 P
 
Dooryard
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Multi-Family
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

(a) General Description
 
A Building that consists of 3 or more side-by-side and/or horizontally stacked units, typically with one or more shared entries.
 



(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
Per Character District Height Standards 
 
Width:
 
Per Character District Lot Width and Side Setback Standards 
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Main Entrance Location
 Principal Frontage
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Building
 3 min.
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Porch
 P
 
Stoop
 P
 
Forecourt
 P
 
Dooryard
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Live/Work
 Permitted Districts: 
 

* Illustration of 3 Adjoining Live/Work Units


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

(a) General Description
 
A small- to medium-sized attached or detached Building that consists of a flexible space used for artisan, studio, or Retail/Personal Service Uses, and a Residential unit above and/or behind. The flexible space and the Residential unit are internally connected. This type is appropriate for providing affordable and flexible Mixed Use space for incubating neighborhood-serving Retail/Personal Service Uses, artists and other craftspeople.
 



(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
Per Character District Height Standards
 
Width:
 
18 ft min. - 36 ft max
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Main Entrance Location
 Principal Frontage
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Building
 2, including 1 Residential and 1 flexible space
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Stoop
 P
 
Dooryard
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 
Shopfront
 P
 
Officefront
 P
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Commercial
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
Per Character District Height Standards
 
Width:
 
Per Character District Lot Width and Side Setback Standards 
 



(a) General Description
 
A small- to medium-sized attached or detached non-Residential Building typically designed to facilitate a single pedestrian-oriented Retail/Personal Service, Business/Commercial, or Office Use.
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Main Entrance Location
 Principal Frontage
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Building
 Unrestricted, except as may be due to Building Code, Special Use Permit, Special Regulated Use Permit, or license.
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Stoop
 P
 
Dooryard
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 
Shopfront
 P
 
Officefront
 P
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Mixed Use
 Permitted Districts: 
 

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.


 



CD-4

CD-5

(a) General Description
 
A typically attached Building that provides a vertical and/or horizontal mix of Uses typically designed to facilitate pedestrian-oriented Retail/Personal Service, Lodging, Business/Commercial, or Office Uses on the ground floor, with upper floors typically designed for Residential or Office Uses.
 



(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
2 Stories min; 2 Stories max in CD-4; 4 Stories max in CD-5
 
Width:
 
Per Character District Lot Width and Side Setback Standards 
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Ground Floor Units
 Principal Frontage
 
Upper Floors Units
 Principal or Secondary Frontage
 
Upper floors units shall be accessed by a common entry.
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Building
 2 min, which must accommodate different Principal Uses
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Stoop
 P
 Terrace
 P
 
Forecourt
 P
 Officefront
 P
 
Dooryard
 P
 Gallery1
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 Arcade1
 P
 
Shopfront
 P
 
1 May only be used in combination with a Shopfront or Officefront Frontage type.
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Flex Building
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
Minimum as prescribed for applicable Character District; 3 Stories max
 
Width:
 
50’ min; max per Character District Lot Width and Side Setback Standards
 



(a) General Description
 
A large footprint Building designed to accommodate a single Use or a vertical or horizontal mix of Uses.
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Unrestricted, except as may be due to Building Code, Special Use Permit, Special Regulated Use Permit, or license.
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Ground Floor Units
 Principal Frontage
 
Upper Floors Units
 Principal or Secondary Frontage
 
Ground floor units may have individual entries along the front Thoroughfare or side Thoroughfare.
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Stoop
 P
 Terrace
 P
 
Forecourt
 P
 Officefront
 P
 
Dooryard
 P
 Gallery1
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 Arcade1
 P
 
Shopfront
 P
 
1 May only be used in combination with a Shopfront or Officefront Frontage type.
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Mid-Rise
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-5

(a) General Description
 
An attached or detached Building that may provide a vertical and/or horizontal mix of Uses, typically designed to facilitate pedestrian-oriented Retail/Personal Service, Lodging, Business/Commercial, or Office Uses on the ground floor, with upper floors typically designed for Residential or Office Uses.
 



(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
Min. 4 Stories; max per Character District Height Standards
 
Width:
 
Per Character District Lot Width and Setback Standards
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 Per Character District Lot Width
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Ground Floor Units
 Principal Frontage
 
Upper Floors Units
 Principal or Secondary Frontage
 
Upper floors units shall be accessed by a common entry.
 



(c) Number of Units
 
Units per Building
 2 min, which may be Residential or non-Residential
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
Stoop
 P
 Terrace
 P
 
Forecourt
 P
 Officefront
 P
 
Dooryard
 P
 Gallery1
 P
 
Terrace/Lightwell
 P
 Arcade1
 P
 
Shopfront
 P
 
1 May only be used in combination with a Shopfront or Officefront Frontage Type
 



TABLE 154.408.G2 PRINCIPAL Building Types - Specific STANDARDS
 
Civic
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CZ

(a) General Description
 
A medium- to large-sized attached or detached Building designed to stand apart from its surroundings due to the specialized nature of its public or quasi-public function for public assembly and activity. Examples include libraries, churches, courthouses, schools, centers of government, performing arts, and museums. They are often the most prominently sited and architecturally significant Structures in a community.
 



(e) Building Size and Massing
 
Height:
 
The height of Civic Buildings shall be limited to 20 additional feet above the maximum allowed height in any Adjacent Character District.
 
Width:
 
Not Regulated
 



(b) Lot
 
Width
 NA
 



(f) Pedestrian Access
 
Except as specifically provided in this Code, Civic Buildings are not subject to the Building, Lot, or Private Frontage Requirements of this Code.
 




(c) Number of Units
 
NA
 



(d) Allowed Private Frontage Types
 
NA
 



(g) Vehicle Access and Parking
 
Parking may be accessed from an Alley, side Thoroughfare or front Thoroughfare.
 



SECTION 154.409.	
ENCROACHMENTS	  
Encroachments of Building Elements are allowed within each District and Civic Zone only as set forth in Table 154.405.A (District Standards) and Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards), respectively. 
SECTION 154.410.	
USES
A. Principal Uses. 
1.	Buildings and Lots in each Character District shall conform to the Principal Uses specified on Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use) for such Character District. Multiple Principal Uses may exist within a Building or Lot.
2.	Buildings and Lots in each Special District shall conform to the Principal Uses specified Table 154.410.A  (Building and Lot Principal Use) for such Special District.
3.	Buildings and Lots in each Civic Zone shall conform to the applicable Principal Uses specified or referenced in Table 154.410.A  (Building and Lot Principal Use).
B. Special Uses. 
1.	Special Uses are permitted on a Lot or within a Building within an applicable District if the Use is shown as “SUP” on Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use), subject to:
a.	compliance with the applicable conditions and requirements imposed for each, as established by or pursuant to Sections 154.410.B.3 and 154.410.B.4;
b.	review and approval by the Planning Commission; and
c.	 issuance of a Special Use Permit.  
	The conditions and requirements applicable to any Special Use or Special Use Permit shall be enforceable, and failure to comply with any condition or requirement of a Special Use or Special Use Permit shall subject such Special Use, Special Use Permit, and rights conferred thereby to revocation pursuant to Section 154.615.E. 
2.	No Special Use shall commence or exist, or be conducted or engaged in, on any Lot or within any Building unless the same has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 154.615 and a Special Use Permit has been issued and is in effect for such Special Use.
3.	The Planning Commission may impose any conditions on its approval of any Special Use in addition to those set forth in Section 154.410.B.4, provided that such additional conditions meet the criteria for conditions set forth in MCL Sections 125.3504(4)(a)-(c).
4.	The following Special Uses must comply with the applicable conditions and requirements indicated for each of them in addition to complying with Section 154.410.B.2 and any additional conditions imposed by the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 154.410.B.3:
a. Accessory Dwelling Units must comply with the following: 
i.	The accessory dwelling unit shall have a floor area of at least 400 square feet but no more than 1,000 square feet.
ii.	The accessory dwelling unit shall have a floor area of no more than 40% of the floor area of the principal dwelling.
iii.	The minimum width of the accessory dwelling unit shall be 20 feet.
iv.	If the accessory dwelling unit is in a separate structure than the principal dwelling unit, that shall be no taller than the structure housing the principal dwelling unit.
v.	The accessory dwelling unit shall be in a structure secured to a permanent foundation. 
vi.	Camping dwellings shall not be used as accessory dwellings.  
vii. The accessory dwelling unit shall be functionally independent from the principal dwelling unit with separate living, sleeping, eating, cooking, heating, and cooling provisions.
viii.No common interior space shall be provided.
ix.	The accessory dwelling unit shall not be located in a basement. 
x.	The accessory dwelling unit may or may not be connected to the principal dwelling but in no case shall provide for interior access to the principal dwelling.
xi.	In order to preserve the traditional character of the neighborhoods in the CD-3 and CD-3L districts and promote neighborhood stability:
I. 	The primary dwelling unit must be owner-occupied for a sufficient portion of each calendar year such that it qualifies for the principal-residence exemption for property taxes, except as provided in subsections II and III below. 
II.	In situations where the primary dwelling on the lot ceases to be owner-occupied and ceases to qualify for the principal-residence exemption, the accessory dwelling unit may be occupied by a non-owner so long as the primary dwelling unit remains vacant. 
III.	In situations where the primary dwelling unit ceases to be owner-occupied and ceases to qualify for the principal-residence exemption, both units may be occupied together by a non-owner family or functional family.
b.	Adult-use marihuana establishments must comply with the following regulations. All terms defined in section 115.01 have the same meaning when used in this subsection: 
i.	Establishments must comply with the MRTMA and the MRTMA rules. 
ii.	Co-located marihuana establishments and stacked grower licenses may be permitted, subject to the regulations of this section and any applicable rules promulgated by LARA. 
iii.	Establishments shall be sufficiently setback from property lines or screened or buffered with a fence, wall, or landscape screen to minimize light spillage, odor, and noise (including noise associated with truck traffic or other machinery), affecting adjacent properties. 
iv.	Special use applicants must provide a plan for the storage and disposal of marihuana or chemicals associated with marihuana cultivation, so as to minimize the risk of theft or harm resulting from chemical exposure. 
v.	No marihuana may be stored overnight outside of an enclosed building. By way of example and without limitation, it is unlawful to store marihuana overnight in an outdoor waste bin or a secure transport vehicle parked outdoors.
vi.	Signage for marihuana establishments will be approved pursuant to the generally applicable procedures and standards provided in section 154.414, with the additional restriction that establishment signage may not depict marihuana, marihuana-infused products, or marihuana-related paraphernalia.
vii.	Marihuana establishments must control and eliminate odor as follows: 
I.	The building must be equipped with an activated air scrubbing and carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter and air scrubbing system.
II.	The filtration system must consist of one or more fans, activated carbon filters and be capable of scrubbing the air prior to leaving any building. At a minimum, the fan(s) must be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three. The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM.
III.	The air scrubbing and filtration system must be maintained in working order and must be in use at all times. The filters must be changed per manufacturers’ recommendation to ensure optimal performance.
IV.	Negative air pressure must be maintained inside the building.
V.	Doors and windows must remain closed, except for the minimum time length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building.
VI.	An alternative odor control system is permitted if the special use applicant submits a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the state of Michigan sufficiently demonstrating that the alternative system will eliminate odor as well or better than the air scrubbing and carbon filtration system otherwise required.
viii.	The following minimum-distancing regulations apply to all marihuana establishments: 
I.	An establishment may not be located within 1,000 feet of a public or private K-12 school.
II.	An establishment generally may not be located within 500 feet of the SD-U University Special District, unless the establishment is located to the east of the Central Michigan University main campus, east of Mission Street.
III.	The distances described in this subsection shall be computed by measuring a straight line from the nearest property line of land used for the purposes stated in this subsection to the nearest property line of the parcel used as a marihuana establishment.
ix.	Establishment types in the city are limited as follows: 
I.	Not more than 5 growers operating under Class A licenses;
II.	Not more than 3 growers operating under Class B or Class C licenses;
III.	Not more than 3 retailers;
IV.	No limit on the number of processors;
V.	No limit on the number of secure transporters;
VI.	No limit on the number of safety compliance establishments;
VII.	Not more than 2 microbusinesses;
VIII.	Zero designated consumption establishments; and
IX.	Zero excess marihuana growers.
x.	For retailers: 
I.	Retailers may not be open to customers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
II.	Retailers may not receive deliveries between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
III.	Retailers in commercial (as opposed to industrial) character districts must be located within the boundaries of the city’s Mission-Pickard Downtown Development District or Central Business Tax Increment Financing Authority District. Retailers would be incompatible with the portions of the commercial character districts outside these designated areas.
IV.	Retailers are allowed in industrial districts only if the establishment is co-located with a grower or processor
V.	The exterior appearance of a retailer must be compatible with surrounding businesses with respect to façade type, ground floor opacity, size and placement of signage, site layout, etc.
VI.	The interior of the establishment must be arranged in a way such that neither marihuana nor marihuana-infused products are visible from the exterior of the establishment.
VII.	Consumption of marihuana shall be prohibited in the retail establishment, and a sign shall be posted on the premises of each retail center indicating that consumption is prohibited on the premises. 
VIII.	Retailers shall continuously monitor the entire premises on which they are operated with surveillance systems that include security cameras. The video recordings shall be maintained in a secure, off-site location for a period of 14 days. 
IX.	The public or common areas of the retail establishment must be separated from restricted or non-public areas of the marihuana establishment.
X.	No drive-through window on the portion of the premises occupied by a retail establishment shall be permitted. 
XI.	Retailers shall not allow the sale, consumption, or use of alcohol or tobacco products on the premises.
xi.	Establishments other than retailers may operate only in areas zoned SD-I.  
xii.	For growers: 
I.	Cultivation must occur within an enclosed building with exterior facades consisting of opaque materials typical of an industrial or commercial building. The roof of the building may be constructed of a rigid transparent or translucent material designed to let in light, such as glass or rigid polycarbonate or fiberglass panels. Films or other non-rigid materials cannot be used to construct any component of the building’s exterior structure.
II.	Cultivation must be conducted in a manner to minimize adverse impacts on the city’s sanitary sewer. The city’s public works department shall review all pertinent information relating to sewer discharges and shall provide any pertinent comments on to the planning commission.
III.	For each zoning lot, no more than 3 stacked grower licenses may be in operation.
xiii.	For processors:
I.	Cultivation must be conducted in a manner to minimize adverse impacts on the city’s sanitary sewer. The city’s public works department shall review all pertinent information relating to sewer discharges and shall provide any pertinent comments on to the planning commission.
xiv.	For safety compliance facilities:
I.	Cultivation must be conducted in a manner to minimize adverse impacts on the city’s sanitary sewer. The city’s public works department shall review all pertinent information relating to sewer discharges and shall provide any pertinent comments on to the planning commission.
xv.	For microbusinesses:
I.	Microbusinesses may not be open to customers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
II.	Microbusinesses may not receive deliveries between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
III.	The exterior appearance of a microbusiness must be compatible with surrounding businesses with respect to façade type, ground floor opacity, size and placement of signage, site layout, etc.
IV.	The interior of the establishment must be arranged in a way such that neither marihuana nor marihuana-infused products are visible from the exterior of the establishment.
V.	Consumption of marihuana shall be prohibited in the establishment, and a sign shall be posted on the premises of each microbusiness indicating that consumption is prohibited on the premises. 
VI.	Microbusinesses shall continuously monitor the entire premises on which they are operated with surveillance systems that include security cameras. The video recordings shall be maintained in a secure, off-site location for a period of 14 days. 
VII.	The public or common areas of the microbusiness establishment must be separated from restricted or non-public areas of the marihuana establishment.
VIII.	No drive-through window on the portion of the premises occupied by a microbusiness establishment shall be permitted. 
IX.	Microbusinesses shall not allow the sale, consumption, or use of alcohol or tobacco products on the premises.
X.	Cultivation must occur within an enclosed building with exterior facades consisting of opaque materials typical of an industrial or commercial building. The roof of the building may be constructed of a rigid transparent or translucent material designed to let in light, such as glass or rigid polycarbonate or fiberglass panels. Films or other non-rigid materials cannot be used to construct any component of the building’s exterior structure.
XI.	Cultivation must be conducted in a manner to minimize adverse impacts on the city’s sanitary sewer. The city’s public works department shall review all pertinent information relating to sewer discharges and shall provide any pertinent comments on to the Planning Commission.
xvi.	Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, penalties for violations of this subsection shall be as follows: 
I.	If at any time an authorized establishment violates this subsection, any condition imposed through a special use permit, or any other applicable city ordinance, the City Commission may request that LARA revoke or refrain from renewing the establishment’s state operating license.
II.	It is unlawful to disobey, neglect, or refuse to comply with any provision of this subsection b or any condition of a special use permit issued pursuant to this subsection. A violation is a municipal civil infraction. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense, subject to the following fines: 
First violation = $500
Second offense = $2,500
Each subsequent offense = $5,000
III.	The foregoing sanctions are in addition to the city’s right to seek other appropriate and proper remedies, including actions in law or equity. 
c.	Automotive repair garages must comply with the following:  
i.	All doors for vehicular access to service areas shall be in the Third Lot Layer.
ii. 	There shall be no outside display of any parts or products.
iii. 	All service, repair or replacement activity shall be conducted within an enclosed Building.
iv. 	All new, used or discarded parts shall be stored within an enclosed Building.
v. 	Uses that emit odors, dust, gases, noise, or vibrations beyond the Building or which are potentially harmful to an Adjacent Use or to the public are prohibited.
d.  	Bars, Nightclubs or Taverns must comply with the following:
ii.  The property shall not be Adjacent to or within 50 feet of property zoned CD-3L or CD-3, measured property line to property line. 
e.  Bed and Breakfast Dwellings must comply with the following:
i.	The maximum stay for any occupant of a Bed and Breakfast Dwelling shall be 14 consecutive days and not more than 30 days in one year.
ii.	Unless located in a local Historic District, Bed and Breakfast Dwellings shall be located no closer than 660 feet from another such establishment. 
iii.	Bed and Breakfast Dwelling shall be located in a House Building type.  
iv.	Bed and Breakfast Dwellings shall be permitted only in Buildings at least ten years old at the time of application.
v.	Bed and Breakfast Dwellings shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors, or light detectable beyond the property lines of their respective lots. The judgment of the Building Official shall be considered decisive and final in this matter unless formally appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 45 days of the Building Official’s written determination.
f.	Child Care Centers as defined by Public Act 116 of 1973, being MCL. §§ 722.111 - 722.128, as amended, must comply with the following:
i.  	A minimum of 35 square feet of habitable indoor play area shall be provided for each child. Play area shall be computed exclusive of hallways, bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and closets, and areas used exclusively for rest or sleep.
ii.   A minimum of 200 square feet of fenced outdoor play area shall be provided for each child. The fence shall be a minimum of 30 inches high. This outdoor area shall be in the Third Lot Layer. This outdoor area may be waived by the Planning Commission if public park or school play area is available within 500 feet of the subject property.
iii.	All outdoor playground equipment shall be located at least 20 feet from Residential Dwellings in Adjacent CD-3L or CD-3 Districts.
iv. 	All requests for the Special Use Permit must  include a floor plan drawn to scale and a Site Plan drawn to scale showing the location of all fences, permanent, stationary outdoor play equipment, parking spaces, and other Improvements, as well as all Structures on Adjacent parcels.
v. 	All Child Care Centers shall be inspected annually by the Building Official or Fire Marshal for compliance with current codes and be issued a certificate of occupancy prior to operation.
g.	Class I restaurants must comply with the following:
i.	Upon request from the City, the establishment shall provide the City Manager with reports and business records to permit the City to review and determine continued compliance with the requirements and performance standards set forth in the definition of “Restaurant and Other Related Uses - Class 1 Restaurant” in Article VII.
ii. All requirements and performance standards set forth in the definition of “Restaurant and Other Related Uses - Class 1 Restaurant” in Article VII and the reporting requirements of this Section 154.410.B.4.f.i.
iii.	To the extent permitted by law, trade secrets or commercial or financial information received by the City Manager pursuant to this Section 154.410.B.4.f.i shall be exempt from disclosure to the public as a public record and shall not be published if the proprietor requests in writing that the records be kept confidential and such confidentiality is acknowledged in writing by the City Manager, except that such records shall be admissible before all courts and administrative tribunals in proceedings brought for the purpose of enforcing this Chapter.
h.	Drive-in or drive-through establishments, including without limitation Drive-In Restaurants, Drive-Through Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or drive-through accommodations must comply with the following:
i.	All drive-through requirements of this Chapter, including without limitation, those in Sections 154.412.A and 154.412.B.
ii.	A 200’ stacking lane must be provided on site measured from the pick-up window. The stacking lane may not impede site circulation or access to parking spaces.
iii. 	Access points shall be located at least 40 feet from the intersection of any two streets.
iv. 	A Screen wall shall be provided at any Side Lot Line or Rear Lot Line Adjacent to CD-3L, CD-3, or CZ. 
i. 	Foster Family Group Homes  as  defined by Public Act 116 of 1973, being MCL. §§ 722.111 - 722.128, as amended, must comply with the following:
i.   The minimum Lot size for foster family group homes shall be at least 900 square feet of land area per occupant, including resident family members and foster children.
ii. 	The Foster Family Group Home shall be located at least 1,500 feet, measured Lot Line to Lot Line, from any of the following:
I.  	An adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 et seq., as amended.
II.	A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under Article 6 of the Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, being MCL §§ 333.6101 et seq., as amended.
III. 	A community correction center, resident home, halfway house or other similar facility that houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Corrections.
IV. 	Another licensed Foster Family Group Home.
V.  	A licensed Group Day Care Home. 
j.	Funeral homes, including a caretaker’s residence, must comply with the following: 
i. 	On-site cremation is prohibited.
ii. 	The service and loading area shall be Screened  along any Side Lot Line or Rear Lot Line Adjacent to any property zoned CD-3L or CD-3.
k.	Group day care homes as defined by Public Act 116 of 1973, being MCL §§ 722.111 - 722.128, as amended, must comply with the following:
i.   The Group Day Care Home may not be located  closer than  300 feet, measured from Lot Line to Lot Line, from any of the following:
I.  	Licensed Group Day Care Home.
II.  	Foster Family Group Home.
III. 	Licensed Child Care Center.
IV.	An adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, being MCL §§ 400.701 et seq., as amended.
V.   	A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under Article 6 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being MCL §§ 333.6101 et seq., as amended.
VI.   	A community correction center, resident home, halfway house or other similar facility that houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Corrections.
ii.   A minimum of 35 square feet of habitable indoor play area shall be provided for each child. Play area shall be computed exclusive of hallways, bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and closets, and areas used exclusively for rest or sleep.
iii.  A minimum of 150 square feet of fenced outdoor play area shall be provided in the Third Lot Layer for each child. The fence shall be a minimum of 30 inches high. This outdoor area shall not be in any required front or side yard. This outdoor area may be waived by the Planning Commission if public park or school play area is available within 500 feet of the subject property.
iv.	All outdoor playground equipment shall be located at least 12 feet from Residential Dwellings on Adjacent property.
v. The applicable Special Use Permit application must include a floor plan drawn to scale and a Site Plan drawn to scale and showing without limitation the location of all fences, permanent, stationary outdoor play equipment, parking spaces and all Structures on abutting parcels.
vi. All Group Day Care Homes must be inspected annually by the Building Official or Fire Marshal for compliance with current codes and be issued a certificate of occupancy prior to operation.
l.	Home Occupations requiring the employment of Persons other than the Dwelling occupants must comply with the following:
i. 	The employment of persons other than the Dwelling occupants is limited to no more than one on-premise employee at any given time.
ii.	Other requirements contained in the Article VII  definition of “Home Occupation” except paragraphs (3) and (6) thereof.
m.   Hotels, must comply with the following: 
i.   Any conference centers, meeting rooms, food and beverage, and similar Uses must be Accessory Uses only.
ii.   Any sale of alcohol related to an Accessory Use Class I Restaurant and/or a Bar, Nightclub, or Tavern shall be subject to meeting the separate Special Use requirements for each of those Special Uses, as applicable, provided elsewhere in this Section.
iii. 	The Building shall be a minimum of two Stories in height.
iv.	The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed establishment will be compatible with surrounding properties and Uses of land. In evaluating compatibility, the Planning Commission will consider at a minimum, the traffic impacts on neighborhoods and the immediate area.
n.	Housing for the elderly must comply with the following:
i.   All Dwellings shall consist of at least 350 square feet per unit, not including kitchen and sanitary facilities.
o. 	Indoor commercial amusements or recreation such as bowling alleys, billiard halls, archery ranges, tennis courts, and skating rinks within an enclosed building must comply with the following:
i. 	If liquor is to be sold or served therein, the Use must be located at least 100 feet from any Adjacent Character District CD-3L or CD-3 measured property line to property line. 
p.	Indoor Shooting or Archery Ranges must comply with the following:
i. The building and method of operation shall comply with the Michigan Department of Natural Resources Generally Accepted Operation Practices for Sport Shooting Ranges and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Best Management Practices at Active Shooting Ranges.
ii. The design and construction of the range shall completely confine all ammunition rounds within the building and in a controlled manner. The design and construction of the gun range shall be performed by a registered engineer in the State of Michigan. The certified plans shall include the specifications and construction of the bullet trap(s), ceilings, exterior and interior walls and floors. The certified plans shall state what type and caliber of ammunition the range is designed to totally confine.
iii. No ammunition shall be used in the range that exceeds the certified design and construction specifications of the gun range.
iv. The range shall have a clear and concise safety plan filed with the special use permit application.
v. No range shall sell or dispense alcoholic beverages, nor shall they be in a building which contains a business that sells or dispenses alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages are not allowed on the premises of the range at any time.
vi. The range shall conform with all Federal, State and Local requirements related to the use, sale, rental, and transport of firearms.
q.	Medical marihuana facilities must comply with the following regulations. All terms defined in section 112.01 have the same meaning when used in this subsection:
i.	Facilities must comply with the MMMFLA and the MMMFLA rules. 
ii.	Co-located marihuana facilities and stacked grower licenses may be permitted, subject to the regulations of this section and any applicable rules promulgated by LARA.
iii.	Facilities shall be sufficiently setback from property lines or screened or buffered with a fence, wall, or landscape screen to minimize light spillage, odor, and noise (including noise associated with truck traffic or other machinery), affecting adjacent properties.
iv.	Special use applicants must provide a plan for the storage and disposal of marihuana or chemicals associated with marihuana cultivation, so as to minimize the risk of theft or harm resulting from chemical exposure. 
v.	No marihuana may be stored overnight outside of an enclosed building. By way of example and without limitation, it is unlawful to store marihuana overnight in an outdoor waste bin or a secure transport vehicle parked outdoors.
vi.	Signage for marihuana facilities will be approved pursuant to the generally applicable procedures and standards provided in section 154.414, with the additional restriction that facility signage may not depict marihuana, marihuana-infused products, or marihuana-related paraphernalia.   
vii.	Medical marihuana facilities must control and eliminate odor as follows: 
I.  	The  building  must be  equipped  with  an  activated air scrubbing and carbon  filtration  system  for  odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter and air scrubbing system.  
II.  	The  filtration  system  must consist  of  one  or  more  fans,  activated  carbon  filters and be capable of scrubbing the air prior to leaving any building.  At a minimum, the fan(s) must be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three. The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM.  
III.  	The air scrubbing and filtration system must be maintained in working order and must be in use at all times. The filters must be changed per manufacturers’ recommendation to ensure optimal performance.  
IV.  	Negative air pressure must be maintained inside the building. 
V.  	Doors and windows must remain closed, except for the minimum time length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building. 
VI.  	An  alternative  odor  control  system  is  permitted  if  the  special  use  applicant  submits  a  report  by  a  mechanical  engineer  licensed  in  the  state  of  Michigan sufficiently demonstrating that the alternative system will eliminate odor as well or better than the air scrubbing and carbon filtration system otherwise required.  
viii.	The following minimum-distancing regulations apply to all medical marihuana facilities:
I.	A facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of a public or private K-12 school.
II.	A facility generally may not be located within 500 feet of the SD-U University Special District, unless the facility is located to the east of the Central Michigan University main campus, east of Mission Street.
III.	The distances described in this subsection shall be computed by measuring a straight line from the nearest property line of land used for the purposes stated in this subsection to the nearest property line of the parcel used as a medical marihuana facility.
ix.	Facility types in the city are limited as follows:
I.	Not more than 5 growers operating under Class A licenses;
II.	Not more than 3 growers operating under Class B or Class C licenses
III.	Not more than 3 provisioning centers;
IV.	No limit on the number of processors;
V.	No limit on the number of secure transporters;
VI.	No limit on the number of safety compliance facilities.
x.	For provisioning centers:
I.	Provisioning centers may not be open to customers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
II.	Provisioning centers may not receive deliveries between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
III.	Provisioning centers in commercial (as opposed to industrial) character districts must be located within the boundaries of the city’s Mission-Pickard Downtown Development District or Central Business Tax Increment Financing Authority District. Provisioning centers would be incompatible with the portions of the commercial character districts outside these designated areas. 
IV.	Provisioning centers are allowed in industrial districts only if the facility is co-located with a grower or processor.
V.	The exterior appearance of a provisioning center must be compatible with surrounding businesses with respect to façade type, ground floor opacity, size and placement of signage, site layout, etc.
VI.	The interior of the facility must be arranged in a way such that neither marihuana nor marihuana-infused products are visible from the exterior of the facility.
 xi.	For growers:
I.	Cultivation must occur within an enclosed building with exterior facades consisting of opaque materials typical of an industrial or commercial building. The roof of the building may be constructed of a rigid transparent or translucent material designed to let in light, such as glass or rigid polycarbonate or fiberglass panels.  Films or other non-rigid materials cannot be used to construct any component of the building’s exterior structure.  
II.	Cultivation must be conducted in a manner to minimize adverse impacts on the city’s sanitary sewer. The city’s public works department shall review all pertinent information relating to sewer discharges and shall provide any pertinent comments on to the planning commission.
III.	For each zoning lot, no more than 3 stacked grower licenses may be in operation.
xii.	Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, penalties for violations of this subsection p shall be as follows:
I.	If at any time an authorized facility violates this subsection p, any condition imposed through a special use permit, or any other applicable city ordinance, the City Commission may request that LARA revoke or refrain from renewing the facility’s state operating license.
II.	It is unlawful to disobey, neglect, or refuse to comply with any provision of this subsection p or any condition of a special use permit issued pursuant to this subsection. A violation is a municipal civil infraction. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense, subject to the following fines:
First violation = $500
Second offense = $2,500
Each subsequent offense = $5,000
III.	The foregoing sanctions are in addition to the city’s right to seek other appropriate and proper remedies, including actions in law or equity.
r.	Motels must comply with the following: 
i. 	Each unit shall contain at least 250 square feet of floor area.
ii. 	The maximum stay for any occupant of a Motel shall be 14 consecutive days and not more than 30 days in one year.
s.  New and used vehicle dealer with showrooms, sales or leasing offices must comply with the following:
i. 	Any outdoor sales space or repair facilities shall be provided with a paved, asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement or other medium approved by the Planning Commission so as to provide a durable, and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water that may accumulate within the area.
ii.	A Streetscreen shall separate the outdoor display area of vehicles and the public right-of-way. 
iii.	Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 40 feet from any intersection of two streets. 
iv.	Servicing of vehicles and major motor repair and refinishing shall be subject to the following requirements:
I.	It shall be subordinate and customarily clearly incidental to the sale of vehicles as a Principal Use and shall occur within an enclosed Building.
II.	Any partially dismantled or damaged vehicles shall be stored within an enclosed Building. 
III.	Any new, used or discarded parts and supplies shall be stored within an enclosed Building. 
IV.	Uses which emit odors, dust, gases, noise, or vibrations beyond the Building or which are potentially harmful to an Adjacent Use or the public are prohibited.
t.  	Registered Student Organization Dwellings must 	comply with the following:	
i.	Access shall be so located that traffic does not conflict with Adjacent Residential Uses.
ii. 	The Lot shall not be Adjacent to, have a common Lot Line with, or be located across a local street or Alley from a Lot in CD-3L or CD-3. 
iii. 	No Registered Student Organization Dwelling may have with more than 12 occupants per Dwelling Unit. 
iv.	Registered Student Organization Dwellings are only permitted in a House building type.
v.	Registered Student Organization Dwellings shall have a minimum of 900 square feet of land area and 300 square feet of Building area per occupant.
u. 	Rooming Dwelling, Rooming Dwelling House,Boarding Dwelling, Boarding Dwelling House, or tourist house must comply with the following:
i. 	Access shall be so located that traffic does not conflict with Adjacent Residential Uses.
ii. 	The Lot shall not have a common Side Lot Line with a Lot in CD-3L or CD-3.
iii. 	No Rooming Dwelling House or Boarding Dwelling House with a common Lot Line or across an Alley or local street from a property in CD-3L or CD-3 may have more than four occupants per Dwelling Unit. For all other Rooming Dwelling Houses and Boarding Dwelling Houses, there shall be no more than six occupants per Dwelling Unit.
iv.	Rooming Dwellings shall have a minimum of 900 square feet of land area and 300 square feet of Building area per occupant. 
v.	Service stations for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and where no repair work is done, other than incidental service, but not including steam cleaning or undercoating, vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering, auto glass work, and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line, must comply with the following:
i. 	The curb cuts for access may not be at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards to Adjacent streets. Entrances shall be at least 40 feet from a street intersection measured from the road right-of-way.
ii.	The minimum Lot area shall be 15,000 square feet and arranged so that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. Gasoline Service Stations which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and having no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles, including lubricating facilities, may be permitted on Lots of 10,000 square feet, subject to all other required provisions.
iii. 	The servicing of vehicles shall be limited to those which may be serviced during a normal work day. Vehicles in the process of being repaired must be parked overnight inside an enclosed Building.
iv.	All gasoline pumps, water and air hoses, and vehicular access to such pumps and hoses and any service areas, shall be located in the Third Lot Layer except for any Driveway leading to the Third Lot Layer. 
w. 	Short-term rental uses are permitted only with a housing license issued pursuant to Chapter 152 of the City Code.
ii.	If the subject lot does not meet the district minimum lot area or has other dimensional nonconformities, or if a short-term rental use would be incompatible with neighboring uses due to the proximity of structures or for other reasons, the Planning Commission may determine that the short-term rental use is not suitable.  Alternatively, the Planning Commission may condition approval on measures that mitigate potential adverse effects of operating a short-term rental on the lot. 
iii.	If an outdoor area intended for the congregating of guests (e.g., porches, decks, pools and pool decks, gazebos, fire pits, etc.) is provided, it shall be sufficiently setback from the property lines or screened or buffered with a fence, wall, or landscape screen to minimize sounds and light, so as not to disturb neighbors.  All existing and proposed fire pits shall meet the City’s fire safety standards.
iv.	Accessory structures constructed or expanded after the effective date of this section shall not be used as sleeping rooms for short-term rentals.
v.	The driveway and off-street parking areas shall be laid out in a manner so as to minimize on-street traffic congestion to the extent reasonably possible.
vi.	The exterior appearance of the dwelling shall have a residential character, and shall not be incompatible with other dwellings in the vicinity.  By way of example, the subject property shall not: (i) appear to be a commercial, multi-family, or institutional use; (ii) be altered to add excessive paved or other impermeable surfaces that create an appearance incompatible with other lots in the neighborhood; or (ii) be illuminated or signed in a manner that is out of character with other homes in the vicinity. 
vii.	No separate cooking facilities shall be allowed in sleeping rooms.
viii.Interior features (bedrooms, bathrooms, kitchens, dwelling units, means of ingress and egress, etc.) must be in conformance with the Michigan Construction Code, and all open permits must be finalized prior to occupancy as a short-term rental. 
ix.	The following site modifications will void an existing special use permit for short-term rental uses: 
I.	Any structural expansion of the dwelling that increases the square footage of the dwelling, including the addition of a new decks and patios.
II.	Alteration of the interior of the dwelling in a manner that results in an increased number of sleeping rooms.
	In these circumstances, a property owner may seek a new special use permit in accordance with the standards provided in this subsection.
x.	Two Family Dwellings must comply with the following: 
i.	Each dwelling unit shall have a floor area of at least 600 square feet and neither unit shall have less than 40% of the floor area of the other unit.
ii. 	Basements (whether finished or unfinished) shall not be counted toward the required gross floor area of each unit.
iii. 	Each unit shall be functionally independent with separate living, sleeping, eating, cooking, heating, and cooling provisions.
iv.	No common interior space shall be provided.
v.	No interior access shall be provided between the units.
vi.	In order to preserve the traditional character of the neighborhoods in the CD-3 and CD-3L districts, all two-family dwellings not legally existing in those districts as of February 21, 2018 shall comply with the following additional standards:
I. 	One of the dwelling units on the lot must be owner-occupied for a sufficient portion of each calendar year such that it qualifies for the principal-residence exemption for property taxes, except as provided in subsections II and III below. 
II.	In situations where a dwelling unit on the lot ceases to be owner-occupied and ceases to qualify for the principal-residence exemption, the other unit may be occupied by a non-owner so long as the unit that used to be owner-occupied remains vacant. 
III.	In situations where a dwelling unit on the lot ceases to be owner-occupied and ceases to qualify for the principal-residence exemption, both units may be occupied together by a non-owner family or functional family.
y.  Veterinary hospitals or clinics must comply with the following:  
i.  	All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed Building.
ii.  No Building may be closer than 200 feet from Character District CD-3L or CD-3.
C. Special Regulated Uses.
1.	In the development of a community it is recognized that there are some Uses which can have serious effects on other nearby property and uses, on people residing or working in the vicinity, on nearby infrastructure, or on public services, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect upon the Adjacent areas. Special regulation of these Uses is necessary to ensure that their adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this Section 154.410.C. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing concentration of these uses in any one area (i.e., not more than two such uses within 1,000 feet of each other which would create such effects). 
2.	Uses that are Special Regulated Uses are those identified within two categories, Group “A” Special Regulated Uses and Group “B” Special Regulated Uses, as described below.
a.	Special Regulated Uses categorized as Group “A” Special Regulated Uses are the following:
i.	Adult bookstore
ii.	Establishments for consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises and having adult entertainment
iii.	Any other Use which provides goods or services which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on depicting, describing or matters relating to “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” or which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” as those terms are defined in this Chapter.
iv.	Pawnshops
b.	Special Regulated Uses categorized as Group “B” Special Regulated Uses are the following:
i.	Pool or billiard halls
ii.	Liquor stores
iv.	Palm readers, psychic readers, horoscope analysis or other professions purporting to predict the future
3.	A Special Regulated Use is permitted on a Lot or within a Building within an applicable District if the Use is shown as “SRU” on Table 154.410.A (Building & Lot Principal Use), provided that: 
a.	the applicable conditions and requirements imposed for each, as set forth in Sections 154.410.C.5 and 154.410.C.6 are met;
b.	the Special Regulated Use is approved by the Planning Commission; and 
c.	a Special Regulated Use Permit is issued. 
4.	No Special Regulated Use shall commence or exist, or be conducted or engaged in, on any Lot or within any Building unless the same has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 154.111.C and 154.615 and a Special Regulated Use Permit has been issued and is in effect for such Special Regulated Use.
5.	The Planning Commission may impose any conditions on its approval of any Special Regulated Use in addition to those set forth in Section 154.410.C.6.
6.	Special Regulated Uses must comply with the applicable conditions and requirements indicated below in addition to complying with Section 154.410.C.4 and any additional conditions imposed by the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 154.410.C.5.
a.   Location standards.
i.   Relationship to similar Uses.
I.   	An application to establish a Group “A” Special Regulated Use shall not be approved if there are already in existence two or more Group “A” and/or Group “B” Special Regulated Uses within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the site of the proposed Special Regulated Use, except as provided for in Section 154.410.C.6.a.iii.
II.  	An application to establish a Group “B” Special Regulated Use shall not be approved if there are already in existence four or more Group “A” and/or Group “B” Special Regulated Uses within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the site of the proposed Special Regulated Use, except as provided for in Section 154.410.C.6.a.iii.
ii.  	Relationship to Residential area and other 		uses.
I.	An application to establish a Group “A” Special Regulated Use shall not be approved if the proposed location is within 1,000 feet of any property zoned within CD-3L or CD-3, or any Mobile Home Park, K through 12 school, Civic Space, church, or cemetery, except as provided for in Section 154.410.C.6.a.iii.
II.   	An application to establish a Group “B” Special Regulated Use shall not be approved if the proposed location is within 300 feet of any property within CD-3L or CD-3, or any Mobile Home Park, K through 12 school, Civic Space, church, or cemetery, except as provided for in Section 154.410.C.6.a.iii.
iii.   Waiver of location standards.
I.   	Relationship to similar Uses. The Planning Commission may waive the locational standards of Section 154.410.C.6.a if the following findings are made:
A.	That the proposed Use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this Section 154.410.C will be observed.
B.	That the proposed Use will not enlarge or encourage the Development of a “skid row” area. 
C. 	That the establishment of an additional Special Regulated Use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation or interfere with any program of urban renewal.
D.	That all applicable regulations of this Section will be observed.
II.	Conditions on waivers. Prior to the granting of a waiver of locational requirements, the Planning Commission may impose any conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operations of any Special Regulated Use as may in its judgment be necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled.

page left intentionally blank

TABLE 154.410.A Building and Lot PRINCIPAL USE
 
District
 CD-3L
 CD-3
 CD-4
 CD-5
 SD-H
 SD-I
 SD-RC
 SD-A
 CZ
 
RESIDENTIAL / DWELLING USES:
 
Bed and Breakfast Dwelling Residence of Owner-Occupant
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 
Convalescent homes
 SUP
 SUP
 
Foster Family Group Homes
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 
Foster Family Home
 P
 P
 P
 
Housing for elderly
 SUP
 SUP
 
Mobile Home Parks
 P
 
Multiple-Family Dwellings
 P
 P
 
One-Family Dwelling - Attached Townhouse
 P
 P
 
One-Family Dwellings - Detached
 P
 P
 P
 P
 
One-Family Dwellings - Detached with Accessory Dwelling Unit
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
Registered Student Organization Dwelling
 SUP
 
Residential single family unit located on the second floor or above in Mixed Use Building
 P
 P
 
Rooming Dwelling House, Boarding Dwelling House, tourist house
 SUP
 SUP
 
Short-term Rentals
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 
Two-Family Dwelling - Duplex
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
LODGING USES:
 
Hotels
 P
 P
 
Motels  
 SUP
 
EDUCATIONAL / INSTITUTIONAL / CIVIC USES:
 
Business, vocational, and technical schools
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 
Cemeteries
 P
 
Child Care Center
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 
Clubs and fraternal organizations not including registered student organization dwellings
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
Colleges and universities
 P
 
Golf courses
 P
 
Group Day Care Homes
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 
Libraries
 P
 
Municipal Buildings, including City Halls, Police and Fire Halls, and administration Buildings
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 P
 
Museums
 P
 
Parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and aquatic centers
 P
 
TABLE 154.410.A Building and Lot PRINCIPAL USE
 
District
 CD-3L
 CD-3
 CD-4
 CD-5
 SD-H
 SD-I
 SD-RC
 SD-A
 CZ
 
Places of worship
 P
 P
 P
 
Public, parochial and private schools providing K-12 education
 P
 
MEDICAL USES:
 
Hospitals
 P
 
Medical and dental offices
 P
 P
 P
 
Outpatient surgical centers, urgent care facilities, and standalone emergency room facilities
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
COMMERCIAL, RETAIL, PROFESSIONAL, AND SERVICE USES:
 
Automobile, motorized vehicle, and related accessory dealerships not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
Automobile filling stations not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 
Automobile rental establishments not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
Automobile repair garage not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
Automobile washing or detailing when completely enclosed in a Building or in 3rd Lot Layer not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 P
 
Banks and credit unions
 P
 P
 P
 
Banks and credit unions with a drive-through not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 
Banquet halls, conference centers and meeting facilities
 P
 P
 P
 
Bars, nightclubs, and taverns
 SUP
 SUP
 
Commercial amusements, including arcades, bowling alleys, fitness and health clubs, mini golf, and skating within an enclosed building
 P
 P
 P
 
Convenience stores
 P
 P
 
Dry cleaning drop-off and pick-up locations
 P
 P
 
Funeral homes
 SUP
 SUP
 
Grocery stores
 P
 P
 
Hardware, floor covering, paint, kitchen, and bath stores
 P
 P
 P
 
Music, art, and dance studios
 P
 P
 
Personal service establishments such as barber shops, beauty parlors, shoe or clothing repair, dressmakers or tailors, hair or nail salons, tattoo or piercing establishments, and licensed massage therapists
 P
 P
 
Pharmacies
 P
 P
 
Pharmacies with a drive-through not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 
Photography studios
 P
 P
 
Professional offices
 P
 P
 P
 
TABLE 154.410.A Building and Lot PRINCIPAL USE
 
District
 CD-3L
 CD-3
 CD-4
 CD-5
 SD-H
 SD-I
 SD-RC
 SD-A
 CZ
 
Radio and television studios with broadcast towers
 P
 
Radio and television studios without broadcast towers
 P
 P
 P
 
Restaurants
 P
 P
 
Restaurants, Class I
 SUP
 SUP
 
Restaurants, drive-in or drive-through not in Central Business District
 SUP
 SUP
 
Retail sales in an enclosed building
 P
 P
 
Self-serve laundries
 P
 P
 
Theaters
 P
 P
 P
 
Veterinary offices
 P
 P
 P
 P
 
COMMUNICATION USES:
 
Wireless reception facilities
 P
 P
 
INDUSTRIAL USES:
 
Animal shelters
 P
 
Bus, commercial equipment, and heavy truck storage and repair
 P
 
Commercial bakeries and kitchens
 P
 P
 P
 
Commercial printing and publishing establishments
 P
 P
 P
 
Contractor’s establishments
 P
 
Dispatch center
 P
 
Dry cleaning plants
 P
 
Indoor shooting or archery ranges
 SUP
 
Kennels
 P
 
Laboratories for research and testing, excluding safety compliance facilities for medical marihuana testing
 P
 P
 
Lumber processing
 P
 
Lumber yards
 P
 
Manufacturing, processing, fabricating, compounding, treatment, packaging, or assembly within an enclosed building
 P
 P
 
Mini-warehouse and self-storage facilities
 P
 
Open storage yards when fully screened
 P
 
Printing and publishing establishments
 P
 
Production and bottling of alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages
 P
 
Recycling center
 P
 
Tow services
 P
 
Truck terminals, including transfer and temporary storage of materials and servicing of vehicles and equipment
 P
 
Warehousing
 P
 
Wholesale and distribution establishments
 P
 
TABLE 154.410.A Building and Lot PRINCIPAL USE
 
District
 CD-3L
 CD-3
 CD-4
 CD-5
 SD-H
 SD-I
 SD-RC
 SD-A
 CZ
 
AGRICULTURAL USES:
 
Raising of commercial crops, not including marihuana
 P
 P
 P
 
UTILITY USES:
 
Electrical generating facilities
 P
 
Electrical transformer and transmission stations
 P
 
Water and sewer facilities including lift stations, pump houses, and similar uses
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 
Water and sewer facilities including water plants, wastewater plants, water towers, and similar uses
 P
 
PARKING:
 
Public parking lot or structure
 SUP
 
ADULT-USE MARIHUANA USES:
 
Retailer
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP*
 
Processor
 SUP
 
Secure transporter
 SUP
 
Safety compliance
 SUP
 
Grower, Class A
 SUP
 
Grower, Class B
 SUP
 
Grower, Class C
 SUP
 
Microbusiness 
 SUP
 
MEDICAL MARIHUANA USES:
 
Provisioning Center
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 
Processor
 SUP
 
Secure transporter
 SUP
 
Safety compliance
 SUP
 
Grower, Class A
 SUP
 
Grower, Class B
 SUP
 
Grower, Class C
 SUP
 
TABLE 154.410.A Building and Lot PRINCIPAL USE
 
District
 CD-3L
 CD-3
 CD-4
 CD-5
 SD-H
 SD-I
 SD-RC
 SD-A
 CZ
 
SPECIAL REGULATED USES:
 
Adult bookstore
 SRU
 SRU
 
Establishments for the consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises and having adult entertainment
 SRU
 SRU
 
Any other use which provides goods or services which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas, or which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas, as those terms are identified in this zoning ordinance.
 SRU
 SRU
 
Pawnshops
 SRU
 SRU
 
Pool or billiard halls
 SRU
 SRU
 
Liquor stores
 SRU
 SRU
 
Palm readers, psychic readers, horoscope analysis or other professions purporting to predict the future
 SRU
 SRU
 
NOTES
 
Principal Uses that are not indicated as “P”, “SUP”, or “SRU” are not allowed.  
All Buildings, Lots, Uses, Improvements and Development must comply with all applicable provisions of this Chapter.
Site Plans must be submitted for review pursuant to Section 154.613 and no Building Permit may be issued prior to Site Plan approval.
A Building & Lot Plan must be certified as compliant with this Chapter prior to issuance of a Building Permit.
A Development Parcel Plan, if applicable, must be submitted as part of an application for Site Plan approval or Zoning Map  amendment.
Lots existing as of July 1, 2015 may not be combined for purposes of constituting a Rooming Dwelling, Boarding House or Boarding Dwelling.
All retail and personal service Uses Principal Uses categorized under “Commercial, Retail, Professional, and Service Uses” must be establishments dealing directly with consumers, and  any goods produced on the premises must be sold at retail on the premises where so produced. 
A Principal Uses categorized under “Commercial, Retail, Professional, and Service Uses” and indicated as “P”, “SUP,  or “SRU”shall be eligible to apply for a license to use the adjoining sidewalk area for displays, food and alcohol service according to City policy; provided that such a license is not available for sidewalk sales or other special events which are subject to authorization by the City Commission.
* Retailers are permitted in the SD-I district only if they are collocated with an authorized grower or processor.
 




D. Accessory Uses. 
1.	In Character Districts and Civic Zones, those Uses shown in Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses) as “PAU” (Permitted Accessory Use) are permitted in the applicable Character District or Civic Zone, as indicated, if subordinate and customarily incidental to a permitted Principal Use on the Lot. 
2. 	In each Special District, any Uses shown in Table 154.410.D (Building and Lot Accessory Uses) as “PAU” (Permitted Accessory Use) are permitted in the applicable Special District, as indicated, if subordinate and customarily incidental to a permitted Principal Use on the Lot.
3.	Additionally, in each District and Civic Zone, all other Uses which are subordinate and customarily incidental to a permitted Principal Use are permitted. 
C

LEGEND
 The following notations are utilized in this table.
 
PAU
 Permitted accessory use
 SUP
 Permitted with Special Use Permit
 



TABLE 154.410.D building and lot accessory uses
 
District
 CD-3L
 CD-3
 CD-4
 CD-5
 SD-H
 SD-I
 SD-RC
 SD-A
 CZ
 
Accessory Dwelling Unit
 SUP
 SUP
 
Administrative, professional and business offices
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Bed and Breakfast Dwelling Short-Term Rental rooms & facilities
 PAU
 PAU
 
Boarding of animals incidental to and an accessory part of a permitted veterinary practice Principal Use and when occurring in a fully enclosed Building
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Commercial, office and service uses which are located, designed and intended to support and complement permitted Principal Uses, such as Retail shops, banks and other financial institutions, Restaurants, transient lodging facilities, theaters, auditoriums and meeting facilities, medical offices and facilities, data processing and computing centers, office and laboratory equipment services, and printing, publishing and allied services. Such Uses shall be located in a Building containing the Principal Uses which will be served, or in service centers consisting of one or more Buildings designed with common drives, parking and loading areas and landscaping.
 PAU
 
Day Care operated by Place of Worship on same Lot as Place of Worship
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Fire, police, and ambulance stations, technical and business schools, recreation facilities (both indoor and outdoor), post office
 PAU
 
Gardens
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Heliport (if Federal Aviation Administration approved)
 PAU
 
Home Occupations without employment of any person other than the dwelling occupants
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Home Occupations with employment of any persons other than the dwelling occupants
 SUP
 SUP
 SUP
 
Living quarters for security and maintenance personnel.
 PAU
 PAU
 
Operations required to maintain or support any use permitted above on the same Lot as the permitted use, such as maintenance shops, power plants, and government facilities.
 PAU
 
Parking within on-site Parking Areas, Garages, Parking Structures or Driveways of operable undamaged vehicles that are driven off site on a regular basis
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Parking of commercially used or licensed vehicles for normal deliveries of short duration
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Parsonage on same Lot as Place of Worship
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Roadside stand for farmer or his family to sell produce from general farm or commercial crops on site.
 PAU
 
Storage of goods and materials for sale or distribution within the Building from which they are sold
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Swimming pool
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 PAU
 
Tasting room located within a facility that produces alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages
 PAU
 
TABLE 154.410.D building and lot accessory uses
 
District
 CD-3L
 CD-3
 CD-4
 CD-5
 SD-H
 SD-I
 SD-RC
 SD-A
 CZ
 
Uses incidental to and in support of Principal Uses permitted in SD-RC, such as cafeterias and shops, located on the Lot of the Principal Use it serves; conducted primarily for the convenience of its own employees and wholly within a Building; and not having any exterior advertising or display.
 PAU
 



E. Permitted Temporary Uses.
The following Temporary Uses are permitted, subject to the requirements indicated for each of them:
1.   Trailers. Any portable Building or Structure that is movable or was designed to be movable, such as a Trailer, Mobile Home, semi-house Trailer, flat bed, van or other vehicle, shall only be allowable as a temporary Accessory Use for the storage of materials or goods for associated Business/Commercial or Office category Principal Uses in CD-4, CD-5, and SD-I, provided:
a.  	All District Setback and other requirements are complied with, and
b.	A Temporary Use Permit has been obtained from the Building Official. (Permits are valid for six months, but may be renewed for one additional six-month period).
2.	Seasonal Uses. The Building Official may authorize a Temporary Use permit for up to 30 days for seasonal or unusual non-recurrent Temporary Uses, including the use of tents by commercial or charitable organizations in Districts CD-4, CD-5, SD-H, SD-RC, and SD-I. Churches may acquire a Temporary Use Permit for a tent on church property in any District. Also, all District Setback and other requirements must be complied with for the additional area provided for such Temporary Use.
3. 	Subdivision office. The Building Official may authorize a temporary certificate of occupancy of a Dwelling in a new subdivision to be used as a sales and management office for the sale of Dwellings within said subdivision for one year. Temporary identification Signs of less than 40 square feet may also be authorized in the rear half of the required front yard.
F. Mobile Home Parks.
1.	Mobile home parks are permitted in the CD-4 district subject to the following:
a.	The sites within the mobile home park must average at least 5,500 square feet per mobile home.
b.	A landscape buffer consisting of evergreen trees or shrubs at least 3 feet in height shall be provided along any boundary abutting a public right-of-way and along the boundary with any residential property.
c.	Common sidewalks shall be installed along one side of all internal roads within the mobile home park and to all service facilities including central laundry, central parking, and recreation areas. 
2. Prior to the establishment of a new mobile home park, an expansion of a mobile home park, or construction of any building within a mobile home park not previously approved, a preliminary plan shall be presented to the Planning Commission for its review and approval as part of the state licensing process. The application process is as follows:
a.	The applicant submits a preliminary plan to the Zoning Administrator including all the information required by Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987 (“Act 96”) and any regulation promulgated under that Act.
b.	The Planning Commission reviews the preliminary plan for compliance with the design standards in this section and any regulations promulgated under Act 96. If it is determined that the preliminary plan complies with those regulations, it shall be approved. 
G. Basement Dwellings.
The Basement of a partially constructed Building may not be used as a Dwelling.
H. Camping Dwellings.
The use of campers, Trailers, tents or similar camping shelters or boats as Dwellings is prohibited.

SECTION 154.411.	
Bicycle parking, Loading, & Trash Receptacle Requirements 
A. Bicycle Parking Requirement.
1.  Off-street bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with Table 154.411.A (Bicycle Parking).
B.  Loading Space. 
1.	Off-street loading spaces shall be shall be located in accordance with Section 154.412. 
2.	Off-street loading spaces and loading areas shall not utilize any required area for maneuvering to parking accommodations or block general vehicular circulation.
C. Solid Waste Receptacle Requirement. 
Solid waste receptacles for both trash and recycling shall be provided for each Lot and shall be located in accordance with Section 154.412. 
D. Dumpster and Trash Receptacle Enclosures. 
All dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be enclosed and located as required in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).  The enclosures should prevent trash from being scattered by wind or animals.  Except for House and Duplex Buildings, the dumpster or trash receptacle shall be placed on a concrete pad.  The  enclosure shall be kept closed at all times other than for servicing.  Except for House and Duplex Buildings, bollards or posts must be placed on the interior of the enclosure to protect the walls from damage by the trash containers within.  
SECTION 154.412. 	
PARKING, LOADING, DRIVEWAY, SERVICE, STORAGE, DRIVE-THROUGH, TRASH 
RECEPTACLE/DUMPSTER, EQUIPMENT, & OTHER ITEMS LOCATIONS & STANDARDS
A. Provision; Location; Access; Design.
1.	Within each Character District, all Parking Areas, Parking Structures, and Garages within Lots shall be located as specified for the applicable Character District in Table 154.405.A (District Standards). 
2.	Within each Special District, all Parking Areas, Parking Structures, and Garages within Lots shall be located as specified for the applicable Special District in Table 154.405.A (District Standards). 
3. 	Within each Civic Zone, all Parking Areas, Parking Structures, and Garages within Lots shall be located as specified in Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards).
4.	Within each Character District, trash receptacle/dumpster and loading space shall be located and provided as specified for the applicable Character District in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
5.	Within each Special District, trash receptacle/dumpster and loading space shall be located and provided as specified for the applicable Special District in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
6.	Within each Civic Zone, trash receptacle/dumpster and loading space shall be located and provided as specified in Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards).
7.	Within each Character District, all outdoor loading, storage, service, drive-through, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, utility service meters (not including water meters) and equipment, mechanical equipment, antennas and satellite equipment, communications transmitting and receiving equipment, solar panels, recreation, play, and swimming pool, hot tub and spa locations shall be as specified for the applicable Character District, as required in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
8.	Within each Special District, all outdoor loading, storage, service, drive-through, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, utility service meters (not including water meters) and equipment, mechanical equipment, antennas and satellite equipment, communications transmitting and receiving equipment, solar panels, recreation, play, and swimming pool, hot tub and spa locations shall be as specified for the applicable Special District, as required in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
9.	Within each Civic Zone, all outdoor loading, storage, service, drive-through, trash receptacle, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, utility service meters (not including water meters) and equipment, mechanical equipment, antennas and satellite equipment, solar panels, recreation, play, and swimming pool, hot tub and spa locations shall be as specified in Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards). 
10.	In all Districts and Civic Zones, vehicular access to Parking Areas and Parking Lots shall not be in conflict with general vehicular movement serving the site. Ingress and egress points shall be at curb cuts approved by Public Works Director. 
11.  In all Districts and Civic Zones Parking, loading, service, storage, trash receptacle/dumpster, and any drive-through locations shall be accessed by Rear Alleys or Rear Lanes, when such are available on the Zoning Map or otherwise available. 
12.	In all Districts and Civic Zones, vehicular entrances and exits shall be designed to be easily identifiable by drivers and pedestrians. Any signage shall be simple, clear, and concise. Any gates, arms, or booths shall be set back at least 20 feet from the Facades of adjoining Buildings. 
13.	In all Districts and Civic Zones, Parking Lots shall be designed in accordance with Section 154.412.A.14 and other applicable provisions of this this Article IV and shall comply with the landscape provisions of Section 154.413.HH.
14. Whenever off-street parking is provided, it shall be located, laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 154.412.A.14 (Off-Street Parking Accommodations - Design), except as they may be modified by handicap parking regulations found in Public Act 230 of 1972, being MCL §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, as amended.
TABLE 154.412.A.14 Off-Street parking accomModations - design
 
Pattern 
Maneuvering
 Lane Width
 Parking Space Width
 Parking Space Length
 
0°*
 12 ft
 8 ft
 21 ft
 
30°-53°
 13 ft
 9 ft
 18 ft
 
54°-74°
 16 ft
 9 ft
 18 ft
 
75°-90°
 21 ft
 9 ft
 18 ft
 
* Parallel parking
 




15. Off-street parking accommodations shall include spaces for the handicapped in accordance with the provisions of Public Act 230 of 1972, being MCL §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, as amended.
16.	All Parking Areas shall provide adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes so that backing directly onto a street is unnecessary, except for the following:
a.	One-family and two-family dwellings.
b. Multiple-family dwellings, Rooming and boarding dwellings, and Registered Student Organization dwellings, provided that the number of stacked spaces per unit shall not exceed five or the unit occupancy, whichever is less. In no case shall more than ten total parking spaces be stacked per site.
c.	Parking Areas accessed by rear alley or rear lane only.
d.	Houses used for non-residential or mixed-use purposes that have five or fewer parking spaces.  
17.	All maneuvering lanes for off-street parking accommodations must be wide enough to permit at least one-way traffic movement.
18.	A clearly defined and marked Driveway shall be provided for parking accommodations in all Districts.
19.	Entrances and exits for off-street parking accommodations in all Districts other than Character Districts CD-3 and CD-3L shall be at least 40 feet from a street right-of-way at an intersection.
20.	Off-street parking accommodations shall be surfaced in accordance with specifications approved by the Director of Public Works. The surfacing must be completed within one year of the date the Building Permit is issued. Off-street parking accommodations must be designed, graded, and constructed in accordance with specifications approved by the Director of Public Works such that surface water does not drain onto adjoining property, toward a Building or into the street right-of-way. Except for House and Duplex Buildings, off-street parking accommodations shall be arranged and legibly marked to provide for orderly and safe loading and unloading, parking and storage of vehicles. 
21.	Off-street Parking Areas and Parking Lots shall be Screened in accordance with Section 154.412.B, and if applicable, Section 154.405.A.  
22.	Except for House and Duplex Buildings lighting illuminating off-street parking accommodations shall be installed within and directed only onto the parking areas.
 
IllustratioN 154.412.A.11: Drive-through


Vehicular 
Access

Drive Through

Vehicular 
Access

FRONTAGE

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.


23.	Cross access easements shall be provided between all contiguous Parking Areas and Parking Lots except where such areas and lots are accessed from a Rear Lane or Rear Alley.  	
B. Screens. 
Screening of the items and conditions indicated shall be provided as required for each applicable District in Table 154.405.A (District Standards), or each applicable Civic Zone in Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards), and Section 154.405.A, if applicable, except in each case, at any Driveway. 
Parking Structures shall be Screened from all Frontages by one or more Liner Buildings as required by Section 154.412.E.
Screens and Streetscreens shall comply with the standards and requirements of Table 154.405.A (District Standards), or Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards), and Section 154.413.G, as applicable. 
C. Driveway Width. 
In Character Districts, Driveways at Frontages shall be no wider in the First Lot Layer than the width specified for the applicable Character District in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
D. Pedestrian Exits. 
In Character Districts, pedestrian exits from all Parking Lots, Parking Areas, Garages, and Parking Structures shall conform to Table 154.405.A (District Standards), except for underground parking accommodations.
E. Liner Buildings Required. 
In Character Districts, Parking Structures shall be Screened from view of any Frontage by one or more Liner Buildings as set forth in Table 154.405.A (District Standards).
Such Liner Buildings shall be the same or greater height as the associated Parking Structure which they Screen.
SECTION 154.413.	
PRIVATE LOT LANDSCAPE STANDARDS    
A. General.
1.	In Character Districts, Lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Table 154.405.A (District Standards) and this Section 154.413. 
2.  	In Civic Zones, Lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards) and this Section 154.413. Additionally, Civic Spaces shall be designed as set forth in Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards). 
3. 	In Special Districts, Lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Table 154.405.A (District Standards) and this Section 154.413.
B. Plant Materials. 
Except as otherwise required by Section 154.413.E and Section 154.413.G, all required plant materials shall meet with the minimum container size, class and other requirements outlined in American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-2004) published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA) or other local Nursery Association Standards.
C. Tree Size.
At installation, Trees shall be a minimum two and a half (2.5) inches in caliper.
D. Placement of Shrubs. 
Proposed shrubs shall be placed minimally 18” from any Sidewalk or pavement edge, measured from the center of the plant.
E. Shrub Size. 
At installation, Shrubs shall be a three (3) gallon container minimum.
F. Hazardous Landscape. 
Ground vegetation or Shrub plantings with spines, thorns or needles that may present hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists or vehicles are prohibited in the first two (2) feet of the First Lot Layer.
G. Bare / Exposed Ground. 
All bare or exposed ground on the site and/or in landscaped areas shall be covered with live plant materials and/or mulch, with the following exceptions:
1.	Naturally occurring creek beds, rock outcroppings or similar landscape features typically lacking in vegetation.
2.	Agricultural fields seasonally tilled for cultivation.
3.	Hiking trails and/or traces.
4.	Clay or sand surfaces associated with recreation fields and facilities.
Without limitation, any site that is to remain cleared shall have the grade restored and must be sodded or seeded within the same growing season.
H. Artificial Plants / Turf. 
Artificial plants or artificial turf are prohibited, excluding active recreation sports fields that are typically subject to intense use and soil compaction which prohibits the establishment of turfgrass, and where paving or grass paving systems will not suffice given the purpose and level of use of the area. 
I. Establishment. 
All required landscape areas shall be watered and fertilized as necessary to ensure establishment within the first planted year in accordance with best landscape practices.
J. Screens. 
Screens shall be provided in accordance with Sections 154.405.A and 154.412.B. 
K. Mitigation of Wind Erosion. 
Wind erosion shall be mitigated and controlled through dust abatement and similar practices during the period of site work and construction.
L. Compacted Soils. 
Landscape soils that have been compacted during construction activities shall be loosened and aerated to a depth of at least six (6) inches before planting.
M. Condition of Plants. 
Plants shall have normal, well-developed branches and vigorous root systems.
N. Maintenance. 
Any planting(s) required under this Section 154.413, which are significantly damaged, removed, infested, disease ridden, or dead shall be replaced within one year or by the next planting season, whichever occurs first.
O. Planted Trees. 
Any planted Trees shall be of the Tree Shape indicated for the applicable District or Civic Zone  on Table 154.5.5.D.1 (Public Planting).
P. Paving. 
The First Lot Layer shall not be paved, except for the following: 
1.	Driveways; 
2.	Sidewalks; 
3. 	Terraces/Lightwells; 
4.	Dooryards; and 
5.	Pavement matching the adjoining Public Frontage in Character District CD-5 where the Building is set back no more than five feet (5’) from the Front Lot Line.
Q. Trees Required. 
Trees shall be provided in accordance with Table 154.405.A (District Standards) and Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards), as applicable.
R. Lawns. 
Lawns are allowed.
S. Minimum Landscaped Area. 
The minimum required landscaped area shall be as provided in Table 154.405.A (District Standards) and Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards), as applicable.
T. Preservation of Existing Trees & Vegetation. 
Preservation of on-site existing Trees and vegetation is encouraged and may be used to fulfill the landscape requirements.
U. Preservation of Root Zones. 
The root zones of existing Trees and vegetation to be preserved shall be preserved and protected from clearing or construction activities and shall be enclosed by a temporary protective fence.
V. No Noxious or Invasive Species. 
No plant species identified in any prohibited plant list  developed by the City Planner shall be installed and all plants of such species shall be removed.
W. Existing Vegetation. 
The size and limits of existing vegetation shall be indicated on the Landscape Plan portion of the Building and Lot Plan.
X. Significant Trees. 
Priority shall be given to preserving and protecting significant Trees that provide screening, buffering, wildlife habitat and/or linkages to wildlife habitat.
Y. Open Space & Civic Space. 
Open Spaces and Civic Space shall remain fenced and protected during all abutting site work and construction activities unless alterations to them are otherwise specified by the plans.
Z. Remediation of Compaction. 
All landscape areas compacted during construction activities shall be tilled and reconditioned to provide an arable topsoil layer that can support the long term health and vitality of landscaping.
AA. Amendment of Topsoil. 
The topsoil within the limits of disturbance of a construction site shall be amended with organic soil additives as recommended by a landscape soils test prior to being redistributed in accordance with best landscape practices.
BB. Parking Areas / Parking Lots. 
Parking Areas and Parking Lots that contain more than nine (9) spaces shall conform to the following:
1.	Parking Areas and Parking Lots shall contain one landscape island for every thirty two (32) parking spaces. Parking Lots with more than one landscape island shall have such islands distributed throughout the Parking Lot.
2.	Each parking island shall be of a minimum size equal to a standard parking space; provided that each parking island abutting two rows of head to head parking spaces shall be of a minimum size and length equal to 2 parking spaces. 
3.	Parking islands shall contain a minimum of one (1) Tree for every single island. If a parking island is double length, then two (2) Trees shall be required. 
4.	Root zones for existing Trees to remain shall be a minimum of 48 square feet. 
5.	For every 2,000 square feet of Parking Area or Parking Lot, at least one Tree shall be installed or preserved within the Parking Area or Parking Lot except to the extent that Trees outside of the Lot containing the Parking Area or Parking Lot are allowed to satisfy this requirement as set forth below.
6.	No parking space shall be more than seventy-two feet (72’) from a Tree within the Lot, as measured from the center of the Tree to the nearest line demarcating the space.
7.	Except for Trees allowed to be counted outside the Parking Area or Parking Lot, new Trees shall be installed and/or existing Trees preserved in Tree islands provided pursuant to this Section 154.413.HH, and/or at the perimeter of the Parking Area or Parking Lot, provided that the perimeter of the Parking Area or Parking Lot where Trees are installed or preserved to meet this requirement lies within the Lot on which the Parking Area or Parking Lot is located.
8.	Trees outside of the Parking Area or Parking Lot located within 20 feet of the closest portion of such Parking Area or Parking Lot, including but not limited to Trees within Thoroughfare Rights-of-Way and Civic Spaces, may be counted toward satisfying the requirements.
9.	In addition to any walkway or Sidewalk around a Parking Area or Parking Lot, each such Parking Area or Parking Lot exceeding one hundred and twenty (120) spaces shall have least one pedestrian walkway bisecting the Parking Area or Parking Lot and connecting to adjoining sidewalks of a minimum width of eight (8) feet that is paved differently from the parking spaces with respect to texture, material, style, and/or color. 
CC. Location.
All Landscaping required pursuant to this Section 154.413 abutting the paved portion of any Parking Area, Parking Lot, Loading Area, Driveway or Thoroughfare shall be located in a manner to protect the vegetation from vehicular damage. Without limiting the foregoing, all Trees within Tree islands or along the perimeter of the Parking Area or Parking Lot shall be separated from Parking Area or Parking Lot paved surfaces by at least three (3’) feet.
SECTION 154.414.	
SIGN STANDARDS
A. Purpose; General. 
1.	The purpose of this Section 154.414 is to establish a comprehensive scheme for the regulation of Signs in the City.  More specifically, this Section is intended to accomplish the following purposes:
a.	Encourage the effective use of Signs as a means of communication and to facilitate navigation from place to place within the City.
b.	Balance the need for information for motorists and pedestrians with the need for traffic safety by limiting Signs or characteristics of Signs that may be distracting to drivers.
c.	Balance the desire and need of individuals to express themselves through Signs with the desire to maintain a pleasing, safe, and navigable environment for residents and visitors.
d.	Provide liberally for the display of Noncommercial messages in residential areas, recognizing the unique value of residential signage as a means of exercising constitutional freedom of expression. 
e.	Protect and enhance the value of property in the City by providing for Signage consistent with the character of the area in which it is located.  			
2.    Signs shall conform to the following:
a.	The Michigan Highway Advertising Act of 1972 (Act 106), to the extent applicable, with any conflict between this Section and such Act being resolved in favor of such Act.  
b.	Within each District, the allowed types and numbers of Signs shall be as provided in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary), Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards), and this Section 154.414. Each Sign type shall be subject to the applicable standards and requirements of Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary)  and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
3.  	Except for Exempt Signs, no Sign shall be erected on a Lot, installed or placed on a Building, or otherwise exist on a Lot or Building unless a Sign Permit has been issued for such Sign in accordance with Section 154.605 and such Sign Permit remains in full force and effect.
4.    Any violation of this Section 154.414 shall be enforceable and appealable  in accordance with the enforcement and appeal provisions of this Chapter 154.  
B.  General Sign Provisions.
1.	There shall be no Signs allowed other than as specified in this Section 154.414.
2.	An Address Sign is required for each Building in compliance with Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
3.	In addition to all other Signs allowed in accordance with Sections 154.414A and 154.414B, non-illuminated Temporary Signs are allowed without a Sign Permit subject to the following regulations:
a. On any lot used as a single-family, two-family, or owner occupied multi-family dwelling, up to 5 temporary Signs may be displayed on a pole or stake affixed to the ground.  Such Signs shall not exceed 8 square feet in area per side, and the top of such Sign shall be no more than 5 feet from ground level.  Such Signs may display noncommercial messages or on-site commercial messages (including, but not limited to, messages conveying that the lot is for sale, that work is being performed on the dwelling by a particular individual or business, or that a garage sale will be held).  
b.	On any lot not used as a single-family, two-family, or owner occupied multi-family dwelling, up to 2 temporary Signs may be displayed on a pole or stake affixed to the ground or on a banner affixed to the building on the lot.  Such Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area per side, and the top of the Sign shall be no more than 5 feet from ground level unless the Sign is a banner affixed to a building. If affixed to the ground, they shall be supported by wooden posts a minimum of 4 inches by 4 inches thick and shall be spaced at least 15 feet apart from one another. Such Sign may display noncommercial messages or on-site commercial messages (including, but not limited to, messages conveying that the lot is for sale, that work is being performed on the dwelling by a particular individual or business, or that a business on the lot is or will be holding a sale).  
c.	Temporary signs must be made of waterproof materials and kept in good repair.
d.	Temporary signs must be set back at least 5 feet from the property line and may not be placed in a manner that obstructs clear vision for drivers on an adjacent street.
4. 	Without limitation to any applicable specific Sign standards, all Signs other than Exempt Signs shall comply with the following additional standards:
a.	Such Signs shall be constructed of durable and weather-resistant material, shall be fabricated and installed by qualified Sign painters and mechanics, and shall be kept in good repair.
b.	any such Signs may, but are not required to be, lighted unless otherwise specifically stated for the particular Sign type in Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards);  and if lighted, shall not be internally illuminated or back-lighted except as otherwise specifically provided for the particular Sign type in Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
c.	Except for the light fixture itself, all electrical elements such as wires, conduits, junction boxes, transformers, ballasts, switches and panel boxes shall be concealed from public view.
d.	Signs shall be mounted in such a way that their removal does not damage and/or alter the original surface of the Building. If the original surface of a Building is damaged during removal of a Sign, the damage must be repaired and the original surface condition restored concurrently.
e.	In addition to Sign types allowed pursuant to Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary), Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards) and Table 154.414C (Sign Limitations), Signs which are original to the Building or have been placed on the Building for at least fifty (50) years may remain or be reproduced.  Any such Signs shall be kept in good repair, both in terms of appearance and operation.
f.	Design drawings of any proposed Sign must be submitted to the Building Official for review of compliance with this Section prior to fabrication and installation. Such drawings shall include Sign location and size and shall indicate materials, color(s), hanging or mounting device, illumination scheme, and example of lettering.
g.	Signs containing commercial messages not pertaining to a use on the subject lot are prohibited. 
h.	All Signs must comply with all applicable provisions of the Michigan Building Code.
i.	Except as expressly allowed under this Article, Signs are not permitted in public Rights-of-Way. 
j.	Portable Signs other than Sidewalk Signs are not permitted.
k.	Except for Signs allowed pursuant to paragraph 154.414.B.4.e above, Commercial Signs and supports for Commercial Signs erected by entities that are no longer operating on the premises shall be removed by the owner, agent, or Person having beneficial use of the Sign or the property upon which the Sign is located within 30 days of written notice from the Building Official. 
l.	Signs in upper floor windows are not permitted, except for Window Signs for an occupant that is separate from the occupant of the ground floor. 
m.	All Signs that do not conform to this Section 154.414 shall be removed by the earlier of 30 days of losing their status as a legal non-conforming Use under Section 154.114, 90 days or two (2) years from the issuance of any Building Permit covering the property. 
n.	A Sign for the occupant shall be permitted at rear entrance doors if mounted flush against the Building and not exceeding six (6) square feet in size.
o.  All Signs erected, altered, or maintained in the City shall conform to City and state electrical codes. 
p.	No Sign may be 	illuminated with or include animated, moving, intermittent, or flashing lights, or other active lighting.
q.	No Sign may have any moving component or element.
r.	No Sign may have changeable copy except for a Marquee Sign with physically changeable letters, an Outdoor Display Case with removable printed items, or an Electronic Message Board allowed pursuant to paragraph 154.414.B.7.
s.	Neon cabinet Signs, canister Signs and projection Signs are not permitted.
t.	No Sign may by design or arrangement imitate the size, color, lettering, illumination, word, phrase, or symbol of a Sign used as traffic safety control Sign.
u. 	Where a Lot adjoins another Lot, no freestanding Sign shall be permitted within a triangle formed by the Side Lot Line, the Front Lot Line and a line beginning on the Side Lot Line at the required front Setback distance and extended at 45 degrees to the Front Lot Line for an existing Building. The established front Setback may be substituted for the required front Setback.
v.	No Sign may be within or overhang a public right-of-way other than a Wall Sign that does not overhang such right-of-way more than 15 inches, a Blade Sign, a Vertical Projecting Sign, a Marquee Sign, or an Awning Sign.
w.	No Sign may obstruct a traffic-control device, traffic  Sign, or street name Sign, block the vision of drivers at any Driveway, street intersection or crosswalk, or be unsafe or constitute a hazard of any type.
x.	No Sign or Sign support may be affixed to a tree, rock, utility pole or other improper Sign support, or contain any attachment, other Sign, symbol, flag, pennant or other attention-getting device (other than the Sign itself).  
5. 	All applicants for new or changed signs in the CBD-TIFA are encouraged to use the Downtown Mt. Pleasant Signage Design Guidelines with regard to orientation and placement; scale and shape; materials; colors; content; lighting; and installation. A copy of the guidelines may be accessed from the city’s Planning or Downtown Development Departments.
6.	Electronic Message Boards shall be permitted in CD-4, CD-5, SD-H, SD-I, SD-RC, SD-A, and CZ districts, only as part of a permitted Monument Sign or Marquee Sign. Such Signs shall be allowed by permit subject to the following conditions: 
a. The electronic lighting shall be of a single color, otherwise referred to as monochrome.
b. The electronic lighting shall not exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (lux) meter at a pre-set distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: the square root of the product of the sign area (in square feet) and 100. For example, the brightness of a 12 square foot sign shall be measured at a distance of 34.6 feet.  Light measurement shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the sign message face, or the area of the sign emitting the brightest light. 
c.	The frequency of message and/or image change shall be no more than once every 60 seconds. 
d.	The transition or change sequence between messages and images shall appear instantaneous as perceived by the human eye, without any animation such as scrolling or flashing. 
e.	The area of an Electronic Message Board shall be considered a part of the sign of which it is a part for purposes of calculating the total sign area of such sign, and the area of the Electronic Message Board itself shall not exceed 50% of the total sign area.  
f.	A new electronic message board may not be constructed or installed within 100 feet of any residential structure, including multi-family dwellings.
C.  Exempt Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit.
The following Signs do not require a Sign Permit:
1. 	One Address Sign per tenant or owner.
2.	On-premises Signs not exceeding three square feet in area that are located along the route to a place or location within such premises or are provided for safety.
3. 	Signs placed by the City or any other governmental unit with jurisdiction over the area where the Sign is placed.
4. 	Signs carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent construction and made an integral part of the Structure.
5.	Temporary Signs allowed under Section 154.414.B.4.
6.	Window Signs allowed under Section 154.414.B.
D. Sign Area Computation.
The area of Sign as regulated herein shall be the computed area of the background upon which lettering, insignia or other devices are placed. Where said display area is the face of a Building, the area of such Sign shall be the product of the total width and the total height occupied by such lettering, devices or insignia. For Signs having two sides, the maximum display area shall be permitted on both sides and the total area of one side shall be deemed to be the total Sign area. The supporting Structures shall not be included in the area computation unless utilized as part of the total display area.
E.  Responsibility for Signs.
All Signs located in the City shall be erected, altered and maintained by the owner of such Sign who shall assume full responsibility for any consequences or damage caused by the Sign. Signs and supports must be removed or corrected within 30 days after the Building Official sends written notice that an unsafe or improperly maintained Sign condition exists.
F.  Non-Conforming Signs.
Any Sign which becomes non-conforming as a result of the enactment or amendment of this Chapter shall be subject to the same ordinance provisions that apply to other non-conformances. 

TABLE 154.411.A BiCYCLE PARKING
 
Unless otherwise noted, bicycle parking shall be provided as specified below or at a rate of 1 bicycle space for each 5 vehicular parking spaces provided, whichever is greater. Any fractions round up. Required bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with specifications and requirements on file with the Department of Planning & Community Development. 
 
Use Type
 
RESIDENTIAL / DWELLING USES:
 
Single family dwellings
 None required
 
Two family dwellings
 None required
 
Rooming/Boarding and Registered Student Organizations
 1 space per occupant
 
Multiple-family
 1 space per unit
 
Mobile Home
 1 space per lot
 
LODGING USES:
 
All uses
 1 space per 10 guest rooms
 
EDUCATIONAL / INSTITUTIONAL / CIVIC USES:
 
All uses
 1 space per 5,000 sf gross floor area
 
MEDICAL USES:
 
All uses
 1 space per 10 examination or patient rooms
 
COMMERCIAL, RETAIL & SERVICE USES:
 
All uses
 1 space per 2,000 sf gross floor area up to 20,000 sf; 1 space per 5,000 sf gross floor area thereafter.
 
OFFICE USES:
 
All uses
 1 space per 4,000 sf gross floor area
 
COMMUNICATION USES:
 
All uses
 None required
 
INDUSTRIAL USES:
 
All uses
 1 space per 20,000 sf gross floor area or 1 per 10 vehicle parking spaces provided, whichever is greater
 
AGRICULTURAL USES
 
All uses
 None required
 
UTILITY USES:
 
All uses
 None required
 
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PARKING:
 
All uses
 1 space per 10 vehicle parking spaces
 
MEDICAL MARIHUANA USES:
 
All uses
 1 space per 2,000 sf gross floor area
 



TABLE 154.414A sign types - sUMMARY
 
Specific Sign Type
 Illustration
 Districts
 
Address Sign:
A Sign that consists of a numeric reference to a Structure, mounted on the Building. 
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Awning Sign:
An awning that contains lettering painted, screen printed, or appliqueed on the awning valance.
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
CZ
 
Band Sign: 
A Sign that is flat against the Facade and placed directly above the main entrance and often run horizontally along the entablature of traditional Buildings. Band Signs are typically intended to be seen from a distance and are often accompanied by additional pedestrian-scaled signage. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Blade Sign: 
A Sign mounted on the first floor of a Building perpendicular to a Building Facade Wall, typically hung from decorative cast or wrought iron bracket in a manner that permits it to swing slightly. These Signs are small, pedestrian-scaled, and easily read from both sides. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
CZ
 
Directory Sign: 
A Sign that displays the tenant names and locations for a Building containing multiple tenants. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
TABLE 154.414A sign types - sUMMARY
 
Specific Sign Type
 Illustration
 Districts
 
Large Projecting Sign: 
A Sign attached above the first floor of a multi-floor Building and projecting from a Building Facade at a 90-degree angle, or if oriented to a Block corner, a 45 degree angle.  
 

 CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Marquee Sign:
A Sign that is located either along the Facade where it projects perpendicular to the Facade or at the corner of a Building where it projects at a 45 degree angle.  These Signs often extend beyond the parapet of the Building, but may also terminate below the cornice or eave. Marquee Signs may have neon lettering used in conjunction with painted colored or changeable lettering.
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
CZ
 
Monument Sign: 
A Sign that is erected on a solid base directly on the ground, and that is itself constructed of a solid material. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Outdoor Display Case: 
A Sign consisting of a lockable metal- or wood-framed cabinet with a hinged transparent door inside of which information may be viewed and accessed for maintenance and updating. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
CZ
 
Plaque Sign: 
A Sign that identifies a Building or its builder, or on professional office Buildings, which might name the firm or partners in a firm. May also be referred to as an Architectural Sign.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
TABLE 154.414A sign types - sUMMARY
 
Specific Sign Type
 Illustration
 Districts
 
Porch Sign: 
Signs that are mounted on a porch.  Signs must be placed parallel to the Building Facade.
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-A
CZ
 
Post Sign: 
A Sign that is mounted on one or two posts in the First Lot Layer. 
 

 CD-4
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Sidewalk Sign: 
A free-standing, double-sided Sign with lettering painted or applied to the surface, placed at the entrance to a Building in a primarily pedestrian environment. Sidewalk Signs provide secondary signage. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-A
CZ
 
Wall Sign: 
A Sign that is flat against the Facade of a Secondary Frontage. These Signs are typically painted directly on the Building and contain a combination of text and graphic elements. They are intended to be visible from a greater distance and shall be accompanied by additional signage on the Facade at the Principal Frontage. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Window Sign: 
A Sign that is professionally painted, consisting of individual letters and designs, applied directly on the inside of a window or hanging inside a window. 
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
CZ
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Address                                             
 Permitted
Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-3

CD-3L

CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

Description
 

 A Sign that consists of a numeric reference to a Structure, mounted on the Building. 

Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per address
 
Area
 max 2 sf
 
Depth / Projection
 max 3 in
 
Clearance
 min 4.5 ft
 
Letter Height
 min 4 in, max 6 in
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Awning Sign                                                           
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

CZ

Description
 
An awning that contains lettering painted, screen printed, or appliqueed on the awning valance.
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per window
 
Width / Height
 max width = width of facade 
max height= n/a 
letters, numbers, and graphics covering no more than 70% of the valance area
 
Depth / Projection
 min 8 ft fully extended, back of curb, whichever is less
 
Clearance
 min 8 ft
 
Letter Height
 min 5 in, max 10 in
 
Valance Height
 max 12 in
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Awning Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be only on an awning that:
i.  does not conceal an architectural feature;
ii.  has no side panels or soffit;
iii. is rectangular in elevation and triangular in cross-section with straight     edges and is not quarter-round or domed; and 
iv. has a metal structure covered in opaque authentic or synthetic canvas or  painted metal; and
b.	shall be limited to the valance of the awning.
 
 




TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Band Sign                                                             
 Permitted Districts:  
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
A Sign that is flat against the Facade and placed directly above the main entrance and often run horizontally along the entablature of traditional Buildings. Band Signs are typically intended to be seen from a distance and are often accompanied by additional pedestrian-scaled signage. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per Facade plus 1 per first floor business Frontage
 
Area
 1.5 sf per linear ft of Facade
 
Width / Height
 max 100% width of Facade / max 3 ft
 
Depth / Projection
 max 7 in
 
Clearance
 min 7 ft
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Band Sign allowed under this Article: 
a.	shall be applied to the first Story Facade and not project vertically above the roof line; 
b.	shall have letters individually attached to the wall, on a separate background panel affixed to the wall, or printed or etched on the same surface as the background; and
c.	shall not obscure any architectural element of the Building and shall be in vertical alignment with the center of an architectural element such as a storefront window or entrance, or centered over the bay or overall space occupied by the business. 
 




TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Blade Sign                                                             
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

CZ

Description
 
A Sign mounted on the first floor of a Building perpendicular to a Building Facade Wall, typically hung from decorative cast or wrought iron bracket in a manner that permits it to swing slightly. These Signs are small, pedestrian-scaled, and easily read from both sides. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per business, no closer than 18 ft from another Blade Sign
 
Area
 8 sf
 
Width / Height
 max 2 ft / max 4 ft
 
Depth / Projection
 max 4 ft
 
Clearance
 min 8 ft clear above the Sidewalk
 
Letter Height
 max 8 in
 




Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Blade Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be permanently installed perpendicular to the Façade; and
b.  all exposed edges of the Sign shall be finished.
 




TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Directory Sign              
 Permitted
Districts:       
 


 



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
A Sign that displays the tenant names and locations for a Building containing multiple tenants. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per ground floor entrance to upper floor business(es)
 
Area
 6 sf max
 
Width / Height of 
Sign panel
 2 ft max width/ 3 ft max height
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Directory Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be attached to and parallel with the first floor Facade;
b.	shall not be attached to or placed within shopfront windows.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Large Projecting Sign                         
 Permitted Districts:       
 

   
 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-5

CD-4

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

CZ

Description
 
A Sign attached above the first floor of a multi-floor Building and projecting from a Building Facade at a 90-degree angle, or if oriented to a Block corner, a 45 degree angle.  
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per Facade, per business. If Sign is placed at the Building corner where it can be viewed from 2 Adjacent Facades, it counts toward both Facades.
 
Height (max)
 Top of Sign shall be located below the cornice of a 2 Story building or below the window sills of the 3rd Story of a Building with more than 2 Stories. 
 
Area (max)
 50 sf 
 
Clearance
 min 12 ft clear above the Sidewalk
 
Letter Height
 Not Regulated
 
Depth (max)
 18 in
 
Projection (max)
 7 ft over Sidewalk, but may not project past back of curb
 
Distance from Frontage Line
 N/A
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Large Projecting Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be made of metal or other material more than 1/2 inch in thickness; 
b.	shall be permanently installed to the Façade; and
c.	shall not be internally lighted or backlit except behind cut-out letters and otherwise shall be lighted with neon tubing or other external means.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Marquee Sign                                                         
 Permitted Districts:
 


 



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

CZ

Description
 
A Sign that is located either along the Facade where it projects perpendicular to the Facade or at the corner of a Building where it projects at a 45 degree angle.  These Signs often extend beyond the parapet of the Building, but may also terminate below the cornice or eave. Marquee Signs may have neon lettering used in conjunction with painted colored or changeable lettering.
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per Principal Frontage
 
Width / Height
 centered on and no more than 4 ft wider than Principal Entrance bay
 
Depth / Projection
 min 4 ft, max 10 ft over Sidewalk
 
Clearance
 min 10 ft from Sidewalk
 
Letter Height
 removable letter height max 6 in, permanent letter height max 36 in
 
Distance from Curb
 min 3 ft
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Marquee Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall not be internally lighted or backlit except behind the panels from which changeable letters are hung and shall otherwise be lighted with neon tubing or other external means;
b.	shall be located only above the Principal Entrance of a Building and attached parallel to the Facade, or if such Building is located on a corner, then such Sign may be located at and attached perpendicular to the corner of the Building;
c.	shall not have any supports more than eight (8) feet deep and all anchors, bolts, and supporting rods must be concealed within its interior;
d.	together with all anchors, bolts, supporting rods and braces, shall be constructed of high quality non-combustible or non-corrodable components and materials and shall be designed by a structural engineer and be subject to approval by the Building Inspector.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Monument Sign                                         
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
A Sign that is erected on a solid base directly on the ground, and that is itself constructed of a solid material. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per Frontage
 
Area (max)
 18 sf
 
Height (max)
 6 ft 
 
Letter Height
 max 12 in.
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all of the applicable standards, each Monument Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be located within the 1st Lot Layer.
b. 	shall incorporate a supporting base that is at least 75 percent of the width of the Sign face at its widest point. 
c. 	shall have a supporting base constructed of brick, stone, masonry or scored concrete.
d.	shall not be allowed if there is a Post Sign on the Lot.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Outdoor Display Case                                              
 Permitted Districts:
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

CZ

Description
 
A Sign consisting of a lockable metal- or wood-framed cabinet with a hinged transparent door inside of which information may be viewed and accessed for maintenance and updating. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per Principal Frontage
 
Area
 max 8 sf, except in the case of theaters, which may not exceed 20 sf
 
Depth / Projection
 max 5 in.
 
Clearance
 min 30 in.
 
Letter Height
 Not Regulated
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Outdoor Display Case allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be permanently attached to and parallel with the first floor Façade;
b.	may be externally illuminated or lighted by a recessed light source within the cabinet; and
c.	shall not be attached to or be placed within shopfront windows.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Porch Sign                                                              
 Permitted Districts:
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
Signs that are mounted on a porch.  Signs must be placed parallel to the Building Facade.
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per address (2 for Corner Building
 
Area
 max 6 sq ft
 
Width / Height
 max 100% width of entrance / max 2 ft
 
Depth / Projection
 n/a
 
Clearance
 min 7 ft
 
Letter Height
 max 8 in
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Porch Sign allowed under this Article: 
a.	shall be hung above the entrance to the porch or elsewhere on the architrave (beam at top of columns); and
b.	shall be permanently installed parallel to the Facade of the Building.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Plaque Sign                                                            
 Permitted Districts:
 


 



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

CD-3L

CD-3

Description
 
A Sign that identifies a Building or its builder, or on professional office Buildings, which might name the firm or partners in a firm. May also be referred to as an Architectural Sign.
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per Principal Frontage
 
Area
 max 1 sf
 
Width / Height
 max 18 in / 
max 2 ft
 
Depth / Projection
 max 3 in
 
Mounting Height max
 7 ft
 




Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Plaque Sign allowed under this Article shall consist of either a panel or individual letters inset or applied flush with a Building wall within ten (10) feet of an entrance to the Building.
No more than 1 Plaque Sign may be used for a Home Occupation in CD-3 or CD-3L. 
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Post Sign
 Permitted Districts: 
 


 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
A Sign that is mounted on one or two posts in the First Lot Layer. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per Building
 
Area
 12 sf
 
Width / Height of 
Sign panel
 max 48 in / 
max 40 in
 
Apex
 6 ft
 
Letter Height
 max 10 in
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Post Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	may be mounted on one or two posts; and
b.	shall be set perpendicular to the Building Facade;.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Sidewalk Sign                                                        
 Permitted Districts: 
 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
A free-standing, double-sided Sign with lettering painted or applied to the surface, placed at the entrance to a Building in a primarily pedestrian environment. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per business 
 
Area
 max 10 sf
 
Width / Height
 max 30 in / max 48 in
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Sidewalk Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be located directly in front of the space occupied by the sign permit holder; 
b.   shall not be placed so as to cause the width of the sidewalk to be reduced below five feet in width, nor shall they be erected or maintained in a manner that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape; 
c.  shall be marked with the approved permit or permit number. Sidewalk signs without permits shall be disposed of at owner’s expense;
d.	shall not be illuminated or have any moving parts;
e.	shall only be displayed between 9:00 a.m. .and 11:00 p.m. and shall be removed from public rights-of-way in the event of snow accumulation until such time that accumulation is removed; 
f.  shall not be made of paper or cardboard; and
g.  may be removed by the City from the right-of-way for municipal purposes.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Wall Sign                                                                  
 Permitted Districts: 
 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
A Sign that is flat against the Facade of a Secondary Frontage. These Signs are typically painted directly on the Building and contain a combination of text and graphic elements. They are intended to be visible from a greater distance and shall be accompanied by additional signage on the Facade at the Principal Frontage. 
 



Dimensions
 
Quantity (max)
 1 per business
 
Area
 max 32 sf
 
Depth / Projection
 3 inches
 
Clearance
 4 feet
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Wall Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall not project vertically above the roof line;
b. 	shall include only letters, background, lighting, and an optional logo, with such information shall consist only of the name and/or logo of the businesses located in such Building;
c.	shall have letters individually attached to the wall, on a separate background panel affixed to the wall, or painted, printed or etched on the same surface as the background; and
d.	shall not obscure any architectural element and be in vertical alignment with the center of an architectural element such as a storefront window or entrance, or centered over the bay or overall space occupied by the businesses.
 



TABLE 154.414B Sign Types - sPECIFIC STANDARDS
 
Window Sign                                                          
 Permitted Districts: 
 

   
 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.



CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

SD-A

CZ

Description
 
A Sign applied directly on the inside of a window or hanging inside a window. 
 



Dimensions
 
Area
 max 33% of glass onto which it is applied
 



Additional Standards
 
In addition to all other applicable standards, each Window Sign allowed under this Article:
a.	shall be of one of the following types:
i.   Letters painted or applied directly on the window
ii.  Hanging Sign that hangs parallel to the window
iii. Neon Sign
iv. Door Sign applied to or hanging inside the glass portion of an entrance doorway;
b.	shall not interfere with the primary function of windows, which is to enable passersby and public safety personnel to see through windows into premises and view product displays; and
c.	may list services and/or products sold on the premises, or provide phone numbers, operating hours or other messages, provided that the total aggregate area of these messages shall not exceed the area dimensional limit provided herein.
 



SECTION 154.415.	
PRIVATE LIGHTING STANDARDS
All private lighting shall conform with the requirements of this Chapter and Chapter 96 (Nuisances).
SECTION 154.416.
STREETSCAPE repairs, replacements & IMPROVEMENTS 
A. Applicability.	
This Section 154.416 shall apply only within Character Districts CD-4 and CD-5 and Civic Zones, but shall not apply to any Building or Lot within a Development Parcel for which Thoroughfares are to be provided or modified in accordance with Article V. 
B. Streetscape Repairs, Replacements & Improvements.	
Prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for a Building or Improvement within Character District CD-4 or CD-5 or any Civic Zone, the following Streetscape improvements, repairs, or replacements shall be provided by the Lot Owner with respect to each Building or Improvement and the Streetscape that Enfronts the applicable Lot:
1.	Any walkway, planter well or planter strip, street light or curb that exists in the Public Frontage or Thoroughfare Adjacent to the applicable Lot prior to commencement of construction of such Building or Improvement and which is damaged during such construction shall be repaired such that it is in at least as good condition as it was in prior to such damage or shall be replaced.
2.	If the Public Frontage Adjacent to the applicable Lot does not include a Sidewalk, Thoroughfare Trees, or any such absent element shall be provided by the applicable Lot Owner in accordance the following standards and requirements:
a.	If there is no Sidewalk, a Sidewalk shall be constructed along the entire Front Lot Line, which Sidewalk shall match any existing Sidewalk Enfronting an Adjacent Lot or if there is none, shall conform to the Thoroughfare standards for the applicable District or Civic Zone, as set forth in Section 154.505 as if such Thoroughfare standards were applicable. 
b.	If there is no planter strip or plant well, planting accommodations shall be constructed along the entire Front Lot Line which planting accommodations shall match any existing planter strip or plant well Enfronting an Adjacent Lot, or if there is none, shall conform to Thoroughfare standards for the applicable District or Civic Zone, as set forth in Section 154.505 as if such Thoroughfare standards were applicable.
c.	If there is no Thoroughfare Tree within the Frontage Adjacent to the Lot, one or more Thoroughfare Trees shall be installed along the Front Lot Line, which Trees shall meet the tree shape, spacing, and size standards for the applicable District or Civic Zone as set forth in Section 154.505, as if such standards were applicable. 
3.	If there is not sufficient public right-of-way area for all or any of the required Streetscape repairs, replacements, or improvements as set forth in this Section 154.416, such element or elements shall be provided within the Lot Adjacent to the public right-of-way and the property owner shall grant a perpetual non-exclusive easement for public use of such elements. 
4.	Each Streetscape repair, replacement or improvement made pursuant to this Section 154.416 must comply with the rules, regulations, and requirements of the City Planning Department and Public Works Department that are applicable and in effect from time to time in respect of such element, such that it qualifies, or would qualify if within the public right-of-way, dedication to the City.

Article V:
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL PLANS & STANDARDS

SECTION 154.501. General
 142
 
SECTION 154.502. Development Parcel Plans
 142
 
SECTION 154.503. Preparation
 142
 
SECTION 154.504. Plan Requirements
 142
 
SECTION 154.505. Thoroughfares
 144
 
SECTION 154.506. Block Perimeter
 158
 
SECTION 154.507. Civic Zones
 158
 
SECTION 154.508. District Density
 163
 
SECTION 154.509. Character Districts
 164
 
SECTION 154.510. Special Districts
 164
 
SECTION 154.511. Special Requirements
 164
 



SECTION 154.501.	
GENERAL
A. Definition. 
Development Parcel is defined in Article VII. 
SECTION 154.502.	
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL PLANS
A. When Development Parcel Plan Required. 
None of the following shall occur except pursuant to and in compliance with a Development Parcel Plan that has been prepared, submitted and approved in accordance with this Article and all standards and requirements applicable thereto:
1.	filing, issuing, applying for, or approving any subdivision application or  plat,  Building Permit, Building and Lot Plan, or Site Plan, relating to, or subdividing, re-subdividing, commencing construction on, or developing or improving any part of a Development Parcel; or
2	approving any Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment other than one prepared by or on behalf of the City.
B. Preparation and Requirements. 
Each Development Parcel Plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 154.503 below and shall conform to the requirements of Section 154.504 and other provisions hereof. 
C. Plan Submission.   
Development Parcel Plans shall be submitted as follows:
1.	If a Development Parcel Plan is required by virtue of Section 154.502.A.1, such Development Parcel Plan shall be submitted for review and Certification of Compliance by the City Planner prior to taking any of the actions described in Section 154.502.A.1.  
2.	If a Development Parcel Plan is required by virtue of Section 154.502.A.2, such Development Parcel Plan shall be submitted as part of the applicable application for approval of the Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment as a zoning map amendment pursuant to Section 154.110.D.2. 
D. Action on Plan. 
An application for review and Certification of Compliance with respect to a Development Parcel Plan shall be processed and acted upon in accordance with Section 154.110.D and Section 154.603. 
SECTION 154.503.	
PREPARATION
Each Development Parcel Plan required to be submitted under this Chapter shall be prepared and submitted by or on behalf of the Owner of the applicable property.
SECTION 154.504.	
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
A. General. 
Each Development Parcel Plan submitted under this Chapter shall include the standards and requirements for the Development Parcel Plan area and one or more maps reflecting each of the items listed in Section 154.504.B below, all in compliance with this Chapter and the standards and requirements of the applicable Character District, Civic Zone, or Special District in which the land covered by such Development Parcel Plan is situated, as determined by: 
1.	the applicable Zoning Map then in effect if such Development Parcel Plan is not being submitted as part of an application for Zoning Map Amendment; or
2.	the proposed Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment if such Development Parcel Plan is being submitted as part of an application for a Zoning Map amendment. 
B. Items Required on/with Development Parcel Plan.	  
The following items shall be shown on or included with each Development Parcel Plan, each in compliance with this Chapter and, as applicable under Section 154.504.A above, the existing or proposed Zoning Map, fully dimensioned and at a scale no smaller than 1”=200’ except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter and signed by the applicant:
1.	existing and any proposed Thoroughfares, including without limitation, any required or proposed new Thoroughfare(s) or any required or proposed extension or change to any existing Thoroughfare(s), in compliance with the applicable Thoroughfare Standards;
2.	Thoroughfare Types and Standards;
3.	Thoroughfare cross-sections;
4.	Pedestrian Sheds and their respective Common Destinations;
5.	existing and any required or proposed Civic Spaces, Civic Buildings and Civic Zones and calculation of percentage of Civic Space to Net Site Area;
6.	existing and any proposed Character Districts and if the Development Parcel Plan site is 80 gross acres or more, calculation of the percentage of each Character District to Net Site Area;
7.	existing and proposed Special Districts, if any;
8.	existing and proposed Special Requirements, if any;
9.	if the Development Parcel Plan site is 80 gross acres or more, the proposed Maximum District Density per Character District or Special District;
10.	the proposed Block Structure for the site in compliance with applicable Block Perimeter Standards; 
11.	Public Landscaping Plan; and
12.	Current zoning and any proposed zoning change.
C. Pedestrian Sheds. 
Any proposed Development Parcel Plan shall be based upon one or several proposed or existing Standard or Linear Pedestrian Sheds, as applicable, located according to existing conditions, such as traffic intersections, Adjacent Development, and natural features. Each Pedestrian Shed shall have a Common Destination near its center. See Illustration 154.504.C (Pedestrian Sheds). The Development Parcel Plan site may be smaller or larger than the Pedestrian Shed within which it is situated. 
ILLUSTRATION 154.504.C PEDESTRIAN SHEDs


5-Minute Walk

Standard Pedestrian Shed

5-Minute Walk

5-Minute Walk

Linear Pedestrian Shed
D. Civic Zones. 
Civic Zones shall be assigned according to and as required by Sections 154.302.C and 154.507.A.
E. Character Districts. 
Character Districts shall be assigned according to and as required by Section 154.302.A and Section 154.302.B.
F. Special Districts. 
Special Districts, if any, shall be assigned according to Section 154.302.
G. Thoroughfare Network. 
The Thoroughfare network shall be laid out according to Section 154.505.
H. District Density. 
District Density, if applicable, shall be calculated and shall conform to Section 154.508.
SECTION 154.505.	
THOROUGHFARES
A. General. 
Thoroughfares shall be generally comprised of Vehicular Parking Lanes,  Vehicular Travel Lanes, any Bicycle Accommodations, and the Public Frontage, which is comprised of the Sidewalks, tree planting area, Thoroughfare trees, and street lights.
B. Thoroughfare Standards. 
Any Thoroughfares within or Adjacent to a Development Parcel on a Development Parcel Plan shall comply with the following standards set forth in this Section 154.505.B:
1.	Thoroughfares shall provide for vehicular and non-vehicular traffic and provide access to Lots and Open Spaces.
2.	Thoroughfares shall consist of Vehicular Lanes, any bicycle accommodations and Public Frontages. 
3.	The Public Frontages of Thoroughfares that pass from one Character District to another shall be adjusted accordingly or, alternatively, the Character District may follow the alignment of the Thoroughfare to the depth of one Lot, retaining a single Public Frontage throughout its trajectory. 
4.	Thoroughfares shall be designed to define Blocks not exceeding any applicable perimeter size prescribed in Table 154.506. (Block Perimeter Standards), measured as the sum of Lot Frontage Lines and subject to adjustment by Waiver of the City Planner at the edge of a Development Parcel.
5.	Thoroughfares shall terminate at other Thoroughfares, forming a network, with internal Thoroughfares connecting wherever possible to those on Adjacent sites and cul-de-sacs not being allowed unless approved by Waiver of the City Planner to accommodate specific site conditions.
6.	Thoroughfares within Districts and within Civic Zones Adjacent to Character Districts shall conform to the applicable Thoroughfare Standards for such Zones set forth in Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards).
ILLUSTRATION 154.505.B1 Turning Radius


TRAVEL
LANE

Turning
 Radius

ON-STREET PARKING

BIKE LANE

Curb Radius

TRAVEL 
LANE

ON-STREET PARKING



TABLE 154.505.B2 thoroughfare Types - Summary
 
Thoroughfare Type
 Illustration
 Permitted 
Districts
 
Rear Lane
A vehicular way located to the rear of Lots, providing access to service areas, parking, and Accessory Buildings and containing utility easements. Rear Lanes may be paved lightly to Driveway standards. The Streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges, has no raised Curb, and is drained by percolation.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
 
Rear Alley 
A vehicular way located to the rear of Lots, providing access to service areas, parking, and Accessory Buildings and containing utility easements. In CD-5, Rear Alleys should be paved from Building face to Building face, with Drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll Curbs at the edges. 
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
 
Neighborhood Street
A local urban Thoroughfare of low speed and capacity and having a Public Frontage with raised Curbs drained by inlets, Sidewalks separated from the Vehicular Lanes by individual or continuous Planters, and parking on one or both sides. The landscaping consists of Thoroughfare Trees aligned in a regularly spaced Allee.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
 
Commercial Street 
A Thoroughfare type designed for moderate to high vehicular capacity and slow speed, traversing an urbanized area. The Public Frontage has raised Curbs drained by inlets and very wide Sidewalks along both sides, separated from the Vehicular Lanes by separate tree wells or planters with grates and parking on both sides. The landscaping consists of Trees aligned with regular spacing where possible, which clears the storefront entrances.
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
TABLE 154.505.B2 thoroughfare Types - Summary (CONTINUED)
 
Thoroughfare Type
 Illustration
 Permitted 
Districts
 
Drive
A Thoroughfare type with Building Frontages on one side and no or very sporadic Building Frontages on the other side. Frequently, a Drive is used along a boundary between an urbanized area and a natural condition along a waterfront or Natural Area. The Public Frontage has raised Curbs drained by inlets and a wide Sidewalk or paved Path along one side, related to a greenway or waterfront. It is separated from the Vehicular Lanes by individual or continuous planters. The landscaping consists of Thoroughfare Trees aligned in a regularly spaced row.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
SD-A
 
2-Lane Avenue
A Thoroughfare of moderate vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers, and usually equipped with a landscaped median. Its Public Frontage has raised Curbs drained by inlets and wide Sidewalks separated from the Vehicular Lanes by a narrow continuous planter with parking on both sides. The landscaping consists of Trees aligned in a regularly spaced Allee.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
 
4-Lane Avenue
A Thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers, and usually equipped with a landscaped median. Its Public Frontage has raised Curbs drained by inlets and wide Sidewalks separated from the Vehicular Lanes by a narrow continuous Planter with parking on both sides. The landscaping consists of Trees aligned in a regularly spaced Allee.
 

 CD-4
CD-5
SD-H
SD-I
SD-RC
 
Illustrations are provided for illustrative purposes only.
 



Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards
 
Rear Lane
 Permitted Districts: CD-3L

CD-3


 

C

C

B

A


 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Thoroughfare Type
 Rear Lane 
 
Right of Way Width
 24 ft max
 A


 
Pavement Width
 12 - 16 ft *
 B


 
Movement
 Yield Movement
 
* Gravel, crushed rock, or pavement allowed.
 
Assemblies
 
Travel Lanes
 N/A 
 
Travel Lane Width
 N/A
 
Parking Lanes
 none
 
Parking Lane Width
 N/A
 
Bikeway Type
 N/A
 
Walkway
 
Walkway Type
 none
 
Walkway Width
 N/A
 



Planter
 
Planter Type
 none
 
Planter Width
 N/A
 
Landscape Type
 none
 
Tree Species
 N/A
 
Curb
 
Turning Radius
 Not Regulated
 
Curb Radius
 None
 C


 
Curb Type
 None
 
Lighting
 
Not Regulated
 



Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards (CONTINUED)
 
Rear Alley
 Permitted Districts: CD-3L

CD-3

CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC


 

B

A


 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Thoroughfare Type
 Rear Alley 
 
Right of Way Width
 24 ft max
 A


 
Pavement Width
 24 ft max
 B


 
Movement
 Slow Movement
 
Assemblies
 
Travel Lanes
 N/A
 
Travel Lane Width
 N/A
 
Parking Lanes
 none
 
Parking Lane Width
 N/A
 
Bikeway Type
 N/A
 
Walkway
 
Walkway Type
 none
 
Walkway Width
 N/A
 



Planter
 
Planter Type
 none
 
Planter Width
 N/A
 
Landscape Type
 none
 
Tree Species
 N/A
 
Curb
 
Turning Radius
 Not Regulated
 
Curb Radius
 Not Regulated
 
Curb Type
 Roll Curb or Inverted Crown
 
Lighting
 
Not Regulated
 



Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards (CONTINUED)
 
Neighborhood Street
 Permitted Districts: CD-3L

CD-3

CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC


 

E

E

F

F

D

C

C

D

G

G

B

A


 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Thoroughfare Type
 Neighborhood Street 
 
Right of Way Width
 54 - 76 ft
 A


 
Pavement Width
 28 ft - 36 ft
 B


 
Movement
 Slow
 
Assemblies
 
Travel Lanes
 2 lanes
 
Travel Lane Width
 10 ft 
 C


 
Parking Lanes
 Parallel, 1 or both sides
 D


 
Parking Lane Width
 8 ft
 
Bikeway Type
 Shared Use Lane, Buffered Bicycle Lane. See Table 154.505.C*
 
* Bikeways are optional. If bikeways are provided, right of way and pavement width may be increased by the aggregate width of bikeways, in accordance with Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types).
 
Walkway
 
Walkway Type
 Sidewalk, both sides
 F


 
Walkway Width
 5 - 8 ft
 



Planter
 
Planter Type
 Continuous Planter
 E


 
Planter Width
 8 - 12 ft
 
Landscape Type
 Trees at 30 ft o.c. average; first tree shall be placed within 30 ft of Block corner.
 
Tree Species
 See Section 154.505.D
 
Curb
 
Turning Radius
 25 ft min
 
Curb Radius
 10 -20 ft*, except where travel lane is adjacent to the curb, the maximum curb radius shall be 25 ft.
 G


 
Curb Type
 Raised Curb (Travel Lane may not include gutter, Parking Lane may)
 
* Designated truck routes may have a curb radius larger than 20 feet if required by the Division of Public Works to accommodate the design vehicle for that route.
 
Lighting
 
Lighting Placement
 Lighting shall generally be placed midway between Thoroughfare Trees where possible.
 
In CD-3L, CD-3 and SDs
 Not Regulated
 
In CD-4
 Within 20 ft of each block corner and at mid-block. 
 
In CD-5 
 Within 20 ft of each block corner and at 50 ft min O.C. 
 
Lighting Type
 Cobra head lighting not permitted in CD-4 or CD-5
 



Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards (CONTINUED)
 
Commercial Street
 Permitted Districts: CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC


 

E

E

F

F

D

C

C

D

G

G

B

A


 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Thoroughfare Type
 Commercial Street 
 
Right of Way Width
 60 - 76 ft
 A


 
Pavement Width
 36 ft
 B


 
Movement
 Slow
 
Assemblies
 
Travel Lanes
 2 lanes
 
Travel Lane Width
 10 ft
 C


 
Parking Lanes
 Parallel, 2 sides
 D


 
Parking Lane Width
 8 ft, marked
 
Bikeway Type
 Shared Use Lane, Buffered Bicycle Lane, Protected Bicycle Lane. See Table 154.505.C *
 
* Bikeways are optional. If bikeways are provided, right of way and pavement width may be increased by the aggregate width of bikeways, in accordance with Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types).
 
Walkway
 
Walkway Type
 Sidewalk, both sides
 F


 
Walkway Width
 12 - 20 ft
 



Planter
 
Planter Type
 Tree Well or Planter
 E


 
Planter Width
 4 - 6 ft
 
Landscape Type
 Trees at 30 ft o.c. average; first tree shall be placed within 30 ft of Block corner.
 
Tree Species
 See Section 154.505.D
 
Curb
 
Turning Radius
 25 ft min
 
Curb Radius
 5 - 20 ft*, except where travel lane is adjacent to the curb, the maximum curb radius shall be 25 ft
 G


 
Curb Type
 Raised Curb (Travel Lane may not include gutter, Parking Lane may)
 
* Designated truck routes may have a curb radius larger than 20 feet if required by the Division of Public Works to accommodate the design vehicle for that route.
 
Lighting
 
Lighting Placement
 Lighting shall generally be placed midway between Thoroughfare trees where possible.
 
In SDs
 Not Regulated
 
In CD-4
 Within 20 ft of each block corner and at mid-block. 
 
In CD-5 
 Within 20 ft of each Block corner and at 50 ft min O.C. 
 
Lighting Type
 Cobra head lighting not permitted in CD-4 or CD-5
 



Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards (CONTINUED)
 
Drive
 Permitted Districts: CD-3L

CD-3

CD-4

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC


 

F

F

C

D

E

C

E

G

B

G

A


 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Thoroughfare Type
 Drive
 
Right of Way Width
 50 - 72 ft
 A


 
Pavement Width
 18 - 28 ft
 B


 
Movement
 Slow
 
Assemblies
 
Travel Lanes
 1 - 2 lanes
 
Travel Lane Width
 10 ft
 C


 
Parking Lanes
 Parallel, 1 side
 D


 
Parking Lane Width
 8 ft, unmarked
 
Bikeway Type
 Shared Use Lane, Protected Bicycle Lane, Multi-Use Path. See Table 154.505.C  *
 
* Bikeways are optional. If bikeways are provided, right of way and pavement width may be increased by the aggregate width of bikeways, in accordance with Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types).
 
Walkway
 
Walkway Type
 Sidewalk, both sides
 F


 
Walkway Width
 8 - 10 ft
 



Planter
 
Planter Type
 Continuous Planter
 E


 
Planter Width
 8 - 12 ft
 
Landscape Type
 Trees at 30 ft o.c. average; first tree shall be placed within 30 ft of Block corner.
 
Tree Species
 See Section 154.505.D
 
Curb
 
Turning Radius
 25 ft min
 
Curb Radius
 10 -20 ft*, except where travel lane is adjacent to the curb, the maximum curb radius shall be 25 ft
 G


 
Curb Type
 Raised Curb (Travel Lane may not include gutter, Parking Lane may)
 
* Designated truck routes may have a curb radius larger than 20 feet if required by the Division of Public Works to accommodate the design vehicle for that route.
 
Lighting
 
Lighting Placement
 Lighting shall generally be placed midway between Thoroughfare trees where possible.
 
In CD-3L, CD-3 and SDs
 Not Regulated
 
In CD-4
 Within 20 ft of each Block corner and at mid-Block.
 
Lighting Type
 Cobra head lighting not permitted in CD-4 
 



Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards (CONTINUED)
 
2 Lane Avenue
 Permitted Districts: CD-3L

CD-3

CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC


 

G

H

F

E

D

C

D

E

H

F

G

H

I

I

I

B

A


 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Thoroughfare Type
 2 Lane Avenue 
 
Right of Way Width
 79 - 176 ft
 A


 
Pavement Width
 36 ft 
 B


 
Movement
 Slow
 
Assemblies
 
Median Width
 15 - 60 ft
 C


 
Travel Lanes
 2 lanes
 
Travel Lane Width
 10 ft
 D


 
Parking Lanes
 Parallel, 2 sides
 E


 
Parking Lane Width
 8 ft, marked
 
Bikeway Type
 Protected Bicycle Lane, Buffered Bicycle Lane or Shared Use Lane. See Table 154.505.C*
 F


 
* Bikeways are optional. If bikeways are provided, right of way and pavement width may be increased by the aggregate width of bikeways, in accordance with Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types).
 
Walkway
 
Walkway Type
 Sidewalk, both sides
 H


 
Walkway Width
 6 - 20 ft
 



Planter
 
Planter Type
 Continuous Planter
 G


 
Planter Width
 8 - 20 ft
 
Landscape Type
 Trees at 30 ft o.c. average; first tree shall be placed within 30 ft of Block corner.
 
Tree Species
 See Section 154.505.D
 
Curb
 
Turning Radius
 25 ft min
 
Curb Radius
 10 - 20 ft*, except where travel lane is adjacent to the curb, the maximum curb radius shall be 25 ft
 I


 
Curb Type
 Raised Curb (Travel Lane may not include gutter, Parking Lane may)
 
* Designated truck routes may have a curb radius larger than 20 feet if required by the Division of Public Works to accommodate the design vehicle for that route.
 
Lighting
 
Lighting Placement
 Lighting shall generally be placed midway between Thoroughfare trees where possible.
 
In CD-3L, CD-3 and SDs
 Not Regulated
 
In CD-4
 Within 20 ft of each Block corner and at mid-Block. 
 
In CD-5 
 Within 20 ft of each Block corner and at 50 ft min O.C. 
 
Lighting Type
 Cobra head lighting not permitted in CD-4 or CD-5
 



Table 154.505.B3 Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards (CONTINUED)
 
4 Lane Avenue
 Permitted Districts: CD-4

CD-5

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC


 

H

G

F

E

D

C

D

D

D

E

F

G

H

I

I

B

A


 



Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.

Thoroughfare Type
 4 Lane Avenue 
 
Right of Way Width
 99 - 196 ft
 A


 
Pavement Width
 56 ft 
 B


 
Movement
 Slow
 
Assemblies
 
Median Width
 15 - 60 ft
 C


 
Travel Lanes
 4 lanes
 
Travel Lane Width
 10 ft
 D


 
Parking Lanes
 Parallel, 2 sides
 E


 
Parking Lane Width
 8 ft, marked
 
Bikeway Type
 Protected Bicycle Lane, Buffered Bicycle Lane or Shared Use Lane. See Table 154.505.C* 
 F


 
* Bikeways are optional. If bikeways are provided, right of way and pavement width may be increased by the aggregate width of bikeways, in accordance with Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types).
 
Walkway
 
Walkway Type
 Sidewalk, both sides
 H


 
Walkway Width
 6 - 20 ft
 



Planter
 
Planter Type
 Continuous Planter
 G


 
Planter Width
 8 - 20 ft
 
Landscape Type
 Trees at 30 ft o.c. average; first tree shall be placed within 30 ft of Block corner.
 
Tree Species
 See Section 154.505.D
 
Curb
 
Turning Radius
 25 ft min
 
Curb Radius
 10 - 20 ft*, except where travel lane is adjacent to the curb, the maximum curb radius shall be 25 ft
 I


 
Curb Type
 Raised Curb (Travel Lane may not include gutter, Parking Lane may)
 
* Designated truck routes may have a curb radius larger than 20 feet if required by the Division of Public Works to accommodate the design vehicle for that route.
 
Lighting
 
Lighting Placement
 Lighting shall generally be placed midway between Thoroughfare trees where possible.
 
In SDs
 Not Regulated
 
In CD-4
 Within 20 ft of each Block corner and at mid-Block. 
 
In CD-5
 Within 20 ft of each Block corner and at 50 ft min O.C. 
 
Lighting Type
 Cobra head lighting not permitted in CD-4 or CD-5
 



C. Bicycle Accommodations.
Bicycle Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 154.411.  
Within Character Districts a bicycle network comprised of the various allowed Bikeway Types indicated in Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types) should be provided throughout each Development Parcel. 
Within Civic Zones, any bicycle accommodations shall comply with the standards applicable to any Adjacent Character District. 
Within Special Districts, any bicycle accommodations shall comply with any applicable standards for the Special District. 

TABLE 154.505.C BIKEWAY TYPES
 
Bicycle Lane
 Permitted 
Districts: 
 


 Riding Surface Width
 5 ft min
 
Buffer
 None
 
Movement
 With traffic
 
Intersection Detailing
 Signalized, Peg-a-Track, colored, Bicycle Box
 
Bicycle Parking
 Rack, bicycle shelter, bicycle station 
 
Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
Protected Bicycle Lane
 Permitted 
Districts: 
 


 Riding Surface Width
 5 ft min
 
Buffer
 3 ft min, painted buffer, curb, or planter strip
 
Movement
 With traffic or dual direction
 
Intersection Detailing
 Signalized, Peg-a-Track, colored, Bicycle Box
 
Bicycle Parking
 Rack, bicycle shelter, bicycle station 
 
Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
Buffered Bicycle Lane
 Permitted 
Districts: 
 


 Riding Surface Width
 5 ft min each way
 
Buffer
 2 ft min, painted buffer
 
Movement
 With traffic or Contra-flow (2 lanes on the same side of the street or 1 lane on each side)
 
Intersection Detailing
 Signalized, Peg-a-Track, colored, Bicycle Box
 
Bicycle Parking
 Rack, bicycle shelter, bicycle station 
 
Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
TABLE 154.505.C BIKEWAY TYPES
 
Shared Use Lane
 Permitted 
Districts: 
 


 Riding Surface Width
 Same as Vehicular Lane
 
Buffer
 N/A
 
Movement
 With Traffic
 
Intersection Detailing
 Signed, signalized 
 
Bicycle Parking
 Opportunistic, rack, Bicycle Shelter 
 
Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
Shared Use Path
 Permitted 
Districts: 
 


 Riding Surface Width
 10 ft min
 
Buffer
 3 ft min, curb or planter strip
 
Movement
 With traffic or dual direction
 
Intersection Detailing
 Signed, signalized, Peg-a-Track
 
Bicycle Parking
 Rack, bicycle shelter, bicycle station 
 
Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 



CD-4

CD-5

CD-3

CD-3L

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

CD-4

CD-5

CD-3

CD-3L

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

CD-4

CD-5

CD-3

CD-3L

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

CD-4

CD-5

CD-3

CD-3L

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

CD-4

CD-5

CD-3

CD-3L

SD-H

SD-I

SD-RC

D. Public Frontages.
1.	The Public Frontage shall include the Sidewalk, Curb, any planter, any bicycle accommodations, any Thoroughfare trees, and any street lights, allocated within and designed in accordance with this Article V, Table 154.505.C (Bikeway Types), and Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards).
2.	Within Civic Zones, the Public Frontage shall comply with the Public Frontage standards applicable to any Adjacent Character District, or if there is none, the nearest Character District. 
3.	Within the Public Frontage, Public Planting, if any is required or is to be provided, shall be provided by the property Owner in accordance with Table 154.505.B.3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards), provided that the spacing may be adjusted by Waiver by the City Planner to accommodate specific site conditions. Tree species shall be selected from the City tree list; provided that coniferous trees are not allowed within the public right of way.
4.	The Public Frontage shall include Thoroughfare trees with shade canopies of a height that, at maturity, leaves clear at least one Story.
5.	Other than Thoroughfare trees prescribed by this Section 154.505.D, the introduced landscape shall consist primarily of durable native species and hybrids that are tolerant of soil compaction and require minimal irrigation, fertilization and maintenance.
6.	Sidewalks meeting the technical standards of the Public Works Department and the standards and requirements set forth in Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards) shall be required to insure pedestrian movement and safety.
E. Placement of Trees.
Thoroughfare trees, any other landscaping within the Public Frontage, and landscaping within Civic Zones and any Special Districts shall comply with the following standards:
1.	The same shall be centered horizontally and placed minimally:
a.	Two (2) feet from walkways, curbs, and other impervious surfaces if planted in a tree well or continuous planter;
b.	Three (3) feet from walkways, curbs, and other impervious surfaces if planted in a continuous Swale or uncontained area.
2.	Five (5) feet from street lights, utility meters and service lines, fences, walls and other ground level obstructions;
3.	Six (6) feet from porch eaves, awnings and similar overhead obstructions associated with the ground level of Buildings; and
4.	Eight (8) feet from balconies, verandas, Building eaves and cornices, and similar overhead obstructions associated with the upper stories of Buildings.
F. Tree Size.
At installation, trees shall be a minimum of two and a half (2.5) inches in caliper.
G. Shrub Size.
At installation, Shrubs shall be a three (3) gallon container minimum and t height of 30 inches minimum. Shrubs shall be 18” – 24” minimum clear from any Sidewalk or pavement edge at the Lot Line.
H. Bare / Exposed Ground.
All bare or exposed ground on the site and in landscaped areas shall be covered with live plant materials and/or mulch, with the following exceptions:
1.	Naturally occurring creek beds, rock outcroppings or similar landscape features typically lacking in vegetation.
2.	Agricultural fields seasonally tilled for cultivation.
3.	Hiking trails and/or traces.
4.	Clay or sand surfaces associated with recreation fields and facilities.
I. Artificial Plants / Turf.
Artificial plants or artificial turf are prohibited.
J. Irrigation.
All required Landscape Areas shall be irrigated by an automatic underground irrigation system. Where possible and practical, bubbler, drip irrigation, and soaker hose emitters shall be utilized. Each irrigation system shall be equipped with a meter, backflow preventer, rain sensor, and a suitable controller.
K. Temporary Spray Irrigation.
Temporary spray irrigation systems may be used to establish seeded areas for grass and groundcover and native drought-tolerant landscape. 
L. Water Features.
Constructed water features such as fountains, streams and ponds that operate with water recirculation systems shall be designed to prevent seepage and leaks.
M. Minimum Requirements.
Except as otherwise required by Section 154.505.F and 154.505.G above, all plant materials shall meet with the minimum container size, class and other requirements outlined in American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-2004) published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA) or other local Nursery Association Standards.
N. Prevention of Compaction.
The soil structure of planting strips shall be protected from compaction with a temporary construction fence. Standards of access, excavation, movement, storage and backfilling of soils in relation to the construction and maintenance of deep utilities and manholes shall be specified.
O. Mitigation of Wind Erosion.
Wind erosion shall be mitigated and controlled through dust abatement and similar practices during the period of site work and construction.
P. Compacted Soils.
Landscape soils that have been compacted during construction activities shall be loosened and aerated to a depth of at least six (6) inches before planting.
Q. Condition of Plants.
Plants shall have normal, well-developed branches and vigorous root systems.
SECTION 154.506.	
BLOCK PERIMETER
Each Block shall conform to the applicable Block Perimeter Standards set forth in Table 154.506 (Block Perimeter Standards).
TABLE 154.506 BLOCK PERIMETER STANDARDS 
 
District
 By Right
 
CD-3L&3
 2,400 ft max 
 
CD-4
 2,400 ft max
 
CD-5
 2,000 ft max or 3,000 ft max if Parking Structure provided within the Block 
 





SECTION 154.507.	
CIVIC ZONES 
A. Civic Space Requirement; Civic Zone Designation. 
Any Development Parcel Plan having an area of aggregate 80 gross acres or more, excluding any Special Districts, shall include at least 5% but not more than 20% of its gross acreage assigned as Civic Space(s). 
Civic Zone(s) shall be designated on the applicable Zoning Map as Civic Space (CS) and / or Civic Building (CB ).   Civic Zones shall be assigned in accordance with Section 154.302.C. 
All Lots, Development, Buildings, Structures and Improvements within Civic Zones shall comply with Table 154.405.B (Civic Zone Standards).
B. Civic Spaces - Design. 
Civic Spaces Adjacent to  a Character District shall be designed as generally described in Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards) and is so indicated for such Adjacent Character District.

TABLE 154.507.B1 Civic Space Types - Summary
 
Civic Space Type
 Illustration
 Permitted in/
Adjacent to Character 
Districts
 
Natural Area:  
A natural area available for unstructured recreation. A Natural Area may be independent of surrounding Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of Paths and trails, meadows, waterbodies, woodland and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Natural Areas may be lineal, following the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size shall be 8 acres.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
 
Green: 
An Open Space, available for unstructured recreation. A Green may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and Trees, naturalistically disposed. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 8 acres.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
 
Square: 
An Open Space available for unstructured recreation and Civic purposes. A Square is spatially defined by Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of Paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection of important Thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 5 acres.
 

 CD-4
CD-5
 
Plaza: 
An Open Space available for Civic purposes. A Plaza shall be spatially defined by Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas shall be located at the intersection of important Thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres.
 

 CD-5
 
Playground:
An Open Space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. A Playground may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within Residential areas and may be placed within a Block. Playgrounds may be included within Natural Areas and Greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
 
Community Garden:
A grouping of garden plots available for small-scale cultivation, generally to residents without private gardens. Community gardens should be fenced and accommodate individual storage sheds. Running water is required. Community Gardens shall be interspersed within Residential areas and may be placed within a Block or included within Natural Areas and Greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size.
 

 CD-3L
CD-3
CD-4
CD-5
 



TABLE 154.507.B2 Civic Space - Specific Standards 

Natural Area
 Permitted in/Adjacent to: 
 

 Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
Intent
 
A natural area available for unstructured recreation. A natural area may be independent of surrounding Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of Paths and trails, meadows, waterbodies, woodland and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Natural areas may be lineal, following the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size shall be 8 acres.
 

Specifications
 
Size
 8 ac min.
 
Frontage
 Not Regulated
 
Character
 Natural
 

Typical Facilities
 
• Passive and active recreation
• Recreational and community facilities
• Playgrounds and play structures
• Paths and trails
• Accessory structures
 




Green
 Permitted in/Adjacent to: 
 

Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
Intent
 
An Open Space, available for unstructured recreation. A Green may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and trees, naturalistically disposed. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 8 acres.
 

Specifications
 
Size
 1/2 ac min, 8 ac max
 
Frontage
 Independent
 
Character
 Informal
 

Typical Facilities
 
• Passive and active recreation
• Playgrounds and play structures
• Paths and trails
• Accessory structures
 




CD-5

CD-4

CD-3L

CD-3

CD-5

CD-4

TABLE 154.507.B2 Civic Space - Specific Standards

Square
 Permitted in/Adjacent to:
 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only
 
Intent
 
An Open Space available for unstructured recreation and Civic purposes. A Square is spatially defined by Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection of important Thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 5 acres.
 

Specifications
 
Size
 0.5 acres min.
5 acres max
 
Frontage
 Buildings
 
Character
 Formal
 

Typical Facilities
 
• Passive recreation
• Paths
• Accessory structures
 




Plaza
 Permitted in/Adjacent to: 
 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only
 
Intent
 
An Open Space available for Civic purposes. A Plaza shall be spatially defined by Building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas shall be located at the intersection of important Thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres.
 

Specifications
 
Size
 0.5 ac min.
2 ac max
 
Frontage
 Buildings
 
Character
 Formal
 

Typical Facilities
 
• Passive recreation
• Paths
• Accessory structures
• Water features
 




CD-5

CD-4

CD-5

TABLE 154.507.B2 Civic Space - Specific Standards 

Playground
 Permitted in/Adjacent to:
 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only
 
Intent
 
An Open Space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. A Playground may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within Residential areas and may be placed within a Block. Playgrounds may be included within Natural Areas and Greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size.
 

Specifications
 
Size
 No min.
No max
 
Frontage
 Buildings
 
Character
 Formal or Informal
 

Typical Facilities
 
• Active recreation
• Play structures
• Paths
• Water features
 




Community 
Garden
 Permitted in/Adjacent to:
 


Illustration is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 
Intent
 
A grouping of garden plots available for small-scale cultivation, generally to residents without private gardens. Community gardens should be fenced and accommodate individual storage sheds. Running water is required. Community Gardens shall be interspersed within Residential areas and may be placed within a Block or included within Natural Areas and Greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size.
 

Specifications
 
Size
 No min.
No max
 
Frontage
 May be enfronted by Buildings or be located behind Buildings
 
Character
 Formal
 

Typical Facilities
 
• Active recreation
• Garden plots
• Accessory structures
• Running water
 




CD-5

CD-4

CD-3L

CD-3

CD-5

CD-4

CD-3L

CD-3

C. Civic Spaces Required. 
Any Development Parcel Plan having an aggregate area of 80 gross acres or more, excluding any Special Districts, shall provide the following:
1.	each Pedestrian Shed of which the area is a part shall contain at least one Main Civic Space of the Green, Square, or Plaza type conforming to Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary), within 800 feet of the geographic center of each Pedestrian Shed, unless topographic conditions, pre-existing Thoroughfare alignments or other circumstances prevent such location; 
2.	within 800 feet of every Lot in Residential Use, a Civic Space designed and equipped as a Playground conforming to Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Spaces  – Playground) ;
3.	each Civic Space shall have a minimum of 50% of its perimeter Enfronting a Thoroughfare, except for Playgrounds or Community Gardens; and
4.	Civic Space meeting the requirements of Section 154.507.A.
D. Civic Spaces in or Adjacent to Special Districts. 
Civic Space in addition to that required by Section 154.507.C may be permitted or required within Special Districts if approved by the City Commission.
E. Civic Buildings (CB) Required. 
All Development Parcel Plans having an aggregate area of 80 gross acres or more, excluding any Special Districts, shall require the Owner to construct a Meeting Hall or a Third Place in proximity to the Main Civic Space of each Pedestrian Shed and having a corresponding Public Frontage equipped with a shelter and bench for a transit stop.
F. Civic Building Standards. 
Any Civic Building provided or required pursuant to this Chapter should be located within or Adjacent to a Civic Space, or at the axial termination of a significant Thoroughfare.
G. Civic Buildings in Special Districts. 
Civic Buildings may be permitted or required within Special Districts by the City Commission.
H. Maintenance of Civic Buildings and Civic Space.
Civic Buildings and Civic Space shall be owned and maintained by a property owners’ association unless specifically dedicated to and accepted by the City. Any such property owner’s association shall be organized under the laws of the State. The deed conveying a Civic Building or Civic Space to a property owners’ association shall include covenants running with the land that  permanently reserve it for Civic purposes and require the association to maintain and pay all expenses associated with such Civic Building or Civic Space. 
SECTION 154.508.	
DISTRICT DENSITY 
A. Density Calculations. 
Any proposed Development Parcel Plan having an aggregate area of 80 gross acres or more, excluding any Special Districts, shall require compliance with the following District Density provisions: 
1.	All developable area within a specific District covered by the Development Parcel Plan shall be considered the Net Site Area. 
2.	Density shall be expressed in terms of Density Units per acre as specified for the area of each Character District by Table 154.508.A1 (District Density).
TABLE 154.508.A1 district density
 
Density Units/
Net Site Area of District
 
CD-3L
 4 units per acre, gross, max
 
CD-3
 6 units per acre, gross, max 
 
CD-4
 15 units per acre, gross, max 
 
CD-5
 96 units per acre, gross, max
 
SD-H
 Not Regulated
 
SD-I
 Not Regulated
 
SD-RC
 Not Regulated
 




3.	For purposes of calculating District Density:
a. the area shall include the Thoroughfares but not land assigned to Civic Zones; 
b. the quantities of the Principal Uses indicated on Table 154.508.A2 (Density Equivalencies) shall constitute the indicated number of Density Units or portion thereof.
TABLE 154.508.A2 Density equivalencies
The following quantities of Principal Uses are equivalent to the indicated number of Density Units
 
Category of Principal Use
 No. of 
Density Units
 
1 Residential/Dwelling, each Dwelling Unit
 1 Density Unit
 
1 Bed & Breakfast Dwelling
 1 Density Unit plus .5 Density Units for each guest bedroom
 
Lodging Bedroom
 .5 Density Unit
 
1500 sf. Educational/Institutional/Civic
 1 Density Unit
 
1500 sf. Medical
 1 Density Unit
 
1500 sf. Retail/Personal Service or Business/Commercial
 1 Density Unit
 
1500 sf. Office 
 1 Density Unit
 
3000 sf. Communication
 1 Density Unit
 
3000 sf. Industrial
 1 Density Unit
 
Agricultural (Any Amount)
 0 Density Unit
 
3000 sf. Transportation
 1 Density Unit
 
3000 sf. Utility
 1 Density Unit
 
3000 sf. Recreation/Entertainment
 1 Density Unit
 
Other (Any Amount)
 0 Density Unit
 
Accessory Building/ Accessory Dwelling (Any Amount)
 0 Density Unit
 
sf. = Building square feet
 




B. Maximum District Density.
1.	The Maximum Density per Character District of a Development Parcel having in the aggregate an area of 80 gross acres or more, shall not exceed that set forth in Table 154.508.A1 (District Density). 
2.	The Maximum Density for per Special District of a Development Parcel having in the aggregate an area of 80 gross acres or more shall not exceed that set forth in Table 154.508.1 (District Density).
SECTION 154.509. 
CHARACTER DISTRICTS	
A Development Parcel Plan shall designate all Character Districts within it.
For Development Parcels having a gross acreage of 80 acres or more, excluding any Special Districts, Character Districts shall be assigned in accordance with Section 154.302.B.
SECTION 154.510.	
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Special District designations are for areas which, by their intrinsic size, Use, or Configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of the applicable Character District(s). 
Special Districts shall not be used to avoid compliance with standards and requirements for Character Districts, and instead, shall be used sparingly.  
Special Districts shall be assigned in accordance with Section 154.302.D. 
SECTION 154.511.	
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS  
A Development Parcel Plan may designate any of the Special Requirements set forth in Section 154.203. 

Article VI:
administration & enforcement

SECTION 154.601. AUTHORIZATION OF zoning administrator
 166
 
SECTION 154.602. BUILDING AND LOT PLANS
 166
 
SECTION 154.603. development parcel PLANS
 166
 
SECTION 154.604. administrative waivers
 167
 
SECTION 154.605. building permits, certificates of occupancy, and sign permits
 167
 
SECTION 154.606. zoning board of appeals
 168
 
SECTION 154.607. appeals
 169
 
SECTION 154.608. VARIANCES
 169
 
SECTION 154.609. decisions interpreting the zoning ordinance oR map
 170
 
SECTION 154.610. hearing procedure
 171
 
SECTION 154.611. decisions final; appeal
 171
 
SECTION 154.612. planning commission
 171
 
SECTION 154.613. site plan review
 171
 
SECTION 154.614. planned residential development agreement
 174
 
SECTION 154.615. special use permits & special regulated use permits
 175
 
SECTION 154.616. ZONING Amendments and Map changes
 178
 
SECTION 154.617. notice OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
 180
 
SECTION 154.618. Properties in historic districts
 180
 
SECTION 154.619. nuisance per se; abatement
 181
 
SECTION 154.620. additional remedies
 181
 
SECTION 154.621. penalty
 181 
 



SECTION 154.601.
authorization OF zoning 
administrator
The Zoning Administrator and its designees shall administer and enforce this Chapter, the requirements of the Planning Commission authorized by this Chapter, the provisions of any certified Building and Lot Plan or Development Parcel Plan,  or any approved Site Plan. Additionally, the Building Official and its designees shall issue Sign Permits in accordance with this Chapter. 
The Zoning Administrator and its designees shall review and certify compliance of Building and Lot Plans, Development Parcel Plans, Site Plans, and Sign Plans with all standards and requirements of this Chapter.
SECTION 154.602.
Building and Lot Plans
A. Building and Lot Plan Required.
No new construction or exterior Alteration to an existing Building may be commenced, and no Building Permit may be issued, prior to submission of a Building and Lot Plan that complies with this Chapter, review and issuance of a Certificate of Compliance with respect to such Building and Lot Plan.
B.  Submission with Application for Building Permit.  
A Building and Lot Plan complying with this Chapter shall be submitted with each Building Permit application.  Each Building and Lot Plan so submitted shall be reviewed to determine if it is in compliance with this Chapter.
C.  Requirements.
Each Building and Lot Plan shall be prepared in accordance with and include all items described in Section 154.404.B in compliance with the standards and requirements of this Chapter and any applicable Development Parcel Plan and Site Plan. 
D. Review and Action; Issuance of Certificate of Compliance.   
A Certificate of Compliance with respect to a Building and Lot Plan shall be issued if and only if the Building and Lot Plan and proposed Building and Lot covered thereby are determined to be in compliance with the standards and requirements of this Chapter, an approved Development Parcel Plan if required, and an approved Site Plan if required.  
SECTION 154.603.
Development parcel Plans
A. Development Parcel Plan Required.
If a Development Parcel Plan is required pursuant to Section 154.502 with respect to property, no exterior Alteration to an existing Building, no new construction, Development,  or Improvement may be commenced, no Building and Lot Plan may be submitted, reviewed or have a Certificate of Compliance issued with respect thereto, no Building Permit may be issued, no Site Plan may be approved, and no District or Civic Zone classification shall be made or changed with respect to all or any part of a Development Parcel prior to submission of, review and issuance of a Certificate of Compliance with respect to a Development Parcel Plan that complies with this Chapter.
B.  Applications.  
If required by Section 154.502.A.1, a Development Parcel Plan complying with this Chapter shall be submitted with each Site Plan submitted pursuant to this Chapter.  
If required by Section 154.502.A.2, a Development Parcel Plan complying with this Chapter shall be submitted with each Zoning Map amendment application submitted pursuant to this Chapter. 
C.  Requirements.
Each Development Parcel Plan shall be prepared in accordance with and include all items described in Section 154.504.B in compliance with the standards and requirements of this Chapter.
D. Review and Action; Issuance of Certificate of Compliance.   
A Certificate of Compliance with respect to a Development Parcel Plan shall be issued if and only if the Development Parcel Plan and proposed Development covered thereby are determined to be in compliance with the standards and requirements of this Chapter. 
SECTION 154.604.
administrative waivers
Upon request of an applicant, the City Planner is authorized to grant a Waiver of any dimensional standard provided in Article IV or Article V provided that such Waiver does not deviate from the otherwise applicable standard by more than five percent (5%).  The City Planner and the Director of Public Works also are authorized to grant any Waiver specifically provided for in this Chapter.
SECTION 154.605.
BUILDING PERMITS, cERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY, and sign permits
A. Building Permit Required.  
A Building Permit must be obtained before any new construction or any exterior Alteration to an existing Building is begun. 
B.  Applications.  
A completed application for a Building Permit shall be made with the Building Official, who shall review the application to see that the Building project is in compliance with the Building Code and this Chapter.  
C.  Reliance of Certificate of Compliance and Site Plan Approval.
Each Building Permit application shall include in addition to any other applicable requirements Certificates of Compliance issued pursuant to Section 154.602.D, and if applicable, Section 154.603.D, and the Site Plan approval, if applicable.
D.  Certificate of Occupancy.
A Certificate of Occupancy must be obtained from the Building Official before occupancy of any Building that has been erected, Altered, changed, converted, or enlarged.
E. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
The Building Official may, upon the request of a holder of a valid Building Permit, issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy before the entire work is completed if the portion to be occupied prior to completion is safe and will not endanger life or public welfare. The Building Official shall specify the period during which the remaining work shall be completed. Failure of the permit holder to complete the work within the specified time shall be a violation of this Chapter. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may not be renewed by the Building Official.
F. Issuance of Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.   
A Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official if and only if the Building plans, specifications and intended Use conform to the standards, requirements, and provisions of the Building Code and this Chapter, a Building and Lot Plan, a Development Parcel Plan if required, and an approved Site Plan if required.
All reports, recommendations and reviews prescribed by this Chapter or by other public officials and agencies must also have been received and complied with. A permit or certificate shall not be issued for any illegal Use or occupancy.  
G. Sign Permit Required. 
No Sign other than an Exempt Sign may exist or be erected, installed, or maintained in the City unless it is the subject of a valid Sign Permit issued by the Building Official in accordance with this Section 154.605.  
H.  Applications.  
Sign Permit applications shall be made with the Building Official, who shall review the application to determine whether the proposed Sign is in compliance with this Chapter.
I.  Application Requirements.
Each Sign Permit application shall include a fully dimensioned Sign Plan that reflects that such Sign, the method and means of its installation, its type, and its location on the applicable Building or Lot comply with all applicable standards and requirements of this Chapter.
J. Issuance of Sign Permit.   
A Sign Permit shall be issued by the Building Official if and only if:
1.	the applicant pays the application fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the Commission, 
2.	the Building Official determines that the Sign and Sign Permit application conform to the applicable requirements of the Building Code and City and state Electrical Codes, and
3.	the Building Official has certified compliance with Section 154.414 and all other standards, requirements, and provisions of this Chapter, the approved Building and Lot Plan, a Development Parcel Plan if required, and an approved Site Plan if required.  
	
SECTION 154.606.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
A. Powers. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all powers granted by state law and this Chapter. The Zoning Board of Appeal shall keep complete minutes of its proceedings or its official actions and the vote of each member on each question. The minutes shall be filed in the City offices and shall be a matter of public record.
B. Composition. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be composed as follows:
1.	Regular Members. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular members appointed by the City Commission. One of the regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be a member of the Planning Commission.
2.	Alternate Members. The City Commission may appoint an alternate member for the same term as regular members. The alternate member may be called to serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. An alternate member serving on the Zoning Board of Appeals has the same voting rights as a regular member.
3.	Qualifications. All members shall be qualified electors of the City and shall, insofar as is possible, be representative of the entire City.
4.	Terms. The terms of office for members appointed to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be for three years, except for members serving because of their membership on the Planning Commission, whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of those bodies.
5.	Vacancies. A successor shall be appointed as soon as practicable after the term of the preceding member has expired. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
C. Meetings. 
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at other times as the Zoning Board of Appeals in its rules of procedure may specify. The Chairperson or, in the Chairperson’s absence, the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall maintain a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
D. Applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
All applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals (including applications for appeal, applications for Variances, and applications for advisory decisions interpreting this Chapter or the zoning map) shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board or the Secretary’s designee, accompanied by the applicable filing fee. The City Commission may set the amount of the filing fee by resolution.
E. Quorum. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is present.
F. Voting Requirements and Procedures. 
The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is necessary to: 
1.	reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body;
2.	decide in favor of the applicant on a matter upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass under this Chapter; or 
3.	grant a Variance. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall specifically state the grounds of any determination, which shall be included in the minutes.
G. Assistance from City Departments. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may call on City departments for assistance in the performance of its duties. 
SECTION 154.607.  
APPEALS
A. Appellate Authority. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may decide appeals made by an applicant or any aggrieved party from any decision of the Planning Commission, Building Official, Zoning Administrator, City Planner, or any other City official administering this Chapter. No appeal may be made to the Board of a decision or other action of the City Commission.
B. Application to Appeal. 
An application of appeal shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Board or designee within 30 days of the decision being appealed. Applications must specifically state the grounds for the appeal in a manner that explains why the decision being appealed was in error. Applications should not include new information that was not provided to the initial decision maker.
C. Standard for Deciding Appeal. 
In deciding an appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall affirm the decision being appealed unless such decision is not authorized by law, and is not supported by competent, material and substantial evidence. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider only the information provided to the initial decision maker. If the Zoning Board of Appeals finds the record inadequate to make the review required by this Section or finds that additional material evidence exists that with good reason was not presented, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall order further review by the initial decision maker on conditions that the Zoning Board of Appeals considers proper.
D. Stay of Enforcement. 
An appeal stays all action of the decision appealed, unless the City official, board or commission whose decision is being appealed certifies to the Board that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the stay may only be implemented by a restraining order granted by the Board or by the Circuit Court.
SECTION 154.608.
VARIANCES
A. Variance Authority. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant Variances upon finding based on reasonable evidence that the Variance will not be detrimental to Adjacent property or the surrounding neighborhood and will not impair the intent and purpose of this Chapter. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a Variance.
The Board’s consideration of a Variance request shall be limited to the specific standard, requirement, or Use for which the Variance is requested and shall not include any other aspect of an application.  
The Board cannot grant use variances.
B. Non-Use (Dimensional) Variances.
To obtain a non-Use or dimensional Variance, the applicant must show practical difficulty by demonstrating that all of the following conditions exist:
1.	That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question or to the intended Use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties or classes or Uses in the same District or Civic Zone; exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include:
a.	Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this Chapter;
b.	Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, Building or Structure; or
c.	Exceptional Use or Development of the property Adjacent to the property in question.
2.	That such a Variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same District or Civic Zone and in the vicinity.
3.	That the Variance request is not one where the specific conditions pertaining to the property are so general or recurrent in nature as to make the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions reasonably practicable.
4.	That authorization of such Variance will not be a substantial detriment to Adjacent property.
5.	That authorization of the Variance will not materially impair the purposes of this Chapter or the public interest.
6.	That the need for the Variance is not created by any action of the applicant or previous owner.
C. Conditions. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose reasonable conditions on the granting of a Variance.
1.	Conditions may be imposed for the following purposes:
a.	to ensure that the affected public services and facilities will accommodate the change in the land Use or activity;
b.	to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy;
c.	to ensure compatibility with Adjacent Uses of land; and
d. 	to promote the Use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
2.	Any condition imposed shall do all of the following:
a.	be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare or the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land, Use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners Adjacent to the proposed land Use or activity, and the community as a whole;
b.	be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed Use or activity; 
c.	be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Chapter; 
d.	be related to the standards established for the land Use or activity under consideration; and
e. be necessary to insure compliance with those standards. 
	The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of land Use or activity Variance shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the Board and the landowner. The Board shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions.
D.  Performance Guarantee.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may require a Performance Guarantee pursuant to Section 154.115.A, as the Board deems necessary, to compel compliance with and performance of all conditions incident to Variances granted by the Board. Such Performance Guarantees shall not be for amounts greater than the reasonable cost of performing or complying with the conditions attached to such Variance.
E.  Variance Implementation.
A Variance granted under the provisions of this Chapter shall be implemented within one year. Failure to initiate the work authorized in one year will void the Variance.
SECTION 154.609.
DECISIONS INTERPRETING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OR MAP
A. Applications Requesting Advisory Decisions. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide applications requesting advisory decisions regarding the proper interpretation of this Chapter or the zoning map, but only when such application is submitted by one of the following:
1.	The City Commission;
2.	Any City board or commission created by the Charter, any City ordinance, or any state statute;
3.	Any City official whose position is created by the City Charter, any City ordinance, or any state statute; or
4.	An interested property owner whose property is affected by the decision (or may be affected, depending on the proper interpretation) in a manner not common to other property owners in the City. 
B. Standards for Interpreting Zoning Map. 
When rendering any decision involving the interpretation of the zoning map, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall use the following standards:
1.	Zoning District and Civic Zone boundary lines shall follow Lot Lines and the center lines of Alleys, streets, rights-of-way or watercourses. 
2.	With respect to property that is not subdivided, or where a zoning District or Civic Zone divides a recorded Lot, the location of any boundary shall be determined by use of the map scale.
3.	If after application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty still exists as to the exact location of a zoning District or Civic Zone boundary, the Board shall determine and fix the location of line in a reasonable manner to best accomplish the purposes of this Chapter.
SECTION 154.610.
HEARING PROCEDURE
A.  Notice.
1.	Upon receiving an application or request, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing. A notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation no less than 15 days prior to the hearing. The publication notice shall include the time and location of the hearing. Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. Notice shall also be sent by mail to all Persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all Structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction.
2.	The notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the application or request will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification under this Section. The notice shall describe the request and indicate that the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. The notice shall also list when and where the request will be considered and indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained.
B.  Recess.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may recess a hearing to gather additional information, to make site inspections, or to engage in any activities as may be necessary to make a proper decision on the matter before it. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reconvene the hearing within 30 days of the original hearing date. The reconvened hearing date shall be announced at the original hearing. This announcement shall constitute proper notification.
SECTION 154.611.
DECISIONS FINAL; Appeal
1.	The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final; provided, however, that a party aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Circuit Court for Isabella County, except when otherwise required by the Zoning and Land Use Agreement between the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan and the City, entered by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, Northern Division, Case No. 05-10296-BC, on December 17, 2010, in which case an aggrieved party may appeal to the appropriate tribal court of the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan. Upon appeal, the court shall review the record and decision of the Board of Appeals to insure that the decision:
a.	complies with the constitution and laws of the state; 
b.	is based upon proper procedure; is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record; and 
c.	represents the reasonable exercise or discretion granted by law to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
2.	An appeal under this Section 154.611 shall be filed within 30 days after the Zoning Board of Appeals certifies its decision in writing or approves the minutes of the decision.
SECTION 154.612.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The City’s Planning Commission shall perform all duties and functions assigned to planning commissions under state law, this zoning ordinance, and any other applicable City ordinance.
SECTION 154.613.
SITE PLAN REVIEW
A.  Planning Commission Authorized.
In accordance with Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Act 110 of 2006), the Planning Commission is empowered to review Site Plans for any Building or Structure.   The Planning Commission may delegate this authority to the City Planner with respect to proposals not requiring a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit.  No  Building or Structure may be erected or Altered unless a Site Plan has been submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with this Section.
B.  Pre-Application Meeting.
Unless waived in writing by the City Planner, an applicant shall participate in a pre-application meeting with City staff prior to filing an application for Site Plan approval.
C.  Action on Site Plan.
1.	A Site Plan shall be approved upon a finding that:
a.	it contains the information required by this Chapter and is in compliance with the conditions, standards and requirements of or imposed pursuant to this Chapter, Chapter 50 (Solid Waste), Chapter 51 (Sewer), Chapter 52 (Water), Chapter 54 (Stormwater Management), Chapter 93 (Fire Code), Chapter 155 (Land Division), Chapter 153 (Subdivision Regulations), Chapter 156 (Local Historic Districts), the City Standard Special Provisions and Details, other local planning documents, other applicable ordinances, and state and federal statutes; and
b.	the City Planner has certified compliance of the Site Plan with this Chapter, all applicable Building and Lot Plan standards and requirements, and any applicable Development Parcel Plan standards and requirements.
2.	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained or implied in Section 154.613.C.1, the following may be prohibited:
a.	Development of property within the bounds of a future road, Civic Space or other public facility shown in the Master Plan or other planning documents; and
 b.	Development that does not comply with provisions of Ordinance No. 596, Flood Plain Management, City of Mt. Pleasant. (See Chapter 151).
c.	Development without on-site vehicular parking unless the application is accompanied by information that demonstrates there is sufficient parking available either on-site or in the vicinity of the site to reasonably meet the parking demands for the site as developed.
3.	If a Site Plan is approved,  the Site Plan, as approved, shall become part of the record of approval, and subsequent actions relating to the activity authorized shall be consistent with the approved Site Plan, unless a change conforming to this Chapter receives the mutual agreement of the landowner and the reviewing authority that approved the Site Plan.
4.	Decisions conditionally approving or rejecting Site Plans shall be based upon the standards and requirements of this Chapter.
D.  Types of Improvements/Applications Requiring Site Plan Approval:
The following types of Improvements and/or applications shall be subject to Site Plan Review and approval:
1.	New Buildings;
2.	Additions to Buildings which increase the exterior dimensions or the Usable Floor Area;
3.	Alterations or modifications to the site such as changes to parking layout, Driveways, landscaped areas, Screening walls, and public walkways; 
4.	Any Development or application involving a Development Parcel; and
5.	Any other Improvement or application for which a Site Plan is specifically required by this Chapter.
Single family residential homes are exempt from site plan review.
E. Application Requirements & Procedures.
1.  	Except as otherwise provided for a Site Plan for a specific type of application, an application for Site Plan Review shall be signed by the applicant. If the Site Plan includes one acre of land or more, the Site Plan must be sealed by a licensed surveyor, engineer, architect or community planner. The Planning Commission or City Planner may waive this requirement for due cause. Site Plans shall include the following, fully dimensioned and presented at a scale no smaller than 1”=50’ unless a different scale is specified:
a.	All items shown on any applicable Development Parcel Plan;
b.	A title block, including: 
i.	The address and legal description of the site; 
ii.	Names, addresses and telephone numbers for the applicant(s) and owner(s);
iii.	Current zoning classification and use for the property and adjacent properties;
iv.	North arrow; and
v. 	Scale.
c.	Location of all existing and proposed:
i.	Property boundaries;
ii.	Buildings within 50’ of the site, including proposed uses, materials, and elevations for buildings on the site;
iii.	Streets and alleys within 50’ of the site;
iv.	Driveways;
v.	Rights-of-way; and
vi.	Easements.
d.	Locations, dimensions, and design of:
i.	Parking lots and parking spaces, including a dimensioned layout, proposed grades, and pavement section;
ii.	Sidewalks;
iii.	Trash receptacles/enclosures; and
iv.	Signage. 
e.	Location, height, and materials associated with the following:
i.	Screens 
ii.	Streetscreens;
iii.	Walls and fences;
iv.	Landscaping, including proposed plant species and size at time of planting; and
v.	Exterior lighting.
f.	All information deemed necessary by the Division of Public Works and Division of Public Safety to determine compliance with all applicable City codes and ordinances.
g. 	Any other items required by this Chapter with respect to any Site Plan required for a specific type application.
h.	Any other items deemed necessary by the reviewing authority and specifically identified to the applicant in writing.
i.	For all projects for which no vehicular parking is proposed, except for those located within the Central Business District, a parking plan shall be provided which shall include the following minimum information:
i.	Highest peak hour trip generation for all proposed uses calculated using the rates provided in the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual of most recent adoption.
ii.	Anticipated actual peak hour trips, if higher or lower than the rate identified in part i above along with a narrative explanation of the discrepancy. 
iii.	The quantity and location of all public parking (structures, lots, and on-street) within 300 feet of the project boundaries, if available.
iv.	The location of any proposed shared private parking, if available.
2.	An application for Site Plan Review must be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Commission at least 21 days prior to the meeting, or such lesser time as may be set by the Planning Commission at which time it is to be considered. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a non-refundable fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City Commission to cover the cost of processing the application. A procedural outline and application for approval of a Site Plan shall be available at the office of the City Planner.
3.	An application which is incomplete or otherwise not in compliance with this Chapter shall be returned to the applicant. No application shall be processed until properly prepared and submitted and all required fees paid in full.
4.	A copy of the proposed Site Plan shall be forwarded to the Division of Public Works (DPW) and Division of Public Safety (DPS). The DPW and DPS shall provide written comments to the reviewing authority for its consideration during Site Plan Review, based on the technical requirements of this Chapter and the construction standards of the City.
5.	If a Site Plan is approved by the Planning Commission, the Chairperson or the City Planner shall sign the copies of the plans, forwarding one each to the Building Official, Director of Public Works, the Director of Public Safety, the City Planner, the applicant and the Planning Commission files.
6.	In instances where the City Planner is authorized to approve Site Plans, the City Planner shall provide subsequent reports to the Planning Commission on these plan approvals.
7.	A departure from the approved Site Plan will void the Site Plan approval and any related Building Permit and place the applicant in violation of this Chapter unless a change conforming to this Chapter receives the mutual agreement of the applicant and the Planning Commission or City Planner.
8.	Site Plan approval shall be valid for one year unless a Building Permit for such Development is obtained and construction proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such Building Permit. An extension of one year may be granted by the Planning Commission upon a letter of request by the petitioner. In the event of such extension, the Planning Commission may review the Site Plan in accordance with any subsequent zoning changes that have occurred since the initial approval when it considers an extension request.
F. Performance Guarantees.
1.	In accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006, the Planning Commission may require a Performance Guarantee pursuant to Section 154.115.A acceptable to the Planning Commission covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with the project be deposited with the City Finance Director or Treasurer to insure faithful completion of the improvements.
2.	Solely for purposes of Section 154.613.E.1, “improvements” means those features and actions associated with the project which are considered necessary by the Planning Commission to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the City residents and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, Sidewalks, Screening, landscaping and drainage and “improvements” does not include the entire project. The Performance Guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the permit authorizing the project. The City shall rebate any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements made as work progresses.
section 154.614.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT 
A. PRD Agreement Remains in Effect.  
Any property subject to a Planned Residential Development Agreement as of the effective date of this Chapter shall remain subject to such Agreement in accordance with its terms unless such property is included within a Character District, Special District, or Civic Zone pursuant to the approved Zoning Map or approved Zoning Map amendment.  In such case, such property shall be regulated in accordance with the standards and requirements applicable to such District or Civic Zone, as applicable. 
B. Compliance.  
No Development may take place on any property subject to a Planned Residential Development Agreement, nor may any Use thereof be made, except in accordance with the applicable approved Planned Residential Development plan and Planned Residential Development Agreement or in accordance with a Planning Commission approved amendment thereto, unless the plan is terminated as provided herein.
C. Termination Prior to Development. 
An approved Planned Residential Development plan and Planned Residential Development Agreement may be terminated by the applicant or its successors or assigns, prior to commencement of Development of or within the area involved, by filing with the City and recording in the Isabella County Records an affidavit so stating. The approval of the plan shall terminate upon said recording.
D. Termination After Commencement of Development.  
No approved plan shall be terminated after Development commences except with the approval of the Planning Commission, the City Commission and all parties in interest in the land.
E. Termination by City.  
Within a period of two years following the approval of the PRD by the Planning Commission, final plats and/or Site Plans for a specific project area embraced within the Planned Residential Development must be submitted as hereinafter provided. If such plats or Site Plans have not been submitted and approved within the two-year period, the right to develop under the approved overall PRD plan may be terminated by the City.
F.  Zoning Upon Termination.
Upon termination of an approved Planned Residential Development plan and/or Planned Residential Development Agreement, the property covered thereby shall forthwith and without further action convert to Special District SD-A unless and until the zoning classification of such property shall be changed pursuant to Section 154.616.
G. Issuance of Building Permits. 
Before any Building Permits shall be issued for Buildings and Structures within the area of Planned Residential Development, final plats or Site Plans for a project area shall be submitted to the Planning Commission Secretary for review and appropriate recommendation or approval by the Planning Commission of the following:
1.	Said Site Plans and plats shall be fully dimensioned and shall show a fully scaled plan view of all Buildings (except single-family detached Dwellings), all public rights-of-way, and private streets, areas within each project area and the proposed ultimate density thereof, parking areas, utilities, churches, schools and areas to be set aside for the use of public or by the residents within the Development (scale: 1” = 50’). 		
2.	The proposed topography (contour interval of not more than two feet) shall be superimposed on all plats and plans (scale: 1” =50’).
3.	Floor plans typical of all Residential Buildings except detached single-family shall be submitted and the Site Plan shall indicate which floor plan is applicable to each such Building.	
4.	Each final plan and/or Site Plan submitted within the Planned Residential Development shall, either individually or in combination with previously approved project areas, meet the standards set forth in Sections 154.613-154.616.
H. Planning Commission Review of Final Plats and Plans.  
Before approving any final plan or recommending approval of any final plat to the Commission, the Planning Commission shall determine:
1.	That all portions of the project are shown upon the approved plan for the Planned Residential Development for use by the public or the residents of lands within the Planned Residential Development have been committed to such Uses in accordance with the Planned Residential Development contract.	
2.	That the final plats or Site Plans are in substantial conformity with the approved plan for the PRD.	
3.	The provisions have been made in accordance with the PRD Agreement to provide for the financing of any Improvements shown in the project area plan for open spaces and common areas which are to be provided by the applicant and that maintenance of such Improvements is assured in accordance with the PRD contract.
4.	That a dedication of roads shall have been made so as to cause continuity of roadway access between the Adjacent major thoroughfare and ingress and egress to all private Development within the project area plan.
I. Development Not Completed within Three Years.  
If Development of approved final plats or Site Plans is not substantially completed within three years after approval, further final plat or Site Plan submittals under the Planned Residential Development shall cease until the part in question is completed or cause can be shown for not completing same.
J. Fees.  
Fees for review of Site Plans shall be established by resolution of the City Commission.
K. Changes or Amendments. 
Any changes or amendments requested shall terminate approval of the overall plan until such changes or amendments have been reviewed and approved as in the first instance. In instances where modifications are necessary to the plan, the Building Official may request that the plan be again submitted for review if, in his/her judgment, a substantial change is being made in the plan.
section 154.615.
SPECIAL USE PERMITS & Special 
Regulated Use permits
A. Special Use  Permits & Special Regulated Use Permits.
A Special Use Permit or a Special Regulated Use Permit, as applicable, shall be granted if the Planning Commission finds that the proposed Use conforms, or can be altered to conform, to all of the applicable conditions and requirements of Section 154.410, as well as all criteria for approval under this Section 154.615. 
B. Criteria for Special Use Permits and Special Regulated Use Permits.
1.	This Chapter imposes certain general requirements on the Special Use or Special Regulated Use requested by the applicant. Additional conditions and requirements with which the applicant must comply are set forth in Section 154.410.B for Special Uses and Section 154.410.C for Special Regulated Uses.  For each condition or requirement, the applicant must explain, in writing with supporting evidence, how the proposed Special Use or Special Regulated Use satisfies such condition or requirement. With respect to any condition or requirement where there is potential for negative or adverse effects, Applicant shall propose measures to mitigate such effects.
2.	The general requirements imposed by this Chapter are as follows:
a.	The Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall be one listed as a permitted Special Use (“SUP”) or Special Regulated Use (“SRU”) for the District or Civic Zone in which the property is located and the Use shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Chapter and the objectives of the currently adopted Master Plan.
b.	The Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall comply with all applicable standard and requirements of this Chapter. The Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall be operated in a manner compatible with surrounding land Uses within 300 feet measured Lot Line to Lot Line. Compatibility includes, but is not limited to, hours of operation and environmental effects (e.g. noise, light, traffic, intensity of Use, density). 
c.	Applicant shall demonstrate how the Use is compatible with surrounding land Uses.
d.	The Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall not interfere with the general enjoyment of the surrounding area (defined as Adjacent and/or abutting properties including those properties separated by streets, Alleys or other rights-of-way).
e.	The applicant shall indicate how the Special Use or Special Regulated Use will not have an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood within 300 feet of its Lot Line in regards to traffic, noise, architectural compatibility, hours of operation, light, odors, and the like.
f.	The Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall not be hazardous to the Adjacent property, or involve Uses, activities, materials or equipment which will be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of Persons or property through the excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odor, fumes or glare.
g.	The Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall be adequately served by the existing capacity of essential public facilities and services, or it shall be demonstrated that the Person responsible for the proposed Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall be able to continually provide adequately for the services and facilities deemed essential to the Use under consideration.
C. Conditions for Special Use Permits & Special Regulated Use Permits.
1.	The Planning Commission may impose conditions on Special Uses and Special Regulated Uses pursuant to MCL Section 125.3504(4) to insure compliance with the standards of this Chapter. Such conditions shall be considered an integral part of the Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit and shall be enforced by the Building Official.
2.	The Planning Commission may require that a Performance Guarantee pursuant to Section 154.115.A be furnished to insure compliance with all requirements for the Special Use or Special Regulated Use.
3.	A Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit shall become effective at the time the application is approved by the Planning Commission, and shall be valid regardless of change of ownership, provided all terms and conditions of the permit are met by subsequent owners or users.
4.	In the event more than one year has elapsed and Development has not begun, the Planning Commission shall review the permit in relation to the standards and requirements currently in effect. If the permit is still in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter and there has been no change in the conditions affecting the appropriateness of the Special Use or Special Regulated Use, the permit shall remain valid. If there have been changes in either this Chapter or conditions affecting the appropriateness of the Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use, the permit shall become void.
5.	A Use for which a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit has been granted shall be considered a conforming Use provided the permit was issued in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter and all conditions required by the Planning Commission have been complied with and maintained.
6.	A Building Permit shall not be issued until the Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit has been authorized by the Planning Commission. 
7.	Property subject to a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit may not be used or occupied until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued.
D. Application Procedures.
1.	Any Person owning or having an interest in the property for which a Special Use or Special Regulated Use is to be proposed may file with the Secretary of the Planning Commission (or the Secretary’s designee) an application accompanied by a non-refundable fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City Commission to cover the cost of processing the application.
2.	A Site Plan is required for all applications for Special Use Permits and Special Regulated Use Permits where site work is also proposed.  The Site Plan must show, at a minimum, the items listed under Section 154.613.E. The Site Plan shall be considered integral to the Special Use Permit approval.
3.	The application shall also include the following:
a.	Unless the Use is a public necessity, a written statement explaining how the Special Use or Special Regulated Use shall not substantially injure the financial value of surrounding properties, and shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate Development or Use of Adjacent properties. 
b.	A written statement addressing each of the conditions or requirements for the Special Use, Special Regulated Use, or permit,  as set forth in Section 154.410 and this Section 154.615.
c.	When requested by the City’s Planning Department, or a majority of the Planning Commission, additional information shall be provided by the applicant such as:
i.	Traffic impact analysis;
ii.	Detailed parking and site circulation analysis;
iii.	Photographs of the property and surrounding areas;
iv.	Environmental impact statement;
v.	Landscape plan;
vi.	Any other items deemed necessary; and
vii.	An appraisal to indicate the effect of the proposed Use on the financial value of properties within 300 feet of the subject property.
3.	Notice that a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit has been requested shall be published. A notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation no less than 15 days prior to the hearing. The publication notice shall include the time and location of the hearing. Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. Notice shall also be sent to all Persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all Structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction.
4.	The notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification under this Section. The notice shall describe the request and indicate that the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. The notice shall also list when and where the request will be considered and indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained. 
5.	At the time and place set forth in the notice, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing before a decision on the Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit request is made. The Planning Commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions, requests for Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit approval. 
6.	The Planning Commission may impose conditions to ensure compliance with the conditions, standards and requirements of this Chapter and to protect the public interest and welfare. Such conditions shall be considered an integral part of the Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit. Such conditions may include, but need not be limited to:
a.	More restrictive Sign standards;
b.	Additional Open Space, landscaping or Screening requirements;
c.	Additional yard requirements;
d.	Special lighting requirements;
e.	Time limitations on hours of operation;
f.	Additional parking, off-street parking, and loading requirements;
g.	Additional utility, drainage and public facility requirements;
h.	Additional right-of-way and public access requirements;
i.	Additional requirements to ensure compatibility with the Master Plan; and
j.	Conditions for renewal, extension, expiration, and/or revocation of Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit.
	The decision to attach additional conditions shall specify the basis for the decision. The decision on a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit shall be incorporated in a statement of findings and conclusions relative to the Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit, which specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed.
7.	Upon approval by the Planning Commission, the City Planner shall issue a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit, as applicable, to the applicant.
8.	Within 30 days following the decision on a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit application, an applicant or any aggrieved party, including any governmental body or agency, may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon the filing of an appeal, the application and all relevant documents and testimony and the findings and decision of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
9.	Conditions and requirements applicable to the approval of a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the Planning Commission and the landowner.
E. Revocation. 
The City Planner or Building Official shall make periodic investigations of Buildings and Lots with respect to which Special Use Permits or  Special Regulated Use Permits have been approved. A Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit may be revoked if conditions or requirements imposed by this Chapter or the Planning Commission are not met, provided the following steps have been undertaken:
1.	Upon verification of non-compliance by the Building Official or City Planner, a notification shall be sent to the property owner informing them of the non-compliance. The owner shall be notified by certified mail and given 30 days from the mailing date to bring the property into compliance.
2.	If the property is not brought into compliance within 30 days of mailing date of the notice of non-compliance, the City Planner shall send written communication to the Zoning Board of Appeals requesting a public hearing be held to revoke the Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit.
3.	The hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals to consider revocation of a Special Use Permit or Special Regulated Use Permit shall follow the provisions of Section 154.610.
section 154.616.
ZONING AMENDMENTS & MAP CHANGES
A.  Amendments, Supplements or Changes. 
In accordance with the provisions of Public Act 110 of 2006, the City Commission may amend, supplement or change by ordinance, the boundaries of Districts or the regulations herein established.
B. Procedure for Requests for Zoning Amendment.
1.	Requests for zoning amendments by either a text modification or map reclassification shall include:
a.	Name of Person or Persons requesting zoning amendment. The applicant shall be the record owner of the property or its duly authorized representative. If the applicant is not the record owner, the record owner’s notarized authorization of such applicant must be provided with the application.
b.	Legal description of property involved with the request for a map amendment.
c.	Description of the zoning change desired.
d.	Reasons for requesting zoning amendment.
e.	If a map reclassification, a proposed Zoning Map amendment, including, and if the property includes a Development Parcel or any part thereof, a Development Parcel Plan.
f.	A certification by the City Planner that the proposed Zoning Map amendment and any required Development Parcel Plan comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
2.	Two copies of the request and payment of fee (from a schedule determined by resolution of the City Commission) must be filed with the City Planner. The City Planner shall forward one copy of the request for zoning amendment to the Planning Commission and one to the City Commission. 
3.	At least one public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be held by the Planning Commission.
a.	A notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation no less than 15 days prior to the hearing. The publication notice shall include the time and location of the hearing. Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. Notice shall also be sent to all Persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all Structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. 
b.	The notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification under this Section. 
	The notice shall do all of the following:
i.	describe the request, indicate the property that is the subject of the request
ii.	a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist with the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used;
iii.	list when and where the request will be considered and indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained.
	An affidavit of mailing of each such notice shall be maintained.
4.	If an individual property or ten or fewer Adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the Planning Commission shall give notice of the proposed rezoning in the same manner required in Section 154.616.B.3.
5.	If 11 or more Adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the Planning Commission shall give a notice of the proposed rezoning in the same manner required in Section 154.616.B.3, except that the requirement that notice be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered and notice being sent to Persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property nor to the occupants of all Structures within 300 feet regardless of whether the property is located in the zoning jurisdiction is not required.
6.	In the case of a map amendment, notice to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property proposed to be changed shall be given.
7.	The contents of the notice shall be as follows:
a.	Time and place of the public hearing.
b.	A brief description of the change in the text (if applicable).
c.	The street address and legal description of the property for which change is requested, the present zoning of the property and designation of the zoning made in an amendment request.
8.	A hearing shall be given to any Person at the time and place set forth in the notice.
9.	Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit its reports to the City Commission, along with a summary of the comments presented at the public hearing. The report shall include a recommendation as to whether the amendment should be passed as submitted, amended and passed, or rejected.
10.	After receipt of the report of the Planning Commission, the City Commission may refer the proposed amendment back to the Planning Commission for further report or shall schedule a public hearing. This public hearing shall be preceded by mailed notice as required in Section 154.616.B.3.  A copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the Mt. Pleasant Airport manager not less than 15 days prior to the public hearing.
11.	Following the public hearing, the CIty Commission may adopt the proposed amendment, refer the proposed amendment back to the Planning Commission with recommended suggestions for further report, adopt the proposed amendment with such changes as it deems appropriate, or reject the proposed amendment.
12.	Upon presentation of a protest petition, an amendment to this Chapter which is the object of the petition shall be passed only by a five-sevenths vote of the membership of the City Commission. The protest petition shall be presented to the City Commission before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall be signed by one of the following:
a.	The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included in the proposed change; or
b.	The owners of at least 20% of the land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change. 
c.	For purposes of the protest, publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20% land area requirement.
13.	Within 15 days after adoption of an amendment, either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment, and its effective date, the time and place where a copy of the amendment may be purchased or inspected, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
C.  Criteria for Amendment of the Official Zoning Map.
In considering any petition for an amendment to the official zoning map, the Planning Commission and City Commission shall consider the following criteria in making their respective findings, recommendations and decisions:
1.	Consistency with the goals, policies, and future land use map of the City’s Master Plan, including any sub-area or corridor studies. If conditions have changed since the Master Plan was adopted, consistency with recent Development trends in the area shall be considered.
2.	Compatibility of the site’s physical, geological, hydrological and other environmental features with the host of Uses permitted in the proposed zoning District or Civic Zone.
3.	Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return on investment through developing the property with one of the Uses permitted under the current zoning.
4.	The compatibility of all the potential Uses allowed in the proposed District with surrounding Uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of Use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values.
5.	The capacity of City utilities and services sufficient to accommodate the Uses permitted in the requested District without compromising the health, safety and welfare of the City. 
6.	The apparent demand for the types of Uses permitted in the requested District in the City in relation to the amount of land in the City currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand.
7.	The boundaries of the requested rezoning District are reasonable in relationship to surroundings and construction on the site will be able to meet the dimensional regulations for the District listed in the schedule of regulations.
8.	If a rezoning is appropriate, the requested District is considered  to be more appropriate from the City’s perspective than another District.
9.	If the request is for a specific Use, is rezoning the land more appropriate than amending the list of permitted Uses or Special Permitted Uses in the current District to allow the Use?
10.The requested rezoning will not create an isolated and unplanned spot zone.
11.The request has not previously been submitted within the past one year unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided.
12.Other factors deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission and the City Commission.
section 154.617.  
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
The City Planner shall provide notice of any public hearings relating to zoning matters in compliance with the applicable requirements of state law and any additional requirements imposed in this Chapter.
section 154.618.
PROPERTIES IN Historic Districts
A property in a historic district as provided in Chapter 156 of the City Code shall comply with the requirements for approval of a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed, as applicable, from the Commission, in addition to any applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance.
section 154.619.
NUISANCE PER SE; ABATEMENT
Any Development, Building, Structure, or Improvement commenced, constructed, erected, Altered, demolished, razed, or converted, or any Use carried on in violation of any provision of this Chapter or in violation of any approved Site Plan, certified Development Parcel Plan, or certified Building and Lot Plan is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Any court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated.
section 154.620.
ADDITIONAL REMEDIES
The Building Official and Code Enforcement Officers may issue appearance tickets in accordance with MCL § 764.9c, as amended, or take any appropriate legal action to prevent any erection, construction, Alteration, repair, maintenance or Use of any Development, Building, Structure, Improvement,   or premises constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter; to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; or to prevent any unlawful act, conduct, business or Use in or about such premises.
section 154.621.  
PENALTY
Any owner, agent, contractor, lessor or occupant of the Development, Building, Structure, Improvement, or premises where a violation of the provisions of this Chapter has been committed or exists shall be held responsible for a municipal civil infraction and prosecuted in accordance with the Municipal Civil Infractions Ordinance. 
The fine for violation of a municipal civil infraction under this Chapter shall be $50; the second violation, $100; and the third or any subsequent violation within any one calendar year, $250. In addition, the City shall be reimbursed for any costs incurred by the City in causing any work to be performed which the respondent has failed to perform. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
A Person or agency of government that violates Section 154.618 is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.00.
A Person or agency of government that violates Section 154.618 may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated or demolished. 

page left intentionally blank

Article VII: 
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Chapter, capitalized terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Other capitalized terms are defined within the text of this Chapter.
Terms not defined in this Chapter and uncapitalized terms shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
Accessory Building:  a Building occupied or devoted to an Accessory Use.  
Accessory Use.  any Use which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the Principal Use of a Lot or parcel of land, located on the same Lot or parcel of land as the Principal Use.
Address Sign: Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Adjacent: having any distance of real property boundary in common with another property, or being separated from the other property boundary by a right-of-way, Alley, or Easement.  
Adult Bookstore: a retail establishment that meets one or more of the following criteria:
1.	Has 25% or more of its stock for sale or rent books, magazines, or other periodicals that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specific Anatomical Areas”;
2.	Devotes 25% or more of its display area or floor space, excluding aisles and storage areas, to the sale or display of such materials; or
3.	Receives in any one month period 25% or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of such materials.  
Adult Entertainment: any conduct which presents material by books, films, slides or the like or by live presentation which includes services to the patron of an establishment, which material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas”. 
Allee: a regularly spaced and aligned row of trees usually planted along a Thoroughfare or Path.
Alley:  generally, a vehicular way, which affords secondary access to abutting property, which may or may not be dedicated to public use; not intended for general traffic circulation.  See also Rear Alley.
Alteration/Altered: any change, addition, diminution, or modification in construction of the structural members of a Structure, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders.
  
Arcade: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Avenue: the Thoroughfare Type described as such in Table 154.505.B (Thoroughfare Types - Summary).
Awning Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Band Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Basement:  that portion of a Building having more than half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Bed and Breakfast Dwelling: See Dwelling, Bed and Breakfast.
Bicycle Lane: a dedicated lane for cycling within a Thoroughfare, demarcated by striping. 
Bicycle Route: a Thoroughfare suitable for the shared use of bicycles and automobiles moving at low speeds. 
Bicycle Trail: a bicycle way running independently of a vehicular Thoroughfare.
Blade Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Block: the aggregate of private Lots, Passages, and Alleys, circumscribed by Thoroughfares, or where applicable, circumscribed by Thoroughfares, Civic Space, and/or waterbodies. 


Board:  the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Boarding Dwelling: See Dwelling.
Building: any Structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and used or built for the shelter of Persons, animals, or other property.
Building and Lot Plan: a plan complying with and submitted pursuant to Sections 154.402-154.404 of this Code.
Building Element: any component or part of a Building. 
Buildings of Value: Buildings which are worthy of preservation, due to any of a variety of relevant considerations, including, without limitation, architectural significance, contribution to an overall setting or streetscape, historical significance, or otherwise of a character defining a particular District such that preservation or incorporation into a Development Plan and/or Building and Lot Plan could be deemed important to the maintenance of the character of such District.
Business/Commercial: the category of those Principal Uses listed under “Business/Commercial” in Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use).
Central Business District: the Development Area District described in the most recent Central Business District Improvements Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan of the City.
Certificate of Compliance: a certificate issued with respect to a submission pursuant to this Chapter, which certifies that such submission complies with the applicable requirements under this Chapter.
Character District: one of several areas on a Zoning Map to which certain Character District Development, Lot and Building standards are applied. See Table 154.301.E (Character District Descriptions).
Child Care Center: See Child Care Organization.
Child Care Organization: as licensed and regulated by the state under Public Act 116 of 1973, being MCL §§ 722.111 through 722.128 and the associated rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services, a governmental or nongovernmental organization having as its principal function the receiving of minor children for care, maintenance, training, and supervision, notwithstanding that educational instruction may be given. Child Care Organization includes organizations commonly described as child caring institutions, child placing agencies, children’s camps, child care centers, day care centers, nursery schools, parent cooperative preschools, foster homes, group homes, or day care homes. Child Care Organization does not include a governmental or nongovernmental organization that does either of the following:
1.	care exclusively to minors who have been emancipated by court order pursuant to MCL § 722.4.
2.	care exclusively to Persons who are 18 years of age or older and to minors who have been emancipated by court order pursuant to MCL § 722.4
Such organizations shall be further defined as follows:
1.	Child Care Center or Day Care Center:  a facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. Child Care Center or Day Care Center includes a facility that provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center. Child Care Center or Day Care Center does not include any of the following:
a.	a Sunday school, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not more than three hours per day for an indefinite period, or not more than eight hours per day for a period not to exceed four weeks during a 12-month period. 
b.	a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not more than three hours while Persons responsible for the children are attending religious services.
2. 	Foster Family Home: a Private Home in which one but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the adoption code, Public Act 288 of 1939, Chapter X, being MCL §§ 710.21 to 710.70, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
3. 	Foster Family Group Home: a Private Home in which more than four but fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to Public Act 288 of 1939, Chapter X, being MCL §§ 710.21 to 710.70, are provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
4. 	Family Day Care Home:  a Private Home in which at least one minor child, but fewer than seven minor children, are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family Day Care Home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
5.  	Group Day Care Home:  a Private Home in which more than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group Day Care Home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
6.	Private Home: a private residence in which the licensee or registrant permanently resides as a member of the household, which residency is not contingent upon caring for children or employment by a licensed or approved child placing agency. Private Home includes a full-time Foster Family home, a full-time Foster Family Group Home, a Group Day Care Home, or a Family Day Care Home.
City Planner: the person designated by the City Manager to serve the City as such.
Civic: the term describing activities, Uses, purposes and governmental or not-for-profit organizations which are dedicated to arts, culture, education, religion, recreation, government, transit, municipal parking, gardening, horticulture, public gathering, assembly or meeting.
Civic Building: a Building operated by a not-for-profit organization or governmental entity dedicated to Civic activities, Uses, and purposes.  See also Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards).
Civic Space: an outdoor area dedicated for Civic Use.  See Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary). 
Civic Zone: an area on a Zoning Map designated for Civic Building(s) and/or Civic Space(s).   
Commercial Message: a message conveyed by an economically motivated speaker, the purpose of which is to encourage a commercial transaction.  A Commercial Message may have artistic value or pertain to issues of public importance.  Soliciting charitable donations is not a Commercial Message.
Commercial Street: the Thoroughfare Type described as such in Table 154.505.B (Thoroughfare Types - Summary).
Common Destination: an area of focused community activity, usually defining the approximate center of a Pedestrian Shed. It may include without limitation one or more of the following: a Civic Space, a Civic Building, a commercial center, or a transit station, and may act as the social center of a neighborhood.
Common Yard: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Community Garden: the Civic Space Type described as such in Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards).
Configuration: the form of a Building, including its massing, Private Frontage, and Height. 


Corner Lot: See Lot, Corner.
Corridor: a lineal geographic system incorporating  a Thoroughfare, Greenway, or Open Space.
Cross Block Passage: a minimum 10 foot wide pedestrian access reserved between Buildings.
Curb: the edge of the vehicular pavement that may be either raised or flush with a Swale to the extent allowed by this Chapter. It usually incorporates or is associated with the drainage system. See Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards).
Curb Radius: the radius of the curb at an intersection
Day Care Center: See Child Care Organization.
Density: the number of Density Units within a standard measure of land area.
Density Unit: a measurement used to describe the Density or intensity of Development of an area, calculated on the basis of the Density Equivalencies for certain quantities of Principal Uses within such areas as set forth in Table 154.508.A1 (District Density).
Design Speed: the velocity at which a Thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement. There are four ranges of speed: Very Low: (below 20 MPH); Low: (20-25 MPH); Moderate: (25-35 MPH); High: (above 35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired Design Speed. See Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards).
Development: commencing, making or planning for man-made changes to land, Buildings, or other real property, and the resulting changes to such land, Buildings,  or other real property, whether through development, re-development, clearing, excavation, grading, construction, re-construction, Alteration, demolition, modification, subdivision, or re-subdivision, and whether such changes are horizontal, vertical, or subterranean.  Ordinary Maintenance and Repair do not constitute Development.
Development Parcel: a parcel of land:
1.	Which, either alone or together with one or more other parcels under a common Development scheme, program or plan, is four (4) or more gross acres;
2.	With respect to the Development of which any new Thoroughfare or extension or change of the design of any existing Thoroughfare is required or will be made or proposed; or
3.	With respect to which any Character District assignment, Special District assignment, Civic Zone assignment or Thoroughfare alignment is proposed to be made or changed by a Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment. 
Development Parcel Plan: a plan complying with and submitted pursuant to Article V of this Code.
Deviation: a Waiver or a Variance.
Directory Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
District:  a Character District or a Special District; when capitalized and not accompanied by the word “Historic”, the word “District” specifically excludes Local Historic District. See also Zoning District.  
District Density: a number of Density Units per Net Site Area Acre of a District.
Dooryard: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Driveway: a lane for vehicles within a Lot, often leading to a Garage. 
Duplex: the Principal Building Type described as such in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) andy - Specific Standards).
Dwelling:  a Building used in whole or part for human habitation. Dwellings are divided into the following categories:
1. 	Dwelling, One-Family:  a Building used exclusively or designed for one-family occupancy.
2.	Dwelling, Two-Family:  a Building used exclusively or designed for the occupancy of two individual families living independently of each other.
3.	Dwelling, Multiple-Family: a Building containing three or more Dwelling Units.
4.	Dwelling, Rooming:  a Building containing one or more Dwelling Units that is approved for use by three or more Persons, not meeting the definition of a Family, per Dwelling Unit. This is also known as a Rooming House.
5. 	Dwelling, Boarding:  a Rooming Dwelling where meals are provided.
6. 	Dwelling, Registered Student Organization:  a Building or Rooming Dwelling used to house three or more unrelated individuals, which is owned, rented, leased or purchased by or on behalf of a student organization registered by the Central Michigan University Office of Student Life, in the name of:
a.	the Registered Student Organization;
b.	a housing corporation or partnership affiliated with the registered organization; or
c.	one or more members of the Registered Student Organization (RSO) when membership in the RSO is required to live at the Rooming Dwelling and/or the Rooming Dwelling is identified by Signs or other symbols as being affiliated with the RSO.
7.	Dwelling, Bed and Breakfast:  a private, owner-occupied residence with one to four guest rooms. The bed and breakfast Use is subordinate and incidental to the Residential Principal Use of the Building. The bed and breakfast Use is limited to a maximum of four rental, double, sleeping rooms, with bathroom facilities to be shared by not more than two rental sleeping units, with one bath reserved for the sole use of the owner(s). Food service for the bed and breakfast Use is limited to coffee, tea, juice, fresh fruits and vegetables, milk and baked goods.
8.	Dwelling, Functional Family: a private residence occupied by a Functional Family Unit.  The Dwelling is subject to the following standards and regulations: 
a.	Two off-street parking spaces must be provided. Additional parking spaces may be required by the City Planner if the petitioner intends to regularly park more than two vehicles on the site. In order for the City Planner to determine if adequate parking will be provided, the petitioner must submit a list of all vehicles owned or operated on a regular basis by members of the Functional Family as well as a Site Plan indicating the location of proposed off-street parking and analysis of public parking in the area.
b.	There shall be a minimum of 2900 square feet of land area and 500 square feet of floor area in a Dwelling for each member of a Functional Family Dwelling.  For the purpose of calculating the permitted Density of a Functional Family Dwelling, all fractional occupancy shall be reduced to the next lowest full occupant).
	For illustration purposes: The 1990 Census shows the average family size in the City as 2.97 Persons and the average household size as 2.55 Persons. The average City Lot is 66’x132’=8712 square feet divided by 2900=3.004 occupants.  The average size of a Residential Dwelling in the City is between 1200 and 1500 square feet.  1500 square feet divided by 500=3 occupants.
c.	The permit shall apply only to the Functional Family which obtained it and shall be limited to the number of Persons specified in the permit.
d.	There must be a contact Person who will act as head of household in relating to the City.
	
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a Variance from the standards of this definition if it is reasonably necessary to give a handicapped person (as defined in 42 USC § 3602) equal opportunity to use and enjoy a Dwelling. 
Dwelling Unit:  one or more rooms with kitchen, sanitation and sleeping facilities designed for or occupied for living, dining and sleeping purposes.
Edgeyard: the yard type which results from a Building being set back from its Lot boundaries at the front, rear, and both sides.
Edgeyard Building: a Building that occupies the center of its Lot with Setbacks on all sides.
Electronic Message Board: a panel or screen with the capability to display electronically programmed variable messages.
Elevation: as related to the exterior walls of a Building, one which is not along a Frontage Line. See Illustration 154.408.B (Frontage and Lot Lines); when not capitalized, “elevation” means the height above a given level or a drawing or design that represents an object or Structure as being projected geometrically on a vertical plane parallel to one of its sides, as the context indicates. See also Facade. 
Encroach: to break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a Setback, into the Public Frontage, or above a height limit.
Encroachment: any element of a Structure that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a Setback, into the Public Frontage, or above a height limit, or the breaking of such limit by such an element.
Enfront: to place, or the location of, an element along a Frontage, as in “porches Enfront the street.”
Exempt Sign: a Sign listed in Section 154.414.C that does not require a Sign Permit and is not subject to the Sign standards of Sections 154.414.A and 154.414.B.
Existing Local Codes: all City codes and ordinances in effect on the effective date of this Chapter.
Existing Parcel: an existing Lot on which there is situated or conducted an existing legal non-conforming Structure, Improvement, or Use.
Facade: an exterior wall of a Building that is set along a Frontage Line. See Illustration 154.408.B (Frontage and Lot Lines). See Elevation.
Facade Area: The area of the facade measured from finished floor to finished ceiling for each floor of the subject building.
Façade Void Area: the area of a Façade not comprised of walls; including windows, doors and other openings in the wall. Façade Void Area is measured from the edge of wall, and therefore typically includes the door or window but not the frame.

Areas shown in blue are Facade Void Areas


Family: either:
1.	one or more Persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, including without limitation, Offspring  of any one or more of such other Persons, living as a single housekeeping unit, plus not more than one Person not so related, who may be a nurse, nanny, physical therapist, etc., caring for any of the other Persons; or
2.	a Functional Family living as a single housekeeping unit which has received a permit from the City Planner following verification of compliance with the requirements within the definition of the term Dwelling- Functional Family.
a.	Functional Family means a group of people plus their Offspring having a relationship which is functionally equivalent to a Family.  The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct character with a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit. Functional Family does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or group of students or other individuals where a common living arrangement or basis for establishment of a housekeeping unit is temporary.
Family Day Care Home: See Child Care Organization.
First Lot Layer: See Lot Layer.
Fence: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Flex: the Principal Building Type described as such in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards).
Floodplain:  areas of special flood hazard: land subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.  Also may be referred to as “Special Flood Hazard Area”.
Floor Area:  the area of all enclosed floors computed from the dimensions of the outside walls of the Building, excluding unfinished Attics, Basement utility areas, Residential Basements, porches, patios, breezeways, carports, garages, and attached Accessory Buildings.
Floor Area- Usable:  the Floor Area within a Building, less the area of space used for utilities or storage.
Foster Family Home: See Child Care Organization.
Foster Family Group Home: See Child Care Organization.
Forecourt: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Frontage: the area between a Building Facade and a Path, Passage, waterbody, Civic Space, or the curb (or if there is no curb, the edge) of the Vehicular Lanes of a Thoroughfare having Vehicular Lanes, inclusive of the built and planted components of such area. Frontage is divided into Private Frontage and Public Frontage. See Illustration 154.408.B (Frontages and Lot Lines), Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards), and Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types).  Corner Lots have two Frontages, a Principal Frontage and a Secondary Frontage.  See Principal Frontage and Secondary Frontage.  
Frontage Line: a Lot Line bordering a Public Frontage. See Illustration 154.408.B (Frontages and Lot Lines).
Front Lot Line: See Lot Line.
Functional Family: See Family.
Functional Family Dwelling: See Dwelling.
Gallery: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Garage:  a detached Building or Structure or an extension of a Principal Building used for the storage of passenger vehicles and not more than one truck of a rated capacity of not more than two tons.
Green: the Civic Space Type described as such in Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards).
Group Day Care: See Child Care Organization.
Height:  the vertical dimension of a Building or Structure, often described in number of Stories of the Building or Structure, and not including (1) attics under 14 feet in height at their tallest point; (2) raised Basements; or (3) masts, belfries, clock towers, chimneys, chimney flues, silos, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads. 
Historic District Commission: defined in Chapter 156 of the City Code.
Home Occupation:  any occupation conducted within a Dwelling by its occupants as an Accessory Use, including any associated storage, provided that:
1.	no more than 20% of the Floor Area of the Dwelling is used for the Home Occupation;
2.	no goods, Signs (except for Signs or nameplates allowed in the District), or activities pertaining to the Home Occupation are visible from the street;
3.	no persons are employed other than the Dwelling occupants (except as otherwise permitted pursuant to a Special Use Permit);
4.	the Home Occupation is not conducted in an Accessory Building;
5.	the Home Occupation does not require exterior alterations that change the Residential character of the Dwelling;
6.	parking can be accommodated in the Driveway or along the curb Adjacent to the property;
7.	in no case shall a Home Occupation be open to the public at times earlier than 7:00 a.m. nor later than 9:00 p.m;
8.	a Home Occupation shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors, or heat beyond the property lines or beyond the walls, floor and ceilings of the Dwelling Unit. The judgment of the Building Official shall be considered decisive and final in this matter unless formally appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 45 days of the Building Official’s written determination;
9.	garage sales are permitted provided they meet the following standards:
a.	sales last no longer than three days;
b.	sales are held no more than twice yearly;
c.	sales are conducted on the owner’s property, provided that multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of the participants;
d.	no goods purchased for resale may be offered for sale;
e.  Directional Signs may be placed in the street right-of-way in front of the property where the sale is located;
f. 	all directional and advertising Signs shall be free-standing and removed after completion of the sale;
g.	all directional and advertising Signs placed on private property shall have the owner’s permission; and
h. no directional or advertising Signs may be larger than 300 square inches;
10.	deliveries to the Home Occupation by vehicles not owned by the proprietor shall not exceed one per day;
11.	the Home Occupation shall not involve the use of vehicles or Trailers other than one vehicle not to exceed three-quarter ton owned by the resident of the Dwelling, which shall be parked in an adequate off-street parking area, and/or one single axle Trailer with a bed not exceeding 32 square feet. This shall not prohibit the owner from possessing and using a passenger type of vehicle;
12.	if the Home Occupation involves instruction, there shall be no more than six students on the premises at any one time. All classes with four or more students shall be scheduled with an interval of not less than 30 minutes between the end of one class and the start of the next to lessen traffic congestion. If the motor vehicle traffic associated with students coming to and going from class can be and is limited to a total of no more than six vehicles during any period of 60 consecutive minutes, then the classes need not be scheduled with the 30-minute interval;
13.	the following Uses by nature of their operation are prohibited as Home Occupations:
a.	minor or major auto repair and/or painting of vehicles, Trailers, boats, all terrain vehicles, or other recreational vehicles;
b.	personal property rental business;
c.	photo studio;
d.	massage parlor;
e.	welding or machine shop;
f.	small engine repair, or the repair of outboard motors, motorcycles, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, lawn mowers, garden tractors, and the like;
g.	on-premises television repair and other electrical repairs, including major appliances;
h.	upholstering;
i.	ambulance service;
j.	limousine or pedicab, or any taxi cab service;
k.	mortician, hearse service;
l.	Restaurant, Tavern;
m.	tow truck service;
n.	veterinary uses, animal boarding or animal breeding:
o.	barber, beauty, or manicure services with more than eight patrons per day;
p.	any operation that generates more than eight patrons or customers per day, except as provided in division (12) of this definition;
q.	any Group A or Group B Special Regulated Use as described in Section 154.410.C.2; and 
r.	other uses similar to any of items 13.a - 13.q above. 
Hotel: an establishment where short-term Lodging is offered for compensation and Lodging units are accessed from interior hallways.
House: the Principal Building Type described as such in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards).
Impervious Surface Coverage:  that portion of a Lot covered with Buildings, asphalt, or concrete paving or hard-packed prepared graveled surfaces that serve to prevent or restrict absorption of rain or other surface water into the ground.  
Improvement: any man-made Alteration of land, a Lot, a Building or a Structure. 
Inverted Crown: surface shaping of a roadway with the low point in the middle, causing surface runoff to flow down the center of the roadway.
Industrial: the category of Principal Uses listed under the heading “Industrial” in Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Use).
Kennel:  any Structure or premises on which four or more dogs and/or cats over four months of age are kept, excluding, however, any Structure or premises on which such animals are kept for Retail sale in Character Districts CD-4 or CD-5.
Landscaping:  live materials such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges and trees, or durable natural material such as crushed stone, wood chips, rock and weathered wood.
Large Projecting Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Linear Pedestrian Shed: a Pedestrian Shed that is elongated along an important Corridor. A Linear Pedestrian Shed extends approximately 1/4 mile from each side of the Corridor. The resulting area is oblong. (Syn: elongated pedestrian shed). See Illustration 154.504.C (Pedestrian Sheds).
Liner Building: a Building which is a least 24 feet deep measured from the Façade and masks a Parking Lot or a Parking Structure from the Frontage.


Liquor Store: Any business or service having an SDM and/or SDD license, excluding pharmacies and full service super markets. 
Live/Work: the Principal Building Type described as such in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards).
Loading Space:  an off-street area on the same Lot with a Building, used for temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lodging: premises available for daily or weekly renting of bedrooms, including Hotels and Motels.
Lot:  a parcel of land fronting upon a Thoroughfare, whether public or private, separated from Adjacent parcels of land by description on a recorded deed, subdivision plat or survey map.
Lot, Corner:  a Lot situated at the intersection of two or more Thoroughfares having an angle of not more than 135 degrees.
Lot Layer: a range of depth of a Lot within which certain elements are permitted. See Illustration 154.406.A (Lot Layers).  There are three Lot Layers within each Lot, as follows:	
1.	First Lot Layer: that portion of a Lot bounded by 
a.	the Side Lot Lines, 
b.	the Frontage Line, and 
c.	the front Setback line. 
2.	Second Lot Layer: that portion of a Lot bounded by 
a.	 the Side Lot Lines, 
b.	 the front Setback line and
c.	a line which is 20 feet from and parallel to the front Setback line. 
3.	Third Lot Layer: that portion of a Lot bounded by
a.	the Side Lot Lines, 
b.	the Rear Lot Line and
c.	the line of the Second Lot Layer as described in 2.c. above. 
Lot Line:  any boundary line of a Lot.  The types of Lot Line are:
1.	Front Lot Line:  the Lot Line at the Frontage; in the case of a Corner Lot, the Lot Line separating the narrowest side of the Lot from the Frontage.
2.	Rear Lot Line: the Lot Line that separates the Rear Yard from an Adjacent Lot, Alley, Thoroughfare, or waterbody. The Rear Lot Line is the Lot Line that is opposite and most distant from the Front Lot Line.
3.	Side Lot Line:  any Lot Line other than the Front Lot Line or the Rear Lot Line.


Lot Width:  the straight line distance between the Side Lot Lines, measured at the two points where the minimum Front Setback intersects the Side Lot Lines.
Lot, Zoning:  a single tract of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, or developed as a unit under single ownership or control.
Main Body: with respect to the massing of a Building or Structure, the principal portion of such Building or Structure, excluding any wing.
Main Civic Space: the primary outdoor gathering place within a Development Parcel. The Main Civic Space may be associated with an important Civic Building.
Manufacturing:  Use of land or a Building for any of the following activities:  
1.	making, creating, processing, fabricating, packaging, treating, designing, fitting, compounding, repairing, assembling, testing, storing, warehousing, or selling at wholesale finished or partially finished products, parts, or goods from raw, previously prepared,or finished  materials or components, if conducted within an enclosed Building,
2.	storing, warehousing, or selling at wholesale finished or partially finished products, parts or goods,  in or from an enclosed Building, or
3.	distributing or transferring finished or partially finished products, parts or goods from an enclosed Building; excluding, however, the following and any of the foregoing such activities that include any of the following:
a.	storage or use of large volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials;
b.	generation of pollution, dust, odor, heat, glare,  or vibration beyond the walls of such enclosed Building or any light or glare beyond the boundaries of the land on which the Building is situated;
c.	any activity or Use for which any water, air, or other environmental or pollution license or permit is required;
d.	concrete batch plants; 
e.	concrete, tile, or brick manufacturing;
f.	automobile, truck, or tire manufacturing or assembly; 
g.	ammonia or chlorine manufacturing;
h.	metal casting or foundries; 
i.	gas manufacturing; 
j.	grain milling or processing;
k.	metal or metal ore production, refining, smelting, or alloying;
l.	petroleum or petroleum product storage or refining; 
m.	boat, pool, or spa manufacturing; 
n.	keeping, selling, or slaughtering of animals; 
o.	glass manufacturing; 
p.	paper manufacturing; 
q.	manufacturing of materials into compost; 
r.	gravel, sand, stone, coal, gas, oil, or mineral, mining or processing; and
s.	wood or lumber processing.
Marquee Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Massing: the overall shape or arrangement of the bulk or volume of a Building or Structure.
Meeting Hall: a Building available for gatherings, including conferences, which accommodates at least one room equivalent to a minimum of 10 square feet per projected Residential Dwelling Unit within the Pedestrian Shed in which it is located. 
Mid-Rise: the Principal Building Type described as such in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards).
Mixed Use: multiple Uses within the same Building or on the same Lot through superimposition or Adjacency, or in multiple Buildings or on multiple Lots by Adjacency or proximity. See also Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards).
Mobile Home:  manufactured housing built on a chassis.
Mobile Home Park:  land occupied by two or more Mobile Homes for living purposes.
Monument Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Motel: an establishment where short-term Lodging is offered for compensation and one or more Lodging units are accessed by exterior doors opening directly to exterior Parking Areas, passageways, or the outdoors.
Multifamily: the Principal Building Type described as such in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards).
Multiple-Family Dwelling: See Dwelling.
Natural Area: The Civic Space Type described as such in Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards).
Neighborhood Street: the Thoroughfare Type described as such in Table 154.505.B (Thoroughfare Types - Summary).
Net Site Area: all developable land within a site including Thoroughfares but excluding land allocated as Civic Zones.
Non-conforming Structure: any Structure that does not conform to the dimensional or other structural regulations that apply to the parcel on which the Structure is located.
Non-conforming Use:  a Use that does not conform to the Use regulations in this Chapter that apply to the parcel on which the Use is located.
Non-Conformity-Bearing Lot: with respect to an Existing Parcel, a Lot that consists of the portion of such Existing Parcel on which a legal non-conforming Structure, Improvement or Use and associated Parking Area are situated or conducted.
Office: those Principal Uses listed under “Office Uses” in Table 154.410.A (Building & Lot Principal Uses). 
Officefront: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Offspring: the descendants, including biological offspring, adopted children, foster, and legal wards, of a Person.
One-Family Dwelling: See Dwelling.
Open Space: land intended to remain undeveloped; which may be for Civic Space.
Ordinary Maintenance: keeping a Lot, parcel, or Building in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition in a manner that  does not change its external appearance except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary Maintenance does not constitute Development for the purposes of this Chapter.
Outdoor Display Case: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Outdoor Storage: one or more assemblages, collections, stacks, or stockpiles of vehicles, equipment, goods, materials, tanks, or other items in any area other than within a Building, including without limitation, parked operative or non-operative vehicles or equipment. 
Parking Area: an off-street, ground-level open area within a Lot for parking vehicles as an Accessory Use incidental to a Principal Use of the Lot or Principal Building on the Lot. Not synonymous with Parking Lot.
Parking Lot: an off-street, ground-level open area within a Lot for Automobile Parking as a Principal Use. Not synonymous with Parking Area. 
Parking Space:  an area required or provided for parking an automobile, meeting the requirements of Section 154.412.A.14.
Parking Structure: a vertical Improvement containing one or more levels of parking above grade.	
Passage: a pedestrian connector, open or roofed, that passes between Buildings to provide a shortcut through a long Block and connect rear parking accommodations to Frontages.


Path: a pedestrian way traversing a Natural Area or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous Open Space, ideally connecting directly with the urban Sidewalk network. 
Pedestrian Shed: an area of a size approximately equal to the average distance comfortably walked by pedestrians and approximately centered on a Common Destination. There are two types of Pedestrian Sheds: Standard Pedestrian Sheds and Linear Pedestrian Sheds. See Standard  Pedestrian Shed or Linear Pedestrian Shed. See Illustration 154.504.C (Pedestrian Sheds).
Person:  an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, joint venture, company or organization.
Petroleum Bulk Plant:  an establishment for the storage of petroleum products for distribution by tank car, tank vehicle or motor truck. 
Placement: with respect to a Building, the manner in which the (Setback Designations), Illustration 154.406.A (Lot Layers), and Illustration 154.407.B (Principal Building /Accessory Building).
Planned Residential Development: land zoned PRD and Development permitted as such under former City Code Section 154.052 pursuant to a Planned Residential Development Agreement approved and entered into pursuant to former City Code Section 154.070 which was in existence and in full force and effect as of February 21, 2018.
Planning Commission:  the Planning Commission of the City.
Planter: the element of the Public Frontage that accommodates Thoroughfare trees, whether continuous or individual.
Plaque Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Playground: the Civic Space Type described as such in Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards).
Plaza: the Civic Space Type described as such in  Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards).
Porch: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A(Private Frontage Types).
PRD:  Planned Residential Development.
Porch Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Portable Sign: a Sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design and construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support and may be easily moved or relocated.  Portable Signs include, but are not limited to, Signs mounted on a trailer, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile structure, with wheels or with wheels removed.
Post Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Principal Entrance: the main point of access for pedestrians into a Building.
Principal Frontage: with respect to:
a.	Corner Lots, the Frontage designated to bear the address and Principal Entrance to the Building, and the measure of minimum Lot Width; and 
b.	non-Corner Lots, Principal Frontage is synonymous with Frontage. See Frontage. See Illustration 154.408.B (Frontage & Lot Lines).


Principal Use:  the primary or predominant Use of a Lot or Structure. 
Private Frontage: the privately held area between the Frontage Line and the Facade of the Principal Building. See Table 154.408.A (Private Frontage Types), and Illustration 154.408.B (Frontage and Lot Lines).

Vehicular
Lanes

Public
Frontage

Private
Frontage

Parking


Private Home: See Child Care Organization.
Public Frontage: the area between the Frontage Line and 
1.	in the case of a Lot that Enfronts a Thoroughfare having Vehicular Lanes, the curb (or if there is no curb, the edge) of the Vehicular Lanes, or 
2.	in the case of a Lot that Enfronts a Civic Space, Path, Passage, waterbody, or Driveway, such Civic Space, Path, Passage, waterbody, or Driveway. See Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards).
Public Utility:  any Person authorized to furnish, under state or municipal regulations, electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph or water to the public.
Rear Alley (RA): the Thoroughfare Type described as such in Table 154.505.B (Thoroughfare Types - Summary).


Rear Lot Line: See Lot Line.
Rearyard: the yard type resulting from a Building occupying the full Frontage Line, leaving the rear of the Lot as the sole yard.
Rearyard Building: a Building that occupies the full Frontage Line, leaving the rear of the Lot as the sole yard.
Registered Student Organization:  a student organization registered by the Central Michigan University Office of Student Life (e.g., fraternity, sorority, business, professional, or religious organization).
Registered Student Organization Dwelling:  See Dwelling.
Remainder Lots: with respect to an Existing Parcel, one or more Lots consisting together of the remaining portion of such Existing Parcel after exclusion of the related Non-Conformity Bearing Lot.
Repair: to restore Lot, parcel, or Building to good or sound condition by any process in a manner that  does not change its external appearance. A Repair does not constitute Development for the purposes of this Chapter.
Residential: Use characterizing premises available for long-term human habitation. 
Restaurants and Other Related Uses: Restaurants, Class I Restaurants, Bars, Nightclubs and Taverns, as defined below:
1.	Restaurant:  any public place licensed by the Michigan Department of Public Health where food is cooked, prepared, provided or served for human consumption without a license for the sale of alcoholic liquor, excluding churches, educational facilities, hospitals, and non-profit clubs and lodges, but including the following types:
a.	Sit-Down Restaurant:  any Restaurant where foods and beverages are sold primarily for consumption on the premises.
b.	Drive-In Restaurant or Drive-Through Restaurant:  any Restaurant where foods and beverages are sold to a retail customer through a service window or similar aperture without requiring the retail customer to exit his or her vehicle to make the purchase, and shall include an establishment that allows the retail customer to drive in or through any enclosed Building or Structure and make a purchase of food and beverage without requiring the retail customer to exit his or her vehicle.
c.	any Restaurant with the exception of a Drive-In Restaurant or Drive-Through Restaurant where foods and beverages are sold to customers for consumption off the premises.
2.	Class I Restaurant:  any public place licensed by the Michigan Department of Health where food is cooked, prepared, provided or served for human consumption and the premises are licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors and/or as a brewpub; provided that the establishment is operated subject to all of the following requirements and performance standards:
a.	culinary facilities shall at all times be maintained and provided for the preparation and cooking of food for consumption on the premises.
b.	The establishment shall offer a varied menu of food items consisting of not fewer than ten such food items cooked on the premises.
c.	Not more than 50% of the gross floor area open to the general public shall be used for purposes other than seating for diners consisting of tables, chairs, booths and necessary aisleways. Public restroom facilities shall not be considered in this determination.
d.	During any given 90-day period no more than 50% of the gross revenues of the establishment shall be derived from the sale of any alcoholic liquor as defined by the Michigan Liquor Control Act. Admission charges or cover charges which exceed 10% of the establishment’s gross revenues shall be considered as derived from the sale of alcoholic liquors for purposes of determining the percentage of sales of alcoholic liquors.
3.	Nightclub:  any public place licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors, having a maximum occupancy capacity of 100 Persons (as determined by the Fire Marshal) not meeting the requirements of Class I Restaurant.
4.	Bars and Taverns:  any public place licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors, having a maximum occupancy capacity of fewer than 100 or more Persons (as determined by the Fire Marshal) not meeting the requirements of a Class I Restaurant. Bars and Taverns shall include Small Winemakers, Micro Brewers, and Small Distillers as licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
Retail: the sale of goods directly to the consumer of such goods. 
Retail/Personal Services: the category of Uses listed under the heading “Retail/Personal Services Uses” in Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Principal Uses).  Retail/Personal Services Uses must be establishments dealing directly with consumers, and  any goods produced on the premises must be sold at Retail on the premises where so produced.
Retail Frontage: Frontage designated on a Zoning Map that requires the provision of a Shopfront Private Frontage, encouraging the ground level to be available for Retail Use.
Rooming Dwelling: See Dwelling.
Screen/Screening: 
1.	used as a verb, to block an item or condition from view from a vantage point in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter by interposition of a Building, Building Element, wall or fence constructed of an opaque material, or an evergreen hedge; or
2.	used as a noun, a Building, Building Element, wall or  fence constructed of an opaque material, or an evergreen hedge that blocks an item or condition from view from a vantage point, as required by this Chapter.  Not synonymous with Streetscreen.
Secondary Frontage: on Corner Lots, the Frontage that is not the Principal Frontage. See Illustration 154.408.B (Frontage & Lot Lines).
Second Lot Layer: See Lot Layer.
Setback: the area of a Lot measured from a Lot Line to a Building Facade or Elevation, which area is maintained clear of permanent Structures, with the exception of permitted Encroachments, as indicated in Illustration 154.407.A (Setback Designations). 


Shopfront: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Short Term Rental: a dwelling unit providing temporary accommodations for periods of less than 28 days.
Side Lot Line: See Lot Line.
Sidewalk: the paved section of the Public Frontage dedicated primarily to pedestrian activity. 
Sidewalk Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Sideyard: the yard type resulting from a Building occupying one side of its Lot with a Setback on the other side. 
Sideyard Building: a Building that occupies one side of its Lot with a Setback on the other side. 
Sign:  any name, number, symbol, identification, description, direction, instruction, directive, information, illustration, object, graphic, device, display, visual communication or structure, or part thereof, in view of the general public, whether permanent, temporary, portable, or affixed, that announces, directs attention to, informs, advertises, or promotes an ideology, position, interest, object, project, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
Single Ownership:  ownership of real property by one Person or by more than one Person if held jointly, as tenants by the entirety, or as tenants in common.
Site Plan: a plan that complies with and is submitted pursuant to Sections 154.103.C.4, 154.110.E and 154.613.  
Special District (SD): an area which, due to its intrinsic size, Use, Building Placement, Building Elements, Building Configuration, Principal Building Type, or other characteristics, cannot conform to one or more of the applicable Character Districts or standards therefor specified in this Chapter.
Special Flood Hazard Area: see Floodplain.
Special Requirements: provisions of Section 154.203 or 154.511 and/or the associated designations on a Zoning Map or other map for those provisions.
Special Use: a Use designated as a ‘Special Use’ or “SUP” in a particular District or Civic Zone is one that, because of its inherent nature, extent, or external effects, generally is not permitted in the District or Civic Zone, but could be if certain standards and restrictions are met.
Special Regulated Use: a Use designated as “Special Regulated Use” or “SRU” with respect to a particular District or Civic Zone that, because of its nature, is recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of such Uses are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect upon Adjacent areas.
Specified Anatomical Areas: Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. Also, human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities: Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
Square: the Civic Space Type described as such in Table 154.507.B1 (Civic Space Types - Summary) and Table 154.507.B2 (Civic Space - Specific Standards).
Standard Pedestrian Shed: a Pedestrian Shed that is an average 1/4 mile radius or 1320 feet, about the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. See Pedestrian Shed.
Stoop: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Story: a habitable level within a Building, excluding an Attic or raised Basement.
Street: any Thoroughfare meeting the standards and requirements for such Thoroughfare type as set forth herein.  See Table 154.505.B2 (Thoroughfare Types - Summary) and Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies & Standards).  When not capitalized, the term “street” means any public way not within a Lot on which vehicles travel.
Streetscape: street lights, Thoroughfare trees, planting accommodations and Sidewalk.
Streetscreen: a type of Screen situated along a Frontage Line, or along the same plane as a Façade, and consisting of a planted evergreen hedge or freestanding wall constructed of brick or stucco over masonry, which blocks the view of parking, equipment, or other item or condition from the Frontage, provides privacy to a Side Yard, or strengthens the spatial definition of the public realm. 
Story:  a habitable level of a Building or Structure.
Structure:  anything constructed, the use of which requires it to be permanently located on the ground, or anything attached to something that is permanently located on the ground.  Not synonymous with Building.
Swale: a low or slightly depressed natural area for drainage.
Swimming Pool: a constructed basin or Structure for swimming and aquatic recreation, excluding plastic, canvas or rubber pools temporarily erected upon the ground and holding less than 300 gallons of water.
Temporary Sign: a Sign that is not permanently installed and is not intended to be placed permanently.  Signs of the types described in Table 154.414.A (Summary of Sign Types) and Table 154.414.B (Sign Types - Specific Standards) are not Temporary Signs.
Terminated Vista: a location at the axial conclusion of a Thoroughfare. A Building located at a Terminated Vista location designated on a Zoning Map is required to be designed in response to the axis.


Terrace/Lightwell: the Private Frontage Type described as such within Table 154.408.A.(Private Frontage Types).
Third Lot Layer: See Lot Layer.
Third Place: a place other than a home or workplace at which people may gather and socialize. Examples include, but are not limited to, cafes, social clubs, public libraries, or parks.
Thoroughfare: a way for use by vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic and to provide access to Lots and Open Spaces, consisting of Vehicular Lanes and the Public Frontage. See Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards). 

Vehicular
Lanes

Public
Frontage

Parking

Public
Frontage

Parking

Thoroughfare
(Right-of-Way)


Townhouse: the Principal Building Type described as such in Table 154.408.G1 (Principal Building Types) and Table 154.408.G2 (Principal Building Types - Specific Standards). 
Trailer:  a non-powered vehicle designed to be drawn by an automobile or truck, a camper designed for the top of a pickup truck or a self-propelled motor coach.
Turning Radius: the inside radius of the Vehicular Lanes available for a vehicle to make a turn, accounting for the presence of parking, bike lanes, medians or other features.  See Table 154.505.B3 (Thoroughfare Assemblies and Standards) and Illustration 154.505.B1 (Turning Radius).  See also Curb Radius.
Two-Family Dwelling: See Dwelling.
Usable Floor Area: See Floor Area. 
Use: the functions, activities, purposes, or uses  accommodated by or intended to be accommodated by land or a Building, or for which land or a Building is or is intended to be arranged, designed, or occupied. See Table 154.410.A (Building and Lot Permitted Use) and Table 154.410.D (Permitted Accessory Uses).
Variance: a modification of the requirements of this Chapter granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Vehicular Lane: an area of a Thoroughfare for parked or moving vehicles.
Wall Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Window Sign: the Sign Type described as such in Table 154.414A (Sign Types - Summary) and Table 154.414B (Sign Types - Specific Standards).
Yard: the shortest horizontal distance from a Lot Line to the nearest foundation wall supporting a covered Structure more than three feet in height.  The following are types of Yards:
1.	Front Yard: an Open Space extending the full width of the Lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the Front Lot Line and the nearest line of the Principal Building.
2.	Rear Yard:  an Open Space extending the full width of the Lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the Rear Lot Line and the nearest line of  the Principal Building
3.	Side Yard: an Open Space between a Principal Building and the Side Lot Line, extending from the Front Yard to the Rear Yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the Side Lot Line to the nearest point of the Principal Building.
Yield: characterizing a Thoroughfare that has two-way traffic but only one effective travel lane because of parked cars, necessitating slow movement and driver negotiation. Also, characterizing parking on such a Thoroughfare.


Zone: synonymous with Zoning District. 
Zoning Administrator: the City Planner.
Zoning District: a Character District, Special DIstrict, or Civic Zone. 
Zoning Lot: See Lot, Zoning. 
Zoning Map: the map or set of maps that show the Character Districts, Civic Zones, Special Districts if any, Thoroughfares, and Special Requirements if any, of areas subject to, or proposed to be subject to, regulation by this Chapter.  The Zoning Map approved by the City Commission, as the same may be amended from time to time, constitutes the Official Zoning Map of the City.

Example Zoning Map



page left intentionally blank




 
 
 
 




 


