ZONING ORDINANCE MARQUETTE CHARTER TOWNSHIP
$
1000 COMMERCE DR, MARQUETTE, MI | 906-228-6220 | WWW.MARQUETTETOWNSHIP.ORG
PREPARED FOR:
THE MARQUETTE TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES, MARQUETTE MARQUETTE MICHIGAN 49855, UNDER THE DIRECTION TOOFW: NSHIP,
THE MARQUETTE TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION, MARQUETTE TOWNSHIP, MARQUETTE MICHIGAN 49855
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE FOLLOWING REGULATORY AGENCIES:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Table of Contents Page 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION TITLE
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 3: THE ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
ARTICLE 4: RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR)
ARTICLE 5: SCENIC RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (SR)
ARTICLE 6: URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (UR)
ARTICLE 7: DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
ARTICLE 8: GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (GB)
ARTICLE 9: SEGREGATED BUSINESS DISTRICT (SB)
ARTICLE 10: RESOURCE PRODUCTION DISTRICT (RP)
ARTICLE 11: FOREST RECREATION DISTRICT (FR)
ARTICLE 12: CONDITIONAL RE-ZONING
ARTICLE 13: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
ARTICLE 14: ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 15: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 16: DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 17: SPECIAL LAND USES
ARTICLE 18: SITE PLAN REVIEW
ARTICLE 19: PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 20: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Table of Contents Page 2
SECTION TITLE
ARTICLE 21: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 22: SIGNS
ARTICLE 23: NONCONFORMITIES
ARTICLE 24: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
ARTICLE 25: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
ARTICLE 26: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article I Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
1.01: SHORT TITLE 2
1.02: REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE 2
1.03: PURPOSE 2
1.04: INTENT 2
1.05: DESIGNATED AUTHORITY 3
1.06: APPLICATION 3
1.07: VESTED RIGHT 3
1.08: SEVERANCE 3
1.09: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS 3
1.10: RELATIONSHIP TO TEXT AND ATTACHMENTS 4
1.11: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURAL GUIDES 4
ARTICLE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article I Page 2
ENACTING CLAUSE
The Charter Township of Marquette Ordains:
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.01: SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the “Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance.”
SECTION: 1.02: REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE
The Zoning Ordinance of the Charter Township of Marquette, enacted May 13, 1966, and all
amendments thereto, are hereby repealed in full. The adoption of this Ordinance, however, shall
not affect nor prevent any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, any existing
violation of the repealed Ordinance if the violation is also a violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 1.03: PURPOSE
A. This Ordinance is based upon the detailed consideration and mapping of the Township’s
resource base, public infrastructure, land and water uses, and anticipated trends
presented in the Master Plan for Marquette Township. The intent of this Ordinance is to
divide the Charter Township of Marquette into basic zoning districts and to utilize
performance standards to provide flexibility for development while assuring the health,
safety, and general welfare for the present and future residents of the Township. The
general purpose of this Ordinance is to:
1. Promote compatibility of land uses to protect neighboring landowners from adverse
effects of adjoining development and to preserve property values.
2. Protect and preserve natural resource systems for continued and appropriate
sustained productivity and benefit.
3. Control and regulate growth, concentrating development in suitable areas where the
necessary infrastructure presently exists or where it can be feasibly provided.
4. Assure the most practical balance between natural and man-made systems for the
continued benefit of the Township.
SECTION 1.04: INTENT
The goals and objectives of individual land owners and residents of the Township may at times
conflict or compete; therefore, the primary intent of this performance oriented zoning ordinance is
to minimize land use conflicts between landowners and the public interest by devising
performance standards to eliminate or minimize potential negative impacts of varying uses on
ARTICLE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article I Page 3
adjacent lands. The performance standards are designed to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents as well as to encourage creativity in the design of future land
developments within the Township. Zoning districts designations are few in number; however,
each district has a specific purpose and the distinction between districts is significant. The districts
have been located and sized to accommodate the long range objectives based upon the Master
Plan for Marquette Township.
SECTION 1.05: DESIGNATED AUTHORITY
The Charter Township of Marquette Planning Commission is hereby designated the “Planning
Commission” as specified in Section 1, The Township Planning Act, P.A. 168 of 1959, as amended.
In accordance with the requirements of this Act, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Planning Commission to advise the Township Board on all planning matters. In addition, the
Planning Commission shall also assume the duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Board in
accordance with the requirements as set forth in Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended
(being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act), in MCL 125.3102, Section 102(u).(Amend. 08-02-10)
SECTION 1.06: APPLICATION
Except as otherwise provided for by preemptive law having authority over township zoning or as
provided for in this Ordinance, no building, structure, development, or land use shall be
commenced, altered, expanded, continued, used, or occupied unless it is in compliance with the
applicable regulations and requirements of this Ordinance and in accordance with permits and
stated conditions, issued hereunder.
SECTION 1.07 VESTED RIGHT
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted or construed to give rise to permanent vested rights
in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification, or any permissible activities
therein. Any part of this Ordinance may be amended when deemed reasonable for the
preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
SECTION 1.08 SEVERANCE
This Ordinance and the various parts, sections, subsections, provisions, sentences and clauses are
severable. If any part of this Ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or invalid it is declared
that the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 1.09: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS
Whenever regulations or requirements imposed by this Ordinance are either more or less
restrictive than regulations imposed by any other governmental authority through legislation, rule,
or regulation, the most restrictive, which impose the highest standards, shall govern. Regardless of
any other provision of this Ordinance, no land shall be used nor structure erected or maintained in
violation of any federal, state, or county pollution control, health, or environmental protection law
or regulation.
SECTION 1.10: RELATIONSHIP TO TEXT AND ATTACHMENTS
ARTICLE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article I Page 4
In the case of a difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any
caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
SECTION 1.11: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURAL GUIDES
For the benefit of residents, landowners, developers, and other interested parties, guides may be
developed explaining the various requirements and procedures established in this Ordinance. In
the event of any discrepancy between this Ordinance and any guide, the Ordinance shall be the
controlling document. The guides are intended to be an aid to understanding and are not
supplements or additions to this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
2.01: CONSTRUCTION 2
2.02: DEFINITIONS 2-32
2.03: ABBREVIATIONS 32
NOTE: ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS MAY ALSO BE FOUND IN THE FOLLOWING ARTICLES
ARTICLE 16: DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Section 16.08: Sexually Explicit Entertainment 30
Section 16.09: Care Facilities 32
Section 16.10: Alternative Energy 38
ARTICLE 22: SIGNS
Section 22.03: Definitions 4
ARTICLE 23: NONCONFORMITIES
Section 23.02: Definitions 2
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 2
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
SECTION 2.01: CONSTRUCTION
A. The following rules of construction shall apply to any interpretation of this Ordinance
except when the context clearly requires otherwise:
1. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common
and approved usage of the language. Technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be so construed and understood
accordingly.
2. The particular shall control the general.
3. The text of this Ordinance shall control over any differences in a caption or
illustration.
4. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and
derivative forms.
5. Words used in a singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicated the contrary.
6. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is
permissive.
7. The word “person” includes any individual, corporation, partnership, trust,
association, or any other similar legal entity.
8. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is
included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday,
the period is extended to include the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday.
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS
A. As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings as ascribed to them:
AASHTO – Abbreviation of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials, which conducts research and publishes many national road and non-motorized
standards.
Acceleration Lane – A speed-changing land, including taper, for the purpose of enabling a
vehicle entering the roadway to increase its speed to a rate at which it can safely merge with
through traffic.
Access – A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian entrance or exit to a
property from an abutting property or a public roadway.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 3
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Access Connection – Any driveway, street, road turnout or other means of providing for the
movement of vehicles to or from the public road system or between abutting sites.
Access Management – The process of providing and managing reasonable access to land
development while preserving the flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, and speed on the
abutting roadway system.
Access Management Plan – A plan establishing the preferred location and design of access for
properties along a roadway or the roadways in a community. It may be a freestanding
document, or a part of a community master or comprehensive plan, or a part of a corridor
management plan.
Access Point – a.) The connection of a driveway at the right-of-way line to a road. b.) A new
road, driveway, shared access or service drive.
Accessory - A use, activity, structure, or part of a structure that is subordinate and incidental to
the main activity or structure on the site. (Amend. 08-02-10)
Accessory Building or Structure - A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a lot,
or of a principal building on the same lot, and serving a purpose clearly incidental to a permitted
principal use of the lot or of the building and which accessory use or structure is compatible with
the principal permitted uses or structures authorized under the district zoning regulations
applicable to the property. (Amend. 08-02-10)
Accessory Structure, Non-Residential - A structure or combination of structures that: (1) are
located on the same lot, tract, or development parcel as the primary non-residential building; (2)
are clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a primary building or use; (3)
are subordinate too, and serving a primary building or use. (Amend. 08-02-10)
Accessory Use - A use that is incidental and subordinate to that of the main building or use of the
land and that is located on the same lot or parcel and held under the same ownership in all
respects. (Amend. 08-02-10)
Acre (Ac.) – A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet.
ADT – The annual average two-way daily traffic volume. It represents the total annual traffic for
the year, divided by 365. (Where annual data is not available, data from a shorter period may
sometimes be used).
Adult Book Store – See “Sexually Explicit Nude Entertainment.”
Adult Foster Care Facility – See Section 15.09, Care Facilities – Residential.
Agriculture – The art or science of cultivating the ground, including the harvesting of crops and by
extension, the rearing, reproducing and managing of livestock and poultry or other animals upon
the ground in fields or pastures or pens. Agricultural activity shall be further identified on the
basis of intensity as:
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 4
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Light Agricultural Activity: The cultivation of more than a garden but less than a farm,
where the primary land use is residential and the production of crops and husbandry of
domesticated animals is primarily for the consumption, enjoyment and/or use of the
occupants. The maximum number of domestic animals or poultry species permitted shall
not exceed one (1) animal unit per acre of land. See Animal Unit, Article II, Definitions,
and Article XV, Detailed Use Regulations, Section 15.04, B, Private Stables.
Traditional Agricultural Activities: One or more plots of land comprising a farm devoted to
the raising of domestic animals and/or the cultivation of crops in quantity for the primary
purpose of producing income, and which is operated in accordance with The Michigan
Right to Farm Act, Public Act P.A. 93 of 1981, as amended. The maximum number of
domestic animals or poultry species permitted shall not exceed two (2) animal units per
acre of land. See Animal Unit, Article II, Definitions.
Intensive Agriculture Activity: The keeping of animal or poultry species, either in pens or
buildings where the number of animal or poultry species, equivalent to one (1) animal unit,
exceeds one (1) animal unit per acre, and where the following conditions exist:
1. Animals have been, are, or will be, stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a
total of forty-five (45) days, or more, in any twelve (12) month period.
2. Crops, vegetation, forage growth or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the
normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. See Animal Unit, Article
II, Definitions.
Agricultural Produce Stand – A structure which is used seasonally for display and sale of
agricultural produce.
Alley – A service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and
not intended for general traffic circulation.
Alternative Means of Access – A shared driveway, frontage road, rear service drive or
connected parking lot.
Animal Unit – A unit of measurement for determining the number of domestic animals or poultry
permitted in a Zoning District and calculated by multiplying the actual number of animals or
poultry by their applicable animal equivalent unit(s) as shown in the table below. Generally,
animal units shall not exceed 1.0 per acre of land directly devoted to the raising and keeping of
the animals. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following equivalent animal units shall be
used.
Animal or Poultry Type (1 Each of These) Animal Unit (A.U.)
Per 1 Animal
Slaughter and Feed Cattle 1.00
Mature Dairy Cattle 1.40
Swine Weighing >55 lb. 0.60
Horses 2.00
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 5
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Sheep or Goats 0.10
Turkeys 0.02
Chickens W/Overflow Watering 0.01
Chickens W/Liquid Manure System 0.03
Ducks 0.20
Apartment House – A structure containing three (3) or more apartment units. See “Dwelling,
Multifamily”.
Apartment Unit – One or more room(s) with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an
independent self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing more than two dwelling units.
Approved Plan – A plan which has been granted final approval by the appropriate approving
authority.
Approving Authority – The agency, board, commission, group, or other legally designated
individual or authority which has been charged with review and approval of plans and
applications.
Arterial – See Road Classification.
Aquifer Recharge/Discharge Areas – Wetlands, lakes, and ponds which serve as retainers and
suppliers for the groundwater supply.
As-Built Site Plan – The site plan to be submitted to the Township Zoning Administrator upon
substantial completion of any project at least one week before anticipated occupancy in order
for review, final inspection, and issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Basement – That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that
the vertical distance from average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from
the average grade to the ceiling. If the vertical distance from the grade to the ceiling is over five
(5) feet, such basement shall be rated as a first story.
Beach – The strip of land between the water level of a lake or pond and the line of partially
stabilized vegetated soils which are not affected by wave action; or between that same water
level and the toe of a bluff.
Bed & Breakfast Establishment – As defined in Act. No. 112, Public Acts of 1987, being Section
4b(4), and incorporated herein, “Bed and Breakfast” means a single family residence structure
that meets all of the following criteria:
1. Has 8 or fewer sleeping rooms, including sleeping rooms occupied by the
innkeeper, 1 or more of which are available for rent to transient tenants.
2. Serves breakfast at no extra cost to its transient tenants.
3. Has a smoke detector in proper working order in every sleeping room and a
fire extinguisher in proper working order on every floor.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 6
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Bed & Breakfast Establishment – Small – A single family residence structure that meets all of the
following criteria:
1. Has 3 or fewer sleeping rooms, excluding rooms occupied by the innkeeper, 1
or more of which are available for rent to not more than 6 transient tenants
over the age of 6 years.
2. Serves breakfast at no extra cost to its transient tenants.
3. Has a smoke detector in proper working order in every sleeping room and a
fire extinguisher in proper working order on every floor.
Block – A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land,
railroad rights-or-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity to development.
Bluff – A land form that has a slope in excess of thirty (30) percent.
Boulevard – See Divided Driveway.
Bufferyard – A strip of land, including any specified type and amount of planting or structures
which may be required to protect one type of land use from another, or minimize or eliminate
conflicts between them.
Buildable Area – The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard, open space, and
bufferyard requirements of the zoning ordinance have been met.
Building – Structure designed for habitation, shelter, storage, trade, manufacture, religion,
business, education, and the like. A structure or edifice usually but not necessarily covered with a
roof.
Building Coverage – The horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the
ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 7
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Building Height – The vertical distance measured from established grade to the highest point of
the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs; to the average height between
eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on a sloping
terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building
walls. (For examples see below)
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 8
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Building Line – A line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the
front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
Building Permit – Written permission issued by the proper municipal authority for the construction,
repair, alteration, or addition to a structure.
Building, Principal – A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
Camper – A structure, which may be referred to as a pickup camper, travel trailer, 5th wheel, or
motorhome, designed and manufactured to be transported, whether carried upon, or towed by a
vehicle or self-propelled, to a semi-permanent site.
Campground – A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located, established, or
maintained for occupancy as camping units by the general public as temporary living quarters for
recreation, education, or vacation purposes.
Channelized or Channelizing Island – An area within the roadway or a driveway not for
vehicular movement; designed to control and direct specific movements of traffic to definite
channels. The island may be defined by paint, raised bars, curbs, or other devices.
Child Care or Day Care Center – See Section 15.09: Care Facilities.
Circulation Systems – Structures and physical improvements for the movement of people, goods,
water, air, sewage, or power by such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers,
airways, pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or trans-shipment points.
Classification of Roads – See Road Classification.
Collector – See Road Classification.
Comprehensive Development Plan – A comprehensive long-range plan intended to guide the
growth and development of a community or region and one that includes but is not limited to the
analysis, recommendation, and proposals for the community’s population, economy, housing,
transportation, community facilities, and land use.
Conditional Land Use – See “Special Land Use.”
Conflict – A traffic event that causes evasive action by a driver to avoid collision with another
vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian.
Conflict Point – An area where intersecting traffic either merges, diverges, or crosses.
Connected Parking Lot – Two or more parking lots that are connected by cross access.
Conflict Point – An area where intersecting traffic either merges, diverges, or crosses.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 9
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Connected Parking Lot – Two or more parking lots that are connected by cross access.
Corner Clearance – The distance from an intersection of a public or private road or street to the
nearest access connection, measured from the closest edge of the driveway pavement to the
closest edge of the road pavement.
Construction Permit – A permit required for the erection, alteration, or extension of a structure.
Conventional Energy System – Any energy system, including supply elements, furnaces, burners,
tanks, boilers, related controls, and energy distribution components, which uses any source(s) of
energy other than solar energy or wind energy.
Corridor Overlay Zone – A zoning district that provides special requirements that apply to
property in addition to those of the underlying district regulations along portions of a public
roadway.
County Road System, Local – Under Section 4 of Act 51 of Public Acts of 1951, as amended, all
county roads not included in the County Primary System constitute the County Local Road System.
Through the McNitt Act, maintenance of local roads became the responsibility of the County Road
Commission in the early 1930’s, and while up to 50% of Michigan Transportation Funds can be
used to maintain the County Local Road System, major township contributions are often required.
Unlike the County Primary Road System which involves three digit numbered roads, County local
roads are coded with two or three letters.
County Road System, Primary – The County Primary Road System is composed of roads of “…
the greatest general importance to the County” under the provisions of the Michigan Highway
Law, Section 2 of Act 51, Public Acts of 1951, as amended. Primary roads connect principal
traffic generating centers, provide collector/distributor routes, and to supplement the state truck
line system. Primary roads are financed by federal, state, and local resources and are
maintained by the County Road Commission using funds from the Michigan Transportation Fund.
County Road System, Seasonal – This system may be made up of either parts of the County
Local, County Primary, or both road systems. The County Road Commission is not required to
keep seasonal roads cleared of snow between November 1 and April 30 of any year. Seasonal
roads are not permitted to serve as the primary access to any year round (i.e., non-seasonal)
principal use involving a structure.
Critical Area – An area with one (1) or more of the following characteristics:
1. Slopes in excess or twenty (20) percent.
2. Floodplains.
3. Soils classified as having a high water table.
4. Soils classified as highly erodible.
5. Soils subject to erosion.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 10
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
6. Highly acidic soils.
7. Soils with inadequate percolation.
8. Land formerly used for landfill operations.
9. Former hazardous industrial land use areas.
10. Fault areas.
11. Stream Corridors.
12. Estuaries.
13. Mature stands of native vegetation.
14. Aquifer recharge and discharge areas.
Cross Access – A service road or driveway providing vehicular access between two or more
contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public road system.
Cross Street – The adjacent intersecting street or road.
Dark Sky – Ability to visually identify, without aid, zodiacal light, a prominently bright defined
Milky Way, bright star clusters in our galaxy and bright galaxies.
Day Care Center/Facility – See Section 15.09: Care Facilities.
Deceleration Lane – A speed-change lane, including taper, for the purpose of enabling a vehicle
to leave the through traffic lane at a speed equal to or slightly less than the speed of the traffic
in the through lane and to decelerate to a stop or to execute a slow speed turn.
Decibel (dB) – A unit of sound pressure level for expressing the relative intensity of sounds on a
scale of 0 – 130.
Density – The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing structures per unit of land.
Density, Gross – The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the site area of a
site.
District – A part, zone, or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or
development regulations apply.
Divided Driveway – A driveway with a raised median between ingress and egress lanes.
Double Wide Unit – See “Manufactured Housing.”
Drainage – (1) surface water runoff; (2) the removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 11
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for preserving the water
supply and the prevention or alleviation of flooding.
Driveway – Any entrance or exit used by vehicular traffic to or from land or buildings abutting a
road.
Driveway Flare – A triangular pavement surface at the intersection of a driveway with a public
street or road that facilitates turning movements and is used to replicate the turning radius in
areas with curb and gutter construction.
Driveway Offset – The distance between the inside edges of two driveways opposite sides of an
undivided roadway.
Driveway Return Radius – A circular pavement transition at the intersection of a driveway with a
street or road that facilitates turning movements to and from the driveway.
Driveway Shared – A driveway connecting two or more contiguous properties to the public road
system.
Driveway Spacing – The distance between driveways as measured from the centerline of one
driveway to the centerline of the second driveway along the same side of the street or road.
Driveway Width – Narrowest width of driveway measured perpendicular to the centerline of the
driveway.
Dump – A land site used primarily for the disposal by dumping, burial, burning, or other means
and for whatever purpose, garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or
parts thereof, and other waste, scrap, or discarded material of any kind.
Dune – A natural topographic feature composed primarily of sand, whether of windblown or
other origin, which lies within two (2) miles of the ordinary high water mark of Lake Superior.
Duplex – A dwelling containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the
other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both
dwelling units.
Dwelling – A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for human habitation.
Dwelling, Attached – A single-family dwelling attached to one or more other single-family
dwellings by common vertical walls
Dwelling, Detached – A dwelling which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
Dwelling, Multi-Family – A dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 12
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Dwelling, Principal – A primary or predominant dwelling which is used exclusively for human
habitation, i.e., versus caretaker residence, etc.
Dwelling, Single-Family – A building containing one dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached – A dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more
than one family and surrounded by open space or a yard and which is not attached to any other
dwelling by any means.
Dwelling Unit (DU) – One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as
separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the
dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
Easement – A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for
the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.
Egress – The exit of vehicular traffic from abutting properties to a street or road.
Emergency Service Center – Facilities, including improved land and any buildings and structures,
designed to accommodate police, fire, ambulance and other emergency services.
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) – A term applied to a less extensive environ-mental
review than an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), which attempts to describe the probable
impact of a proposed action on the environment and which is utilized by various agencies to
determine whether or not an Environmental Impact Statement will be required.
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) – An extensive report prepared by the developer or on
behalf of the developer detailing the consequences of a proposed action by answering the
following seven (7) major questions:
1. The probable impact of the proposed action.
2. Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should the
proposed action be implemented.
3. The probable impact of the proposed action.
4. Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should the
proposed action be implemented.
5. Alternatives to the proposed action.
6. The relationship between local short term uses of man’s environment and the
maintenance and enhancement of long term productivity.
7. Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be
involved in the proposed action should it be incorporated.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 13
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Erosion – The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or
gravity.
Erosion Hazard Area – An area of the shoreland determined by the Department of Natural
Resources Water Resources Commission to be a “high risk area” or any other area determined to
be subject to erosion.
Essential Services – The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of underground, surface
or overhead electrical, gas, steam, water and sewage transmission and collection systems, and the
equipment and appurtenances necessary for such systems to furnish an adequate level of public
service.
Factory-Built House – See “Manufactured Housing.”
Family – A collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit, whose
relationship is of a continuing, nontransient domestic character and who are cooking and living as
a single non-profit, domestic housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. This definition includes an
individual or a group of two or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or
adoption, but does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge,
organization or group of students or other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a
transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or terms or
other similar determinable period.
Family Day Care Home – See Section 15.09: Care Facilities.
Farm – A parcel of land of at least forty (40) acres devoted to raising crops or animals as a
source of income.
Farm Residence – A residence used in junction with any agricultural land use.
Fence – An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to
enclose or screen areas of land.
Fill – Sand, gravel, earth, or other materials of any composition whatsoever placed or deposited
by humans.
Final Approval – The last official action of the Planning Commission or Charter Township Board
taken on a development plan which has been given preliminary approval after all conditions and
requirements have been met, and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees
properly posted for their installation, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such
guarantees.
Flood Plain – The channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream
or river which has been or may be covered by floodwater.
Floor Area – The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of a building, measured from the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The floor area
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 14
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, or space
used for off-street parking or loading, breeze ways, enclosed and un-enclosed porches, elevator
or stair bulkheads, and necessary structures.
Floor Area, Gross – The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building,
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center of the common walls of
attached buildings. Gross floor area includes basement floors, attic floor space, walls, closets,
stairwells, space denoted to mechanical equipment, and enclosed porches. (Amend. 08-02-10)
Forest – Areas or stands of trees which are stocked with forest products of merchantable type
and size covering an area greater than one acre; or groves of mature trees regardless of area
that consist of substantial numbers of individual specimens.
Forest, Commercial – A tract of land containing no material natural resources other than forest
growth, no portion of which is used for agricultural, mineral extraction, grazing, industrial,
developed recreational, or resort purposes, and upon which the owner proposes to develop,
maintain, and actively manage a forest through planting, natural reproduction, or other forest
practices pursuant to The Commercial Forest Act, Public Act 94 of 1925, as amended.
Forest, Non-Commercial – A tract of land containing no material natural resources other than
forest growth, no portion of which is used for agricultural, mineral extraction, grazing, industrial,
developed recreational, or resort purposes not developed, maintained or actively managed
pursuant to The Commercial Forest Act, Public Act 94 of 1925, as amended.
Forestry – The science and art of cultivating, maintaining and developing timber tracts, tree
farms, forest nurseries and the harvesting of forest products.
Frontage Road or Front Service Drive – A local street/road or private road typically located in
front of principal buildings and parallel to an arterial for service to abutting properties for the
purpose of controlling access to the arterial.
Functional Classification – A system used to group public roads into classes according to their
purpose in moving vehicles and providing access to abutting properties. See Road Classification.
Grade (Road) – The rate or percent of change in slope, in either ascending or descending, from
or along the roadway. It is to be measured along the centerline of the roadway or access.
Gravel Pit – An open land area where sand, gravel, and/or rock fragments are mined or
excavated for sale or off-tract use.
Green Area – Land shown on a development plan, master plan, or official map for preservation,
recreation, landscaping, or park.
Greenbelt – An open area which may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state surrounding
development or used as a buffer between land uses or to mark the edge of an urban or
developed area.
Group Day Care Home – See “Section 15.09: Care Facilities.”
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 15
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
High Risk Area – An area of the shoreland which is determined to be subject to erosion on the
basis of studies and surveys by the Department of Natural Resources Water Resources
Commission.
Home for the Aged – A supervised care facility, other than a hotel, adult foster care facility,
hospital, nursing home, or county medical care facility, that provides room, board, and supervised
personal care to seven (7) or more unrelated, nontransient, individuals sixty-two (62) years of
age or older.
Home Occupation – Any activity which is carried out for gain by a resident in his or her dwelling
unit.
Home Professional Office – A home occupation consisting of the office of a practitioner of a
recognized profession.
Hospital – A facility offering inpatient, overnight care, and services for observation, diagnosis,
and active treatment of an individual with a medical, surgical, obstetric, chronic, or rehabilitative
condition requiring the daily direction or supervision of a physician.
Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) – A measurement of the intensity of land use which is determined
by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on a site by base site area, in the case of
residential uses, or by net buildable site area in the case of nonresidential uses.
Individual Sewage Disposal System – A system for the disposal of sanitary sewage in the
ground, which is so designed and constructed as to treat sewage in a manner that will retain most
of the settleable solids in a septic tank and discharge the liquid portion to an adequate disposal
field.
Infrastructure – Facilities, utilities, and services needed to sustain industrial, residential, and
commercial activities.
Ingress – The entrance of vehicular traffic to abutting properties from a roadway.
Institutional Use – A nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, municipally owned or operated building, structure, or land used for public
purpose.
Interchange – A facility that grade separates intersecting roadways and provides directional
ramps for access movements between the roadways. The structure, ramps and right-of-way are
considered part of the interchange.
International Dark Sky Association (IDA) – Established in 1988 as an educational,
environmental 501(c) (3) nonprofit dedicated to protecting and preserving the nighttime
environment and the heritage of dark skies through quality outdoor lighting. With thousands of
members in more than 70 countries, IDA is the leading authority regarding problems and solutions
related to light pollution.
Intersection – The location where two or more roadways cross at grade without a bridge.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 16
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Intersection Sight Distance – The sight distance provided at intersections to allow the drivers of
stopped vehicles a sufficient view of the intersecting roadways to decide when to enter the
intersecting roadway or to cross it. The time required is the sum of the perception reaction time
plus the time to accelerate and cross or enter the major roadway traffic stream.
ITE – Abbreviation of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, which conducts research and
publishes many national road standards.
Junk – Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored or used in
conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, bailing, disposal, or other use or
disposition.
Junkyard – Any area, lot, land, parcel, building, structure or part thereof used for the storage,
collection, processing, purchase, sale, or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or
discarded goods, materials, machinery, or two or more unregistered inoperable motor vehicles, or
other type of junk.
Kennel, Commercial – A licensed establishment in which dogs or other domesticated animals over
six (6) months old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold. The keeping of five (5)
or more animals over six (6) months old shall be considered a commercial kennel regardless of
ownership or species of animals.
Lake – A body of water two (2) or more acres in area that retains water year round. It may be
naturally or artificially created.
Land Use Intensity (LUI) – A measure of the magnitude and negative impact of a land use on the
environment and neighboring land uses. See Also Article XIV, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts,
Sections 14.02, Land Use Intensity.
Land Use Plan – A plan showing the existing and proposed location, extent, and intensity of land
development to be used in the future for varying types of residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational, educational, and other public and private purposes or combination of
purposes.
Landscape – (1) An expanse of natural scenery; (2) the addition of lawns, trees, plants, and other
natural and decorative features to land.
Lane – The portion of a roadway for the movement of a single line of vehicles which does not
include the gutter or shoulder of the roadway.
Light, Direct – Visible light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector
diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
Light Fixture, Full Cut-Off Type – A luminaire or light fixture that, by design of the housing, does
not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a 90-degree horizontal plane from
the base of the luminaire.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 17
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Light, Fully Shielded – Fully shielded luminaire light fixture which can control the glare in any
direction.
Light, Indirect – Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of surfaces other than
those associated with the light fixture.
Light Pollution – Reflected light that is emitted into the atmosphere above the 90-degree
horizontal plane from the luminaire, and which can or does cause unwanted sky glow or which can
be or is seen from an abutting property.
Light Trespass – When spill light from a light fixture, street light or flood light enters a window
and illuminates an indoor area.
Lighting, Outdoor – The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by any manufactured
device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
Lighting, Street – Lighting provided for highway, major, collector, and local roads where
pedestrians and cyclists are generally present. The primary purpose of street lighting is to help
the motorist identify obstacles, provide adequate visibility of pedestrians and cyclists, and assist
in visual search tasks, both on and adjacent to the roadway.
Local Road or Street – See Road Classification.
Lot – A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise
permitted by law, to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit.
Lot, Corner – A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersection, or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than
135 degrees.
Lot, Flag – A large lot with minimal frontage and where access to the public road is by a
narrow, private right-of-way or driveway. (Amend. 06-20-00)
Lot, Minimum Area of – The smallest lot area established by the zoning ordinance on which
a use or structure may be located in a particular district.
Lot Area – The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way.
Lot Depth – The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line or in the
case of a water front lot, from the lake frontage line to the street frontage line. Five
evenly separated lines drawn from the front to the rear lot lines, or lake frontage line,
shall be utilized in determining the mean horizontal distance. Two of these five (5) lines
shall be the side lot lines. (Amend. 06-20-00)
Lot Line – Any line dividing one lot from another or from a right-of-way and thus
constitutes the property lines bounding a lot. Irregular lots that do not fit the definitions
listed below, may have an application to be determined at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator. (Amend. 06-20-00)
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 18
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Lot Line, Front – Is the line which creates the abutting street right-of-way line. In the case
of a flag lot, for determining setback, width and depth requirements, the front lot line
shall be the line adjacent to the parcel or parcels in front of said flag lot. This front line
for flag lots will be parallel or nearly parallel to the right-of-way line.
(Amend. 06-20-00)
Lot Line, Rear – The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case
of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely
within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side – Any lot line other than the front lot line or the rear lot line.
(Amend. 06-20-00)
Lot Width – The required horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the
two points where the required front setback line intersects the side lot lines.
(Amend. 06-20-00)
Lot of Record – A lot which exists as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the
local register of deeds.
Luminaire – A complete lighting system, including a light source component (lamp or lamps that
produce the actual light) and a fixture.
Luminaire, Height of – The vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the
luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
Mall – See “Shopping Center.”
Manufactured Housing –
Mobile/Manufactured Houses – Residential structures built on a steel undercarriage with
necessary wheel assembly to be transported to a permanent or semi-permanent site. The
wheel assembly can be removed when placed on a permanent foundation, but the steel
undercarriage remains intact, as necessary structural component.
Modular/Manufactured Houses – Residential structures that can be transported on a steel
undercarriage, but the undercarriage is not a permanent and necessary structural
component, and is usually removed when placed on a foundation. Modular housing will
meet most local building codes and is subject to standard regional or state building codes
for modular construction.
Panelized or Prefabricated Houses – Residential structures that consist of packaged,
factory-built components and are site-assembled. All must conform with local and state or
regional building codes for site-built construction (Source: 1986 – Marshall & Swift).
Median – The portion of a divided roadway or divided entrance separating the traveled ways
from opposing traffic. Medians may be depressed, painted or raised with a physical barrier or
may be landscaped.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 19
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Median Opening – A gap in a median provided for crossing and turning traffic.
Mine – (1) A cavity in the earth from which minerals and ores are extracted; (2) The act of
removing minerals and ores.
Mineral – An organic or inorganic substance in the earth having a consistent and distinctive set of
physical properties and composition that can be expressed by a chemical formula including, but
not limited to, iron ore, copper, sand, gravel, stone, gypsum, peat, topsoil, silver, gold, diamonds
and other precious and semi-precious stones, and uranium.
Mining – The extraction of minerals including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude
petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation;
milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and floatation; and other preparation customarily
done at the mine site or as part of a mining activity.
Mobile Home – See “Manufactured Housing.”
Mobile Home Park – A site with required improvements and utilities for the long-term parking of
mobile homes which may include services and facilities for the residents.
Mobile Home Space – A plot of land for placement of a single mobile home within a mobile
home park.
Nonconforming Access – Features of the access system of a property that existed prior to the
effective date of Article II and Article XIII, as amended, for access management and that do not
conform with the requirements of this Ordinance; or in some cases, elements of approved access
that are allowed by means of a temporary permit or on a conditional basis, until alternative
access meeting the terms of this ordinance becomes available.
Nonconforming Lot – A lot whose area, dimensions, or location were conforming or lawful prior
to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but which fails by reason of
such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning
district.
Nonconforming Sign – Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of an ordinance, which
due to an amendment thereto renders such sign nonconforming because it does not conform to all
the standards and regulations of the newly adopted or amended ordinance.
Nonconforming Structure or Building – A structure or building the size, dimensions, or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to a zoning ordinance, but which
fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance. See Article XXII: Nonconformities, Section 22.02: Definitions.
Nonconforming Use – A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or
amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, revision, or
amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. See Also Article XXII:
Nonconformities, Section 22.02, Definitions.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 20
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Nuisance Element – Any environmental pollutant, such as smoke, odors, liquid wastes, solid
wastes, radiation, noise, vibration, glare, or heat.
Nursery – Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, and plants for sale.
Nursing Home – A nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, but excluding a
hospital or a facility created by Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, as amended, being
Section 36.1 to 36.12 of the Michigan Complied Laws, which provides organized nursing care and
medical treatment to 7 or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or
infirmity.
Occupant – An individual(s) or entity in actual possession of a premise. (Amend. 04-21-09)
Official Soil Map – Maps which delineate soil types and are part of a United States Department
of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey.
Off Street Parking – A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to
an access aisle, and which is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
Open Space – Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved or with landscaped
improvements, and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space.
Open Space Ratio (OSR) – Total area of on-site (lot) open space divided by the total of
impervious surfaced site improvements expressed as a ratio.
Outbuilding – A separate accessory building or structure not physically connected to the principal
building.
Park & Ride – An off-street parking facility that allows commuters and other users wishing to
travel into other areas of the community the ability to leave their vehicles and transfer to a bus,
public transportation or other commuter vehicles for the remainder of their trip.
Passing Sight Distance – The length of roadway ahead necessary for one vehicle to pass
another before meeting an opposing vehicle which might appear after the passing maneuver
began. (This type of sight distance is not an issue in access management).
Peak Hour Trips (PHT) – A weighted average vehicle trip generation rate during the hour of
highest volume of traffic entering and exiting the site in the morning (a.m.) or the afternoon (p.m.).
Performance Guarantee – Any security that may be accepted by a municipality as a guarantee
that improvements required as part of an application for development are satisfactorily
completed.
Performance Standards – A set of criteria or limits relating to nuisance elements which a
particular use or process may not exceed.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 21
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Permit – Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the
holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization.
Permitted Use – Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to
that zoning district and the other provisions of the ordinance.
Person – Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, association or any other similar
legal entity.
Planning Commission – The duly designated planning commission of the municipality, county, or
region.
Plot – (1) A single unit parcel of land; (2) a parcel of land that can be identified and referenced
to a recorded plat or map.
Plot Plan – The development plan for uses designated in this Ordinance on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot including: significant natural features, utilities,
structures, driveways, and other information that reasonably may be required in order that an
informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
Pond – A body of water less that two (2) acres in area that retains water year-round. It may be
naturally or artificially created.
Potable Water – Water suitable for drinking or cooking purposes.
Poultry Farm, Commercial – The place of confined keeping, raising or breeding of more than
twenty (20) fowl for the production of eggs or meat for commercial purposes.
Principal Use – The primary or predominant use of any lot.
Public Areas – Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, and other recreational areas and other
public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; schools and other public buildings and structures.
Public Hearing – A meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public, where
the public is given an opportunity to participate.
Public Notice – The advertisement of a public hearing in a paper of general circulation in the
area, and through other media sources, indicating the time, place, and nature of the public
hearing.
Public Utility – See “Utility.”
Quarry – A place where rock, ore, stone, and similar materials are excavated for sale or for offtract
use. See “Gravel Pit; Sand Pit.”
Quasi-Public – A use owned or operated by non-profit, religious or charitable institution and
providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious, or similar types of public programs.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 22
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Quorum – A majority of the full authorized membership of a board or agency.
Ravine – A small narrow steep sided valley which adjoins a perennial or intermittent watercourse.
It includes the bottom lands of the ravine and the ravine side walls to a point where the slope is
less than fifteen (15) percent.
Ravine Buffer – The area extending one hundred and fifty (150) feet beyond the top of the
ravine wall.
Rear Service Drive – A local street/road or private road typically located behind principal
buildings and parallel to an arterial for service to abutting properties for the purpose of
controlling access to the arterial.
Rear Yard – See “Yards.”
Reasonable Access – The minimum number of access connections, direct or indirect, necessary to
provide safe access to and from a public road consistent with the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance, with any other applicable plans of Marquette Township, with Act 200 of 1969, or
with other applicable law of the State of Michigan. Reasonable access does not necessarily mean
direct access.
Recreation, Active – Leisure time activities, usually of a more formal nature and performed with
others, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields.
Recreation Facility – A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities.
Recreation Facility, Commercial – A recreation facility operated as a business and open to the
public for a fee.
Recreation Facility, Personal – A recreation facility provided as an accessory use on the same lot
as the principal permitted use and designed to be used primarily by the occupants of the
principal use and their guests.
Recreation Facility, Private – A recreation facility operated by a non-profit organization, and
open only to bona fide members and guests of such non-profit organization.
Recreation Facility, Public – A recreation facility operated by a governmental agency and open
to the general public.
Recreation, Passive – Any leisure time activity not considered active.
Recreational Development – A residential development planned, maintained, operated, and
integrated with a major recreational facility.
Recreational Vehicle – A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which
can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 23
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
recreational, camping, and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck
campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
Recreational Vehicle Park – See “Campground.”
Regional Arterial – A major arterial. See Road Classification.
Residence – A home, abode, or place where an individual is actually living at a specific point in
time.
Residential Unit – See “Household.”
Resort – A facility for transient guests where the primary attraction is generally recreational
facilities or activities.
Restaurant – An establishment where food and drink is prepared, sold, served, and consumed
primarily within the principal building.
Fast Food Restaurant – Establishment with a drive-through window intended for off-site or
both on and off-site sale and consumption of food and drink.
Sit-Down Restaurant – Establishment primarily intended for on-site sale and consumption of
food and drink.
Restriction – A limitation on property which may be created in a property deed, lease,
mortgage, through certain zoning or subdivision regulations, or as a condition of approval of an
application for development.
Retail Food Establishment – Any fixed or mobile place or facility at or in which food or drink is
offered or prepared for retail sale or for service with charge on or off the premises.
Retail Services – Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to
the general public, including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate
and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and recreational services, health and
social services, educational services, museums and galleries.
Retail Trade – Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Rezone – To change the zoning classification of particular lots or parcels of land.
Ridge Line – The intersection of two roof surfaces forming the highest horizontal line of the roof.
Right-of-Way – A general term denoting land, property or interest therein, usually in a strip,
acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 24
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Road – A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a “street”, “highway”, “thoroughfare”,
“parkway”, “through-way”, “avenue”, “boulevard”, “lane”, “cul-de-sac”, “place”, or otherwise
designated, and includes the entire area within the right-of-way.
Road or Street, Cul-de-sac – A street with a single common ingress and egress and with a
turnaround at the end.
Road or Street, Dual – A street with opposing lanes separated by a median strip, center
island, or other form of barrier, which cannot be crossed except at designated locations.
Road or Street, Loop – A local street which has its only ingress and egress at two (2) points
on the same collector street.
Road or Street, Private – A privately owned and maintained road or street characterized
by a joint operating agreement that runs with the land and binds the benefited parcels
and which is not under the jurisdiction of the Marquette County Road Commission.
Road or Street, Seasonal – A County Road, or a portion thereof, which is not normally
maintained or snowplowed by the Marquette County Road Commission during the months
of November through April.
Road or Street, State Trunkline Highways – Highways planned, designed, and constructed,
and maintained by the state. With funds provided by the Michigan Department of
Transportation, road maintenance is contracted to the County Road Commission. Road
construction is contracted to private contractors.
Road Classification – Roadways are classified by the following categories.
Collector – A roadway that provides for traffic movement between arterials and local
streets and carries moderate traffic volumes over moderate distances. Collectors may
also provide direct access to abutting properties.
Local Street – A street or road intended to provide access to abutting properties, which
tends to accommodate lower traffic volumes and serves to provide mobility within that
neighborhood.
Major Arterial – Arterials are roadways of regional importance intended to serve
moderate to high volumes of traffic traveling relatively long distances. A major arterial is
intended primarily to serve through traffic where access is carefully controlled. Some
major arterials are referred to as “regional arterials”.
Minor Arterial – A roadway that is similar in function to major arterials, but operates
under lower traffic volumes, over shorter distances, and provides a higher degree of
property access than major arterials.
Roadway – That portion of a street, road or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 25
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
separate roadways, “roadway” refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all such
roadways collectively.
Roof – The outside top covering of a building.
Roof –
Flat – A roof which is not pitched and the surface of which is parallel to the ground.
Gable – A roof sloping downward in two (2) parts at an angle from a central ridge.
Gambrel – A gabled roof with two (2) slopes on each side, the lower steeper than the
upper.
Hip – A roof with sloping ends and sides.
Mansard – A roof with two (2) slopes on each of four (4) sides, the lower steeper than the
upper.
Shed – A roof with one (1) slope.
Rooming House – A dwelling or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner or
operator to more than three boarders living in rooming units, none of which are dwelling units.
Salvage – The utilization of waste materials.
Salvage Yard/Recycling Center – Any area, lot, land, parcel, building, structure, or part thereof
used to salvage, recycle, or prepare for recycling any waste materials.
Sand Pit – A surface mine or excavation used for the removal of sand, gravel, or fill dirt for sale
or for use off-tract. See “Gravel Pit.”
Sanitary Landfill – A site for solid waste disposal.
Scrap – Discarded or rejected materials that result from manufacturing or fabrication operations.
Scrap Yard – Any area, lot, land, parcel, building, structure, or part thereof used for the storage
of scrap.
Seasonal Dwelling Unit – A dwelling unit that lacks one (1) or more of the basic amenities or
utilities required for all year or all weather occupancy.
Seasonal Use – A use carried on for only a part of the year such as outdoor swimming during the
summer months or skiing during the winter months.
Secondary Street or Side Street – A street or road with a lower functional classification than the
intersecting street or road (e.g. a local street is a side or secondary street when intersecting with
a collector or arterial).
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 26
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Service Drive – See Frontage Road or Rear Service Drive.
Shared Driveway or Common Driveway – See Driveway, Shared.
Shoulder – The portion of a public road contiguous to the traveled way for the accommodation of
disabled vehicles and for emergency use.
Setback, Minimum Yard – All setbacks are measured from the building or wall foundation to the
most restrictive of the following: the property line, the right-of-way line, the line of any easement
used for present or future public or private roads, or a line fifteen feet back from the surface
edge of the road and which line is parallel or nearly parallel to any access road, service road, or
easement which serves more than one building and functions as a public or private road. (Amend.
06-02-98)
Sexually Explicit Nude Entertainment – The offering for observation by patrons or members of
the public, whether or not a fee, compensation or other goods and services are sold or offered in
conjunction therewith, of entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
acts depicting, suggesting, describing, displaying, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” as defined in Section 15.08.
Shopping Center – A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as
a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery
separated from customer access, aesthetic consideration, and protection from the elements.
Shoreland – An area within one hundred (100) feet of the average high water mark of a lake or
pond and all area in close proximity to the shoreline.
Shoreline – That area of the shorelands where land and water meet.
Short-Term Rental – A residential dwelling not owner-occupied, which is rented all, or in part, on
a daily, weekly, or monthly basis for ninety (90) days or less.
Sight Distance – The distance of unobstructed view for the driver of a vehicle, as measured along
the normal travel path of a roadway to a specified height above the roadway.
Sign – Any object, devise, display, structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is
used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. See also Article XXI,
Signs, Section 21.03, Definitions.
Site – Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land.
Site Area – The total area within the plot or parcel (i.e., lot) lines, or lines of contiguous lots or
parcels of land.
Site Plan – The development plan for one(1) or more lots on which is shown the existing and
proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, and
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 27
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping,
structures and signs, lighting, and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may
be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
Spill Light – Focused light sources that are not useful, e.g., producing lighting where it is not
wanted.
Soil – All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock
and can be readily excavated.
Soil Conservation District – A government subdivision that provides advice to communities,
agencies, and individuals within its jurisdiction relative to soils information.
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan – A plan that indicates necessary land treatment
measures, including a schedule for installation which will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation.
Soil Map – A map prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service or comparable agency, indicating the following soil characteristics; slope, depth to
seasonal high water, depth to bedrock, permeability, natural drainage class, stoniness, and flood
and stream overflow hazard.
Solar Energy System – A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, an
energy storage facility (where used), and components for the distribution of transformed energy.
Solid Waste – Unwanted or discarded material, including garbage with insufficient liquid content
to be free flowing. Solid waste may be categorized as follows: (1) Agricultural – a solid waste
that results from the raising and slaughtering of animals, and the processing of animal products
and orchard and field crops; (2) Commercial – waste generated by stores, offices and other
activities that do not actually turn out a product; (3) Industrial – waste that results from industrial
processes and manufacturing; (4) Institutional – waste originating from educational, health care
and research facilities; (5) Pesticide – the residue from the manufacturing, handling, or use of
chemicals intended for killing microbial, plant or animal pests; (6) Residential – waste that
normally originates in a residential environment, sometimes called domestic solid waste.
Special Land Use – A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use
in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or
operation of such use as specified in a zoning ordinance and authorized by the appropriate
approving authority.
Spot Zoning – Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for a use incompatible
with surrounding uses and not for the purpose of implementing a comprehensive plan.
Stable, Commercial – An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for and where
instruction in riding, jumping, and showing is offered and the general public may, for a fee, hire
horses for riding.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 28
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Stable, Private – A structure and associated pasture or grazing area used for the shelter or care
of horses or ponies.
Standard – A definite rule or measure establishing a minimum level of quantity or quality that
must be complied with or satisfied in order to obtain development approval, such as (but not
limited to) a height, setback, bulk, lot area, location or spacing requirement.
Stopping Sight Distance – The available sight distance should be sufficiently long to enable a
vehicle traveling at or near the design speed to stop before reaching a stationary object in its
path. Stopping sight distance is the sum of brake reaction distance and braking distance.
Street – See Road.
Structure – Any constructed, erected, or placed material or combination of materials in or upon
the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, sheds, decks, free standing signs,
fences, storage bins, and satellite dishes, but not including sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking
lots, and utility poles. Building areas separated by fire walls or bearing walls shall not be
considered separate structures under this Ordinance.
Subdivision – The division of a lot, tract, or parcel or land into five (5) or more lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, or of building development.
The meaning of the term “subdivision” shall not, however, apply to the partitioning or dividing of
land into tracts or parcels of land or more than ten (10) acres.
Subdivision, Conventional – A conventional subdivision consists of single family dwellings on
individual lots with no provisions for clustering of dwelling units, reduction of lot sizes below the
specified lot area, or required community or neighborhood open space. A conventional
subdivision is characterized by division of the entire subject parcel into individual lots.
Taper – A triangular pavement surface that transitions the roadway pavement to accommodate
an auxiliary lane.
Target Area – The location of the target area which is intended to be illuminated by the light
source.
Temporary Access – Provision of direct access to a road until that time when adjacent properties
develop in accordance with a joint access agreement, service road, or other shared access
arrangement.
Temporary Structure – A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when
the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has
ceased.
Temporary Use – A use established for a fix period of time with the intent to discontinue such use
upon the expiration of the time period.
Tent Theater – A large tent used for plays and theatrical entertainment.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 29
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Thoroughfare – A public roadway, the principal use or function of which is to provide an arterial
route for through traffic, with its secondary function the provision of access to abutting property
and which is classified as a “major or minor arterial”.
Throat Length – The distance parallel to the centerline of a driveway to the first on-site location
at which a driver can make a right-turn or a left-turn. On roadways with curb and gutter, the
throat length shall be measured from the face of the curb. On roadways without a curb and
gutter, the throat length shall be measured from the edge of the paved shoulder.
Throat Width – The distance edge-to-edge of a driveway measured at the right-of-way line.
Tiny Home – A manufactured or conventionally built structure, 450 square feet in size or less,
which may be built on a steel undercarriage with the necessary wheel assembly to be transported
to a permanent or semi-permanent site. The steel undercarriage and/or wheels may be removed
when placed on a permanent foundation.
Traveled Way – The portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders
and auxiliary lanes.
TRB – Abbreviation of the Transportation Research Board, which conducts research and publishes
transportation research, findings and policy.
Trip Generation – The estimated total number of vehicle trip ends produced by a specific land
use or activity. A trip end is the total number of trips entering or leaving a specific land use or
site over a designated period of time. Trip generation is estimated through the use of trip rates
that are based upon the type and intensity of development.
Tours, Guided – Organized excursions for the purpose of sightseeing.
Trailer – A structure standing on wheels, towed, or hauled by another vehicle and used for shortterm
human occupancy, carrying materials, goods or objects, or as a temporary office.
Trails (snowmobile) – Any cleared way, path or area on any lot, parcel, land, right-of-way, or
easement which is used by snowmobiles for seasonal use as defined by the State of Michigan.
This is not to include automobiles, vans, trucks and motorcycles, dirt bikes, all terrain vehicles and
other motorized traffic. This definition does not include private land used for said activity solely
by and for the landowner and his or her household. (Amend. 02-19-02)
Trails (non-motorized) - Any cleared way, path or area on any lot, parcel, land, right-of-way, or
easement which is used by pedestrians, joggers, hikers, bicyclists, rollerbladers, skateboarders,
cross country skiers, and similar types of recreation users but not by any snowmobiles, all terrain
vehicles or other motorized vehicles. This definition does not include private land used for said
activity solely by and for the landowner and his or her household nor does it include public
sidewalks. (Amend. 02-19-02)
Trails (all terrain vehicles) – Any cleared way, path or area on any lot, parcel, land, right-ofway,
or easement which is used by, off road vehicles, dirt bikes, and other motorized off road
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 30
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
vehicles which are tagged and licensed by the State of Michigan. This is not to include
snowmobiles. This definition does not include private land used for said activity solely by and for
the landowner and his or her household. (Amend. 02-19-02)
Undivided Roadway – A roadway having access on both sides of the direction of travel,
including roadways having center two-way left-turn lanes.
Uplighting – Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane.
Utility, (Private or Public) – Any agency which, under public franchise or ownership, or under
certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam,
communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service or a closely
regulated private enterprise with a franchise for providing a public service. This definition shall
not include Wireless Communication Facilities, Attached Wireless Communications Facilities, and
Wireless Communication Support Structures. (Amend. 02-20-01)
Wireless Communication Facilities shall mean and include all structures and accessory facilities
relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving
radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers,
telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment
building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are:
citizen band facilities; short wave facilities; ham, amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and,
governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt
municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following additional terms are
defined:
1. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities shall mean wireless communication facilities
that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility
poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly
established shall not be included within this definition.
2. Wireless Communication Support Structures shall mean structures erected or modified to
support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include,
but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed
towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support
structure.
3. Collocation shall mean the location by two or more wireless communication providers of
wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view
toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless
communication antennas within the community. (Amend. 02-20-01)
Utility, Facilities – The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead, gas,
communication, telephone, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or
distribution systems, collections, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes,
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 31
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories in connection therewith which are
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal
departments for the general public health, safety, convenience, or welfare, but not
including service centers, office buildings, substations, towers, or structures which
are enclosures or shelters for the service equipment or maintenance depots. Also
see Article XV, Section 15.02, E., Emergency Service Centers.
Utility Facilities, Local or Minor – Those utility facilities primarily serving the
Township or portion thereof.
Utility Facilities, Regional or Major – Those utility facilities primarily serving, or
extending to serve, two or more municipalities in a county or region.
Utility Service Centers – Establishments engaged in the generation, transmission,
and/or distribution of electricity, gas, or steam, including but not limited to water
and irrigation systems and sanitary systems used for the collection and disposal of
garbage, sewage, and other wastes by means of destroying or processing
materials, and which may include office buildings, substations, towers or structures
which are enclosures or shelters, for the service equipment or maintenance depots.
Variance, Use – A variance granted for a use that is not allowable in the zoning district in which
such variance is granted; use variances are not legally issuable by townships in the State of
Michigan.
Variance, Non-use – A variance granted from any provision of the Zoning Ordinance, other than
use.
Wetland – Based upon The Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, P.A. 203, 1979, as
amended, a wetland area is characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration
sufficient under normal circumstances to support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is
commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh and which is any of the following:
a. Contiguous to the Great Lakes or Lake St. Clair, an inland lake or pond, or a river or
stream.
b. Not contiguous to the Great Lakes, an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; and
more than five (5) acres in size.
c. Not contiguous to the Great Lakes, an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; and
five (5) acres or less in size if the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) determines
that protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of
the state from pollution, impairment, or destruction and the DNR has so notified the
owner.
Wood Yard – A parcel of land where pulp wood and other logs are gathered from various
locations and stored for commercial sale.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 32
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
Woodland, Young – An area of plant material covering at least five (5) contiguous acres with a
density of fifty (50) or more trees per acre at least eight (8) inches D.B.H.
Yards –
Yard, Front – An open space extending the full width of the lot and lying between the
front line of the lot and the nearest point of any building or structure.
Yard, Rear – An open space extending the full width of the lot and lying between the rear
line of the lot and nearest line of any building or structure.
Yard, Side – An open space between the side line of the lot and nearest line of any
building or structure and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Zone – A specifically delineated area of district in a municipality within which regulations and
requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
Zoning – The dividing of a municipality into districts and the establishment of regulations
governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
Zoning Administrator – The township official designated to administer and enforce the Zoning
Ordinance.
Zoning Map – The map and maps which are a part of the Zoning Ordinance and delineate the
boundaries of zone districts.
Zoning Compliance Certificate – A document signed by the Zoning Administrator, as required in
the Zoning Ordinance, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection,
construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion, or installation of a structure or
building, which acknowledges that such use, structure, or building complies with the provisions of
the municipal zoning or authorized variance therefrom.
SECTION 2.03: ABBREVIATIONS
The following abbreviations used within this Ordinance have the following meanings:
AC - Acre GFA - Gross Floor Area
AU - Animal Unit LF - Lineal Feet
DBH - Diameter at Breast Height OSR - Open Space Ratio
DU/AC-Dwelling Units Per Acre Sq. Ft. - Square Feet
EIA - Environmental Impact Assessment EIS - Environmental Impact Statement
MET - Meteorological Tower WES - Wind Energy System
SWES -Small Wind Energy System MWES - Medium Wind Energy System
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 2 Page 33
SECTION 2.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
LWES - Large Wind Energy System (Amend. 08-02-10)
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 3 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 3
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION TITLE PAGE
3.01: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 2
3.02: ZONING DISTRICT MAP 2
3.03: INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING DISTRICT MAP 2
3.04: ZONING OF VACATED AREAS 3
3.05: ZONING OF FILLED LAND AREAS 3
3.06: APPLICATION OF ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 4
3.07: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS 4
3.08: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 5
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 3 Page 2
ARTICLE 3: THE ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
SECTION 3.01: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
The zoning districts defined in this Article are hereby established for all land and water areas
within the Charter Township of Marquette. The intended provisions and requirements for each
specific zoning district are specified in this Ordinance. The seven (7) specific zoning districts are
designated as follows:
(RR) Rural Residential District
(SR) Scenic Residential District
(UR) Urban Residential District
(DD) Development District
(GB) General Business District
(SB) Segregated Business District
(RP) Resource Production District
(FR) Forest Recreation District
SECTION 3.02: ZONING DISTRICT MAPS
The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the Official Zoning
Map, Section 3.08, which accompanies this Ordinance and which, with all notations, references,
and other information thereon, shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if fully described
herein. The zoning map shall be certified as the official copy by the signature of the Township
Supervisor, and attested to by the Township Clerk. The official map shall be kept in the Township
Hall. Subsequent maps and descriptions accompanying enacted amendments shall be noted on
the official copy until such time as the official copy is updated by the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 3.03: INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING DISTRICT MAPS
A. Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the zoning maps accompanying
this Ordinance, there is an uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location
of any zoning district boundary as shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact
location of the zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The Board, in arriving at a decision on these matters, shall apply the following
standards:
1. Zoning district boundary lines shown as following, or approximately following, the
limits of any municipal corporation shall be construed to be the boundaries.
2. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or
perpendicular thereto, or along the center lines of alleys, streets, rights-of-way, or
water courses, unless the zoning district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as
shown on the zoning map.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 3 Page 3
SECTION 3.03: INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING DISTRICT MAPS – (Cont.)
3. Zoning district boundary lines shown as following section lines, one-quarter section
lines, or one-sixteenth lines shall be construed to establish such lines as the district
boundaries.
4. Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot
lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries
5. Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of any boundary, unless
the location is indicated by dimensions shown on the zoning map, shall be determined
by the use of the map scale shown.
6. Zoning district boundary lines shown as approximately following shorelines of any
lakes shall be construed to follow the mean high waterlines. In the event of change in
the mean high waterline, boundary lines shall be construed as moving with the actual
mean high waterline.
7. Zoning district boundary lines shown as approximately following the centerline of
streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing water courses shall be construed as
following the channel center line of the water courses taken at the mean low water
level, and in the event of a natural change in the location of streams, rivers, or other
water courses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the
channel centerline.
8. If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty still exists as to the exact
location of a zoning district boundary, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine
and fix the location of any line.
SECTION 3.04: ZONING OF VACATED AREAS
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way within the Township shall have been vacated by
official governmental action and when the land within the boundaries thereof attach to and
become part of land adjoining a street, alley, or public way, the vacated land shall automatically
be subject to the zoning regulations applicable to the land to which it attaches and becomes a
part.
SECTION 3.05: ZONING OF FILLED LAND AREAS
Whenever any fill is placed in any lake or stream, the land created shall automatically and
without further governmental action, acquire the same zoning district and regulations as the lands
to which it shall attach.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 3 Page 4
SECTION 3.06: APPLICATION OF ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The regulations established within each zoning district shall be the minimum regulations for
promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare. Where there are practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of this Ordinance, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have the power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify regulations and
provisions of this Ordinance so that the intent and purposes shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done.
SECTION 3.07: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS
A. Uses are permitted by right, Y, special use, S, temporary use, T, or specific temporary use,
SK, in the various districts only if specifically listed in Section 14.05, Principal Uses
Permitted in Districts. Where not specifically permitted by right, special use, temporary
use or specific temporary use, uses are prohibited unless construed by the Zoning Board of
Appeals to be similar to a use expressly permitted or allowable as a special use.
B. Accessory uses are permitted within the various zoning districts if such uses are clearly
incidental to a permitted principal use or uses in existence on the site.
C. The uses permitted subject to special conditions are recognized as possessing
characteristics of such unique and special nature relative to location, design, size, etc., as
necessitating individual performance standards and conditions in order to safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the community.
D. No part of a setback area, open space, or off-street parking or loading space required
about or in connection with any use, building, or structure, for the purpose of complying
with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a setback area, open space, or off-street
parking or loading space similarly required for any other use, building, or structure.
E. No setback area or lot existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance shall be reduced
in dimensions or area, below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established herein.
F. No portion of one (1) lot, once established and/or improved with a building or structure,
shall be sold unless each lot resulting from each reduction, division, or sale conforms with
all of the requirements established herein.
ARTICLE 3 – ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 3 Page 5
SECTION 3.08: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
ARTICLE 4 – RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 4 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 4
RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
4.01: PURPOSE 2
4.02: PRINCIPLE USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
4.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
4.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
4.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
4.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 3
4.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 3
4.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM 3
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE 4 – RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 4 Page 2
ARTICLE 4: RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR)
SECTION 4.01: PURPOSE
The Rural Residential District is established to provide low-density, limited growth, residential
areas. It is designed to accommodate residential development for those who desire low-density
environments in somewhat remote locations and are willing to assume the costs of providing
individual private utility systems and amenities. This District is established to protect and preserve
the existing character of those areas within the Township which are presently rural in nature and
contain scattered residential developments or other low-intensity uses. This District is generally
characterized by lack of public sewer, water, and a well-developed road circulation system.
Since it is the intent of the Township to concentrate its infrastructural resources in areas where
more intense development is planned, existing developments within this District are likely to
remain without public service facilities indefinitely. Future development of all sites permitted
within this District will require County Health Department permits and approvals for individual site
septic systems and potable water wells in addition to meeting the requirements and standards set
forth in Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.14, Schedule of District Regulations and
Minimum Performance Standards, and as outlined within this Ordinance.
SECTION 4.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter “Y”, is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met, and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 4.03: ACCESSORY USES
An accessory use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16.03, Accessory Uses and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 4.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “S”, provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses, have also been
met.
SECTION 4.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE
PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter “T” or “SK” in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
ARTICLE 4 – RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 4 Page 3
SECTION 4.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the “District” column remains blank.
SECTION 4.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Sections 19.14 and 19.20, Schedule of District Regulations
and Minimum Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the Rural
Residential District and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum
standards and shall be attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or
certificates.
ARTICLE 4 – RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 4 Page 4
ARTICLE 5 – SCENIC RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 5 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 5
SCENIC RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (SR)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
5.01: PURPOSE 2
5.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
5.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
5.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
5.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
5.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 2
5.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 2
5.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
ARTICLE 5 – SCENIC RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 5 Page 2
ARTICLE 5: SCENIC RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (SR)
SECTION 5.01: PURPOSE
The Scenic Rural District is established to preserve and protect large tracts of land in the Township
and to provide for very low density residential development located on private roads.
In addition, future development of all sites within this District shall meet with the requirements and
Standards set forth in Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.13, Schedule of District
Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards, and as outlined within this Ordinance.
SECTION 5.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15 ,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter "Y," is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 5.03: ACCESSORY USES
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16 .03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 5.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “5," provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses have also been met.
SECTION 5.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter "T" or "SK" in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
SECTION 5.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the "District" column remains blank.
SECTION 5.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 5 – SCENIC RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 5 Page 3
SECTION 5.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.13, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the Scenic Residential
District and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum standards and
shall be attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or certificates.
ARTICLE 5 – SCENIC RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 5 Page 4
ARTICLE 6 – URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 6 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 6
URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (UR)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
6.01: PURPOSE 2
6.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
6.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
6.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
6.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
6.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 2
6.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 3
6.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
ARTICLE 6 – URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 6 Page 2
ARTICLE 6: URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (UR)
SECTION 6.01: PURPOSE
The Urban Residential District is established to provide higher density areas for single family housing
developments and is intended to grow at a moderate intensity with an urban residential character. It is
intended that this District be serviced with all of the facilities for urban living including community
sanitary sewers and water supply systems. This District is generally located where a full range of public
utilities presently exist or may soon be provided to compliment and encourage development of this
intensity. In addition, future development of all sites within this District shall meet with the requirements
and standards set forth in Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.15, Schedule of District
Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards, and as outlined within this Ordinance.
SECTION 6.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15 ,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter "Y," is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 6.03: ACCESSORY USES
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16 .03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 6.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “5," provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses have also been met.
SECTION 6.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter "T" or "SK" in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
SECTION 6.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the "District" column remains blank.
ARTICLE 6 – URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 6 Page 3
SECTION 6.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
SECTION 6.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.15, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the Urban Residential
District and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum standards and
shall be attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or certificates.
ARTICLE 6 – URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 6 Page 4
ARTICLE 7 – DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 7 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 7
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
7.01: PURPOSE 2
7.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
7.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
7.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
7.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
7.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 3
7.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 3
7.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
7.09: BUILDING MATERIALS & DESIGN 3
7.10 PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIVITY 3
ARTICLE 7 – DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 7 Page 2
ARTICLE 7: DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
SECTION 7.01: PURPOSE
The Development District is intended to accommodate future growth in specifically designated
areas within the Township where planning studies and future land use maps have indicated, where
infrastructure already exists, or where it would be most likely to occur. The location of this district
will most naturally occur between the General Business District areas and Residential area within
the Township. It is designated to be a flexible, Transitional Growth District where a variety of
mixed Land Uses, including Commercial, Office and Residential, could compatibly co-exist. This
District is intended to function primarily as a transition zone located between the more intensive
existing land uses and land uses exhibiting minimal impact or intensity, such as are inherent in a
Residential District. The Land Use Intensities within this transition district will be controlled utilizing
the Minimum Performance Standards as required for each proposed development to be located
within the District. Excluded from this District are high intensity Land Uses which are best located
in the more intense zoning districts within the Township. Future development, on all sites within the
Development District, shall meet the requirements and standards set forth in Article 19
Performance Requirements, Section 19.16, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards as outlined in this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 7.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter "Y," is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 7.03: ACCESSORY USES
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16 .03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 7.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “5," provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses have also been met.
SECTION 7.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter "T" or "SK" in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
ARTICLE 7 – DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 7 Page 3
SECTION 7.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the "District" column remains blank.
SECTION 7.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
SECTION 7.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.16, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the Development District
and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum standards and shall be
attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or certificates.
SECTION 7.09 BUILDING MATERIALS & DESIGN
Permitted construction material within the district may include, but not limited to, brick, stone,
stucco, wood, architectural concrete, architectural metal, glass, steel, and Exterior Insulation and
Finishing Systems (EIFS). Unfinished concrete masonry units and corrugated plastic or unpainted
corrugated metal (typically associated with pole barn construction) shall be prohibited. If painted
corrugated metal is used, its use on the front façade shall be limited to no more than 50% of the
front façade and shall be used on the front façade in conjunction with another permitted
construction material. This section shall not be a prohibition to trade dress or prototypical building
designs that may incorporate unfinished concrete masonry units or corrugated metal as a
component of its exterior design.
Buildings that exceed over 150 feet in length shall break up the building plane in balance and
scale by use of a mix of different building materials, vertical and horizontal articulation, color,
glazing, canopies, foundation plantings, canopies or other similar methods.
SECTION 7.10 PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIVITY
All commercial or business developments open to the public shall provide safe, pedestrian
connectivity within the Development District (DD) zoning district in the following manner:
1) From any public entrance of a development to the required parking area.
2) A pathway to adjoining or disconnected buildings, if they exist within a single parcel and
serve a general public use, unless the connection would require a running slope that
exceeds five (5) percent, or unless the total length of the pathway would exceed twohundred
(200) feet.
3) A separated pathway to existing public walkways, unless the connection would require a
running slope that exceeds five (5) percent, or unless the total length of the pathway
would exceed two-hundred (200) feet.
ARTICLE 7 – DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 7 Page 4
4) Pedestrian connections shall be constructed in compliance with the American with
Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines and shall incorporate Universal Design Principles.
5) These pathway improvements shall be made by the developer, at the developer’s
expense.
ARTICLE 7 – DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 7 Page 5
ARTICLE 8 – GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 8 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 8
GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (GB)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
8.01: PURPOSE 2
8.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
8.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
8.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
8.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
8.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 2
8.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 3
8.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
8.09: BUILDING MATERIALS & DESIGN 3
8.10 PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIVITY 3
ARTICLE 8 – GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 8 Page 2
ARTICLE 8: GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (GB)
SECTION 8.01: PURPOSE
The General Business District is intended to serve as a focal point for the commercial needs of the
highest density population areas of the Charter Township of Marquette and the surrounding
areas. The General Business District shall be served by existing or planned public utilities
capable of supporting intense development. The standards prescribed for the District are
designed to optimize utilization of existing infrastructure. The minimum performance standards
are intended to assure compatibility of land uses within the General Business District, as well as
neighboring areas. Excluded are uses that require segregation due to environmental and/or
health considerations not easily controlled by the application of minimum standards for
performance. In addition, future development of all sites within this District shall meet the
requirements and standards set forth in Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.17,
Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards, and as outlined within this
Ordinance.
SECTION 8.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter "Y," is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 8.03: ACCESSORY USES
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16.03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 8.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “5," provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses have also been met.
SECTION 8.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter "T" or "SK" in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
SECTION 8.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the "District" column remains blank.
ARTICLE 8 – GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 8 Page 3
SECTION 8.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
SECTION 8.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.17, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the General Business
District and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum standards and
shall be attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or certificates.
SECTION 8.09 BUILDING MATERIALS & DESIGN
Permitted construction material within the district may include, but not limited to, brick, stone,
stucco, wood, architectural concrete, architectural metal, glass, steel, and Exterior Insulation and
Finishing Systems (EIFS). Unfinished concrete masonry units and corrugated plastic or unpainted
corrugated metal (typically associated with pole barn construction) shall be prohibited. If painted
corrugated metal is used, its use on the front façade shall be limited to no more than 50% of the
front façade and shall be used on the front façade in conjunction with another permitted
construction material. This section shall not be a prohibition to trade dress or prototypical building
designs that may incorporate unfinished concrete masonry units or corrugated metal as a
component of its exterior design.
Buildings that exceed over 150 feet in length shall break up the building plane in balance and
scale by use of a mix of different building materials, vertical and horizontal articulation, color,
glazing, canopies, foundation plantings, canopies or other similar methods.
SECTION 8.10 PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIVITY
All commercial or business developments open to the public shall provide safe, pedestrian
connectivity within the General Business (GB) zoning district in the following manner:
1) From any public entrance of a development to the required parking area.
2) A pathway to adjoining or disconnected buildings, if they exist within a single parcel and
serve a general public use, unless the connection would require a running slope that
exceeds five (5) percent, or unless the total length of the pathway would exceed twohundred
(200) feet.
3) A separated pathway to existing public walkways, unless the connection would require a
running slope that exceeds five (5) percent, or unless the total length of the pathway
would exceed two-hundred (200) feet.
4) Pedestrian connections shall be constructed in compliance with the American with
Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines and shall incorporate Universal Design Principles.
5) These pathway improvements shall be made by the developer, at the developer’s
expense.
ARTICLE 8 – GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 8 Page 4
ARTICLE 9 – SEGREGATED BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 9 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 9
SEGREGATED BUSINESS DISTRICT (SB)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
9.01: PURPOSE 2
9.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
9.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
9.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
9.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
9.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 3
9.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 3
9.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
ARTICLE 9 – SEGREGATED BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 9 Page 2
ARTICLE 9: SEGREGATED BUSINESS DISTRICT (SB)
SECTION 9.01: PURPOSE
The Segregated Business District is intended to accommodate industrial uses which must be
segregated because of the inherent nuisance impacts which cannot be made compatible with
other uses through the application of minimum performance standards. The creation of the
Segregated Business District recognizes the potential for public nuisance, infrastructure, and
operational incompatibilities between permitted uses and those of other districts. Accordingly, the
standards for this District are designed to accommodate intensive industrial uses having
potentially severe adverse impacts. This District should be linked to locations with appropriate
environmental characteristics and existing or planned industrial facilities. Standards of
performances shall assure that nuisances caused by land uses within the Segregated Business
District will have minimal impact on adjacent areas. The locational requirements of intensive use
districts shall be recognized as a “Segregated Business District” and be discouraged from being
utilized for any type of less intensive uses. In addition, future development of all sites within this
District shall meet the requirements and standards set forth in Article 19, Performance
Requirements, Section 19.18, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards,
and as outlined within this Ordinance.
SECTION 9.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter "Y," is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 9.03: ACCESSORY USES
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16 .03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 9.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “5," provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses have also been met.
SECTION 9.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter "T" or "SK" in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
ARTICLE 9 – SEGREGATED BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 9 Page 3
SECTION 9.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the "District" column remains blank.
SECTION 9.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
SECTION 9.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.18, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the Segregated Business
District and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum standards and
shall be attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or certificates.
ARTICLE 9 – SEGREGATED BUSINESS DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 9 Page 4
ARTICLE 10 – RESOURCE PRODUCTION DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 10 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 10
RESOURCE PRODUCTION DISTRICT (RP)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
10.01: PURPOSE 2
10.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
10.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
10.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
10.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
10.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 3
10.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 3
10.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
ARTICLE 10 – RESOURCE PRODUCTION DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 10 Page 2
ARTICLE 10: RESOURCE PRODUCTION DISTRICT (RP)
SECTION 10.01: PURPOSE
The Resource Production District is intended to promote the most appropriate social, economic,
and environmental utilization of land in the Charter Township of Marquette. This District is
intended to provide for a variety of different uses which are resource based. Differences in land
uses within the District shall be assured of compatibility by developmental standards required for
each land use within the District. The minimum performance standards are intended to provide
flexible utilization of the Township’s natural resources while preventing nuisance situations from
arising. The Reclamation of Mineral Mining Lands Act, P.A. 92 of 1970, as amended, shall be
supplemental to this Ordinance. It provides for the conservation of minerals from wasteful use,
and assures reclamation and restoration of a mining site after mining is phased out. Expected life
and reclamation stipulations and procedures shall be carefully scrutinized when reviewing site
plan proposals within this District. In addition, future development of all sites within this District
shall meet the requirements and standards set forth in Article 19, Performance Requirements,
Section 19.19, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards, and as
outlined within this Ordinance.
SECTION 10.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter "Y," is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 10.03: ACCESSORY USES
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16.03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 10.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “5," provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses have also been met.
SECTION 10.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter "T" or "SK" in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
ARTICLE 10 – RESOURCE PRODUCTION DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 10 Page 3
SECTION 10.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the "District" column remains blank.
SECTION 10.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
SECTION 10.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.19, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the Resource Production
District and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum standards and
shall be attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or certificates.
ARTICLE 10 – RESOURCE PRODUCTION DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 10 Page 4
ARTICLE 11 – FOREST RECREATION DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 11 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 11
FOREST RECREATION DISTRICT
SECTION TITLE PAGE
11.01: PURPOSE 2
11.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT 2
11.03: ACCESSORY USES 2
11.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS 2
11.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 2
11.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED 2
11.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES 2
11.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
ARTICLE 11 – FOREST RECREATION DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 11 Page 2
ARTICLE 11: FOREST RECREATION DISTRICT
SECTION 11.01: PURPOSE
The purpose of the Forest Recreation District is to protect recreational, scenic and forest resource
values. The district permits certain types of low-intensity and low-impact development while
restricting uses that are not in character with the preservation of recreational forested land.
In addition, future development of all sites within this District shall meet with the requirements and
standards set forth in Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.13, Schedule of District
Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards, and as outlined within this Ordinance.
SECTION 11.02: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter "Y," is a use permitted by right,
provided that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
SECTION 11.03: ACCESSORY USES
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land and is permitted by right within the individual districts. See also Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16 .03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use Regulations.
SECTION 11.04: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15,
Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district denoted by
the letter “5," provided that the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses have also been met.
SECTION 11.05: TEMPORARY AND SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter "T" or "SK" in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section
15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations.
SECTION 11.06: PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the "District" column remains blank.
SECTION 11.07: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right, Y, under a special, S, temporary, T, or specific temporary, SK, land use
permit shall be subject to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other
articles of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 11 – FOREST RECREATION DISTRICT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 11 Page 3
SECTION 11.08: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.18, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards, outlines the minimum requirements applicable to the Forest Recreation
District and the land uses allowed within this District. The standards are minimum standards and
shall be attained prior to approval and issuance of any permits and/or certificates.
ARTICLE 12 – CONDITIONAL REZONING
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 12 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 12
CONDITIONAL RE-ZONING
SECTION TITLE PAGE
12.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT 2
12.02: APPLICATION AND OFFER OF CONDITIONS 2
12.03: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW 3
12.04: TOWNSHIP BOARD REVIEW 3
12.05: APPROVAL 3
12.06: COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS 4
12.07: TIME PERIOD FOR ESTABLISHING DEVELOPING OR USE 5
12.08: REVERSION OF ZONING 5
12.09: SUBSEQUENT RE-ZONING OF LAND 5
12.10: AMENDMENT OF CONDITIONS 6
12.11: TOWNSHIP RIGHT TO RE-ZONE 6
12.12: FAILURE TO OFFER CONDITIONS 6
ARTICLE 12 – CONDITIONAL REZONING
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 12 Page 2
ARTICLE 12: CONDITIONAL RE-ZONING
SECTION 12.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the
Charter Township of Marquette as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in
zoning boundaries, if certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a
request for re-zoning. It is the intent of this Section to provide a procedure consistent with the
provisions of Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act 110, 2006, (MCL 125.3405), as
amended, by which an owner seeking a re-zoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding
the use and/or development of land as part of the re-zoning request.
SECTION 12.02: APPLICATION AND OFFER OF CONDITIONS
1) An owner of land may voluntarily Offer in writing, Conditions relating to the use
and/or development of land for which a re-zoning is requested. This Offer shall
be made at the time the application for re-zoning is filed.
2) The required application and procedure for considering a re-zoning request with
conditions shall be the same as that for considering re-zoning requests made
without any Offer of Conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this
Section.
3) The owners Offer of Conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments
not permitted in the requested zoning district.
4) The owner’s Offer of Conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship
to the property for which re-zoning is requested.
5) Any use or development proposed as part of an Offer of Conditions what would
require a Special Land Use permit under the terms of this Ordinance may only be
commenced if a Special Land Use permit for such use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the requirements as set forth in Article XVI of this
Ordinance.
6) Any use or development proposed as part of an Offer of Conditions that would
require a Variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a
Variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with the requirements as set forth in Article XXIII of this
Ordinance.
7) Any use of development proposed as part of an Offer of Conditions that would
require Site Plan Approval under the terms of this Ordinance, may only be
commenced if Site Plan Approval for such use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the requirements as set forth in this Ordinance in
Article XVII, Site Plan Review.
ARTICLE 12 – CONDITIONAL REZONING
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 12 Page 3
SECTION 12.02: APPLICATION AND OFFER OF CONDITIONS – (Cont.)
8) The Offer of Conditions may be amended during the process of re-zoning
provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by
the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its Offer of Conditions any time
prior to final re-zoning action by the Township Board provided that, if such
withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission’s public hearing on the
original re-zoning request, then the re-zoning application shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for a new public hearing with appropriated notice and a new
recommendation.
SECTION 12.03: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW
The Planning Commission, after public hearing and consideration of the factors for re-zoning set
forth in this Ordinance, Article XXIV, Changes and Amendments, Section 24.06, Fact Finding, may
recommend approval, approval with recommended changes or denial of the re-zoning provided,
however, that any recommended changes to the Offer of Conditions are acceptable too and
thereafter offered by the owner.
SECTION 12.04: TOWNSHIP BOARD REVIEW
After receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Township Board shall deliberate
upon the requested re-zoning and may approve or deny the conditional re-zoning request. The
Township Board’s deliberations shall include, but not be limited to, a consideration of the factors
for re-zoning set forth in Section 24.06 of this Ordinance. Should the Township Board consider
amendments to the proposed conditional re-zoning advisable and if such contemplated
amendments to the Offer of Conditions, are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner,
then the Township Board shall, in accordance with Section 11 of the Township Zoning Act (MCL
125.281), refer such amendments to the Planning Commission for a report thereon within a time
specified by the Township Board and proceed thereafter in accordance with said statute to deny
or approve the conditional rezoning with or without amendments.
SECTION 12.05: APPROVAL
1) If the Township Board finds the re-zoning request and Offer of Conditions
acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written
Statement of Conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the
provisions of this Section. The Statement of Conditions shall be incorporated by
attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the Ordinance adopted by the
Township Board to accomplish the requested re-zoning.
ARTICLE 12 – CONDITIONAL REZONING
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 12 Page 4
SECTION 12.05: APPROVAL – (Cont.)
2) The Statement of Conditions Shall:
a) Be prepared in a form recordable with the Marquette County Register of
Deeds or, as an alternative, be accompanied by a recordable Affidavit or
Memorandum prepared and signed by the owner giving notice of the
Statement of Conditions in a manner acceptable to the Township Board.
b) Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains.
c) Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions runs
with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land.
d) Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other
documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to
illustrate the implementation of the Statement of Conditions. If any such
documents are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify
where the document may be examined.
e) Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions or an
Affidavit of Memorandum giving notice thereof shall be recorded by the
Township Clerk with the Register of Deeds of Marquette County.
f) Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the subject land
preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer
and consent to the provisions contained within the Statement of Conditions.
3) Upon the re-zoning taking effect, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect the
new zoning classification along with a designation that the land was re-zoned with
a Statement of Conditions. The Township Clerk shall maintain a listing of all lands
re-zoned with a Statement of Conditions.
4) Upon the re-zoning taking effect, the use of the land so re-zoned shall conform
thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use and development within the
new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in the
Statement of Conditions.
SECTION 12.06: COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS
1) Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land that has
been Re-zoned with Conditions shall continuously operate and maintain the
development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in the
Statement of Conditions.
ARTICLE 12 – CONDITIONAL REZONING
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 12 Page 5
SECTION 12.06: COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS – (Cont.)
2) Any failure to comply with a condition contained within the Statement of Conditions
shall constitute a Violation of this Zoning Ordinance and be punishable
accordingly. Additionally, any such Violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se
and subject to judicial abatement as provided by the law.
3) No permit or approval shall be granted under this Ordinance for any use or
development that is contrary to an applicable Statement of Conditions.
SECTION 12.07: TIME PERIOD FOR ESTABLISHING, DEVELOPING, OR USE
Unless another time period is specified in the Ordinance re-zoning the subject land, the approved
development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required permits shall be
commenced upon the land within 18 months after the re-zoning took effect and thereafter
proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may upon written request be extended by
the Township Board if:
1) It is demonstrated to the Township Board’s satisfaction that there is a strong
likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of
extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion.
2) The Township Board finds that there has not been a change in circumstances that
would render the current zoning with Statement of Conditions incompatible with
other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound
zoning policy.
SECTION 12.08: REVERSION OF ZONING
If approved development and/or use of the re-zoned land does not occur within the 18 month
time-frame specified under Subsection G above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning
classification as set forth in MCL 125.286i. The reversion process shall be initiated by the
Township Board requesting that the Planning Commission proceed with consideration of re-zoning
the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering and making this
reversionary re-zoning shall thereafter be the same as applies to all other re-zoning requests.
SECTION 12.09: SUBSEQUENT RE-ZONING OF LAND
When land that is re-zoned with a Statement of Conditions is thereafter re-zoned to a different
zoning classification or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no Statement of
Conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to Subsection H above or
otherwise, the Statement of Conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease
to be in effect. Upon the owner’s written request, the Township Clerk shall record with the
Marquette County Register of Deeds, a notice that the Statement of Conditions is no longer in
effect.
ARTICLE 12 – CONDITIONAL REZONING
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 12 Page 6
SECTION 12.10: AMENDMENT OF CONDITIONS
1) During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use
specified pursuant to Subsection G above or during any extension thereof granted
by the Township Board, Township Officials shall not add to or alter the conditions
in the Statement of Conditions.
2) The Statement of Conditions may be amended thereafter in the same manner as
was prescribed for the original re-zoning procedures and Statement of Conditions.
SECTION 12.11: TOWNSHIP RIGHT TO RE-ZONE
Nothing in the Statement of Conditions nor in the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to
prohibit the Township from re-zoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a Statement of
Conditions to another zoning classification. Any re-zoning shall be conducted in compliance with
this Ordinance and the Township Zoning Act (MCL 125.271 et seq.).
SECTION 12.12: FAILURE TO OFFER CONDITIONS
The Township shall not require an owner to Offer Conditions as a requirement for re-zoning. The
lack of an Offer of Conditions shall not affect an owner’s rights under this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 13
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
13.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT 2
13.02: QUALIFYING CONDITIONS 2
13.03: PERMITTED USES 4
13.04: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE FOR PUD 5
13.05: PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN APPLICATION 5
A. Preliminary PUD Plan Application Requirements 5
B. Planning Commission Public Hearing And Review Of Preliminary PUD 9
13.06: FINAL PUD PLAN 9
A. Final PUD Application 9
B. Planning Commission Review Of Final PUD Plan 11
13.07: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL (Both preliminary and final) 11
13.08: PUD AGREEMENT 12
13.09: CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PUD 12
13.10: TIME LIMIT FOR APPROVED PUD 13
13.11: OPTION FOR DEVELOPMENTS WITH MULTIPLE USES AND PHASES 14
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 2
ARTICLE 13: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
SECTION 13.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT
Planned Unit Development (PUD) regulations are intended to provide for various types of land
uses planned in a manner which shall encourage the use of land in accordance with its character
and adaptability; encourage innovation in land use planning; achieve economy and efficiency in
the use of land, natural resources, energy, and the provision of public services and utilities;
encourage useful open space; protect natural features and sensitive environmental areas; provide
enhanced housing, employment, shopping, traffic circulation and recreational opportunities for the
people of the township; and bring about a greater compatibility of design and use; provide
enhanced site and building architectural features. The provisions of this Article provide enabling
authority and standards for the submission, review, and approval of applications for planned unit
developments. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for administering this article and
forwarding all documents and reviews to the Planning Commission per this Article however he or
she may designate other individuals or consultant(s) to assist with this administration, and
providing PUD reviews and recommendations for the Planning Commission.
SECTION 13.02: QUALIFYING CONDITIONS
A planned unit development (PUD) may be located anywhere in the Township upon its approval
by the Marquette Township Planning Commission and its subsequent Zoning Compliance Permit.
Any development that fails to meet the following qualifying conditions, at a minimum, shall not be
considered for the PUD District:
A. Grant of the PUD will result in one of the following:
1. A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the
community, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be
achieved without application of the PUD regulations; or
2. Long-term protection and preservation of natural resources and natural features of a
significant quantity and/or quality, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible
or unlikely to be achieved without application of the PUD regulations. Examples of
natural features to be preserved include but are not limited to: streams and their
riparian buffers of fifty (50) feet on both sides of the stream systems, bodies of water,
wetlands, woodlands, habitat for plant or animal species that are listed as threatened,
endangered or of special concern in the Marquette Township Comprehensive
Development Plan, steep slopes exceeding twenty (20) percent; or
3. An existing non-conforming use shall, to a material extent, be rendered more
conforming, or less offensive, to the zoning district in which it is situated.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 3
SECTION 13.02: QUALIFYING CONDITIONS – (Cont.)
B. Acreage Requirement: The PUD site shall be not less than five (5) acres of fully contiguous
property not separated by a public road, railroad, or other such associated feature or
barrier. The Planning Commission may consider a PUD on lesser acreage if it is clear that
the proposed PUD substantially provides for the purpose and intent of a PUD as stated in
Section 13.01. In addition, the Planning Commission may use Section 13.01 Purpose and
Intent when considering a PUD with property that may be separated by a public road,
railroad, or other such associated feature or barrier. It would be up to the applicant to
show why, for example, a physical barrier (road or railroad) separating the acreage
would not restrict the applicant’s ability to develop a cohesive PUD.
C. The proposed type and density of the use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in
the need for or burden upon public services, facilities, roads and utilities, such as a
substantial expansion of the public water and sewer system and facilities or an increase of
the level of service on the roads. Connection to the Township’s public water and sewer
systems shall be required for all PUDs where any property line for the PUD parcel is a
distance of five hundred (500) feet or less from the closest water and sewer mains. The
maximum gross density for residential dwelling units of the PUD shall not exceed that
which is required in the Urban Residential District in Section 19.15 SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT
REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS of this ordinance. The PUD
shall be in compliance with any Marquette Township Ordinance pertaining to stormwater
management and the Marquette County Drain Commissioner’s regulations and procedures.
D. The proposed development shall be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare
of the Township.
E. The proposed development shall not result in a negative environmental impact on the
subject site or surrounding land.
F. The proposed development shall not result in a negative economic impact upon
surrounding properties.
G. The proposed development shall be under single ownership and/or control such that there
is a single person or entity having responsibility for completing the project in conformity
with this ordinance.
H. The proposed development must be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the
Marquette Township Comprehensive Development Plan.
I. Pedestrian: The PUD must provide for integrated, safe and abundant pedestrian or other
non-motorized access and movement within the PUD and to adjacent properties.
J. Architecture: The PUD should provide for coordinated and visually appealing
architectural styles, building forms and building relationships.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 4
SECTION 13.02: QUALIFYING CONDITIONS – (Cont.)
K. Traffic: The PUD must provide for safe and efficient vehicular movements within, into and
off of the PUD site. In addition, the PUD should integrate traffic calming techniques, along
with suitable parking lot landscape islands and other similar techniques to improve
parking lot aesthetics, stormwater management, traffic flow and vehicular/pedestrian
safety.
L. Open Space Requirements:
1. The PUD development shall contain open space as defined in SECTION 2.02:
DEFINITIONS and regulated in SECTION 19.05 REQUIRED OPEN SPACE in an amount
equal to at least thirty-five (35) percent of the total PUD site. The Planning
Commission may consider a PUD with a lesser amount of open space if it is clear that
the proposed PUD substantially provides for the intent of a PUD as stated in this
Article. It is noted that open space is a very important element of a PUD and
reductions to the open space provision should be granted only as a result of specific,
clearly documented reasons (i.e. the PUD may be located on a relatively small site in
an area where a thirty-five (35) percent open space provision would detract from
building continuity, historic preservation efforts, etc.) However in all circumstances, the
open space for the PUD shall equal at least twenty (20) percent. The percentage of
open space required in this section shall supersede that of what is required in Sections
19.13 through Section 19.19.
2. Such open space shall be permanently set aside for the sole benefit, use, and
enjoyment of present and future occupants of the PUD through covenant, deed
restriction, open space easement, or similar legal instrument acceptable to review and
approval of the Township; or, if agreed to by a governmental agency, the open space
may be conveyed to a governmental agency for the use of the general public. Access
to open space areas may be limited to PUD residents, especially in areas of sensitive
natural areas, and is subject to the Planning Commission review and approval.
3. All accessory and incidental structures are subject to review and approval of the
Planning Commission and must be depicted on the PUD site plan at the time of the
preliminary and final PUD review.
SECTION 13.03: PERMITTED USES
Any land use permitted by right or by special land use in any Zoning District, except the Rural
Residential and the Urban Residential Districts, may be requested to be included in the PUD,
subject to adequate public health, safety, and welfare protection mechanisms being designed into
the development to ensure compatibility of varied land uses both within and outside the
development. In the Rural Residential and the Urban Residential Districts, the only uses that may
be requested to be included in the PUD are those uses that are listed in Section 15.05: Table 15
USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH, under the headings of Agriculture, Agricultural support,
Forestry, Public Service, Recreation/Commercial, Recreation Indoor/Outdoor, Recreational Rental
Dwelling, Residential Dwelling, and Special Residential & Institutional.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 5
SECTION 13.04: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE FOR PUD
A. Prior to the submission of an application for a PUD, a pre-application conference shall be
held with representatives from Marquette Township for the purpose of exchanging
information, providing guidance to the applicant and determining the eligibility of the
request for consideration as a PUD.
B. A request for a pre-application conference shall be made to the Zoning Administrator. As
part of the pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit seven (7) copies of a
conceptual plan, at least ten (10) days in advance of the pre-application conference,
which shows the property location, total number of acres, the number of dwelling units,
boundaries, significant natural features and resources, the location and number of acres to
be preserved as open or recreational space, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, all
existing and proposed land uses and buildings for the entire site, know deviations from the
ordinance regulations to be sought.
C. The Township may advise the applicant of the known conformance of the PUD concept
with the intent and objectives of a PUD in the Township, whether it appears to qualify
under the minimum requirements of Section 13.02. No formal action will be taken at a
pre-application conference, nor will statements made at the pre-application conference
be considered legally binding commitments.
SECTION 13.05: PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN APPLICATION
A. PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
1. Following the pre-application conference and subsequent meeting with the Planning
Commission, applicants seeking approval of a PUD District shall submit a complete
application, two (2) copies of the preliminary PUD site plan and supporting documents
and the required fee to the Zoning Administrator. Within seven (7) business days from
the receipt of the application and the two preliminary PUD site plans and supporting
documents, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant if the application, the
site plans and fees are complete or incomplete. Then the applicant shall resubmit all
of completed documents or, if informed by the Zoning Administrator that the submittal
is complete, the applicant shall submit one (1) additional copy of such completed
application and PUD site plan and supporting documents for each of the following
agencies that the Zoning Administrator has determined as necessary for their review
and comment:
a. Marquette County Road Commission
b. Marquette County Health Department
c. Marquette County Drain Commissioner
d. Marquette County Soil Conservation Official
e. Michigan Department of Transportation
f. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
g. School District – Superintendent of Schools
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 6
SECTION 13.05: PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN APPLICATION – (Cont.)
h. Charter Township of Marquette Fire Chief or Marshal
i. Chief of the local law enforcement agency
j. Affected utility companies
k. Nearby operating railroads which may be affected by the proposed plan
l. Charter Township of Marquette Department of Public Works
m. Other federal, state, county, or local agencies which may be impacted by the
proposed development
Upon receipt of such completed applications, plans, and supporting documents, the
Zoning Administrator shall forward such to the above agencies. During this review by
these agencies, the Zoning Administrator shall also complete a review of the PUD
proposal for compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
Once all of the comments from the above agencies have been received by the Zoning
Administrator or fifteen (15) business days, whichever is sooner, the Zoning
Administrator shall forward all of the comments as well as his or her own to the
applicant. The applicant shall revise the plan and documents per these comments and
submit fifteen (15) complete sets of the revised plan at least fifteen (15) business days
ahead of the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. Then the Zoning
Administrator shall forward the preliminary PUD plan, application, review, and all
other documents from other agencies to the Planning Commission at their next regular
meeting.
2. Such application shall include the following (unless determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be unnecessary);
a. A completed application form and the appropriate number of copies as outlined
above of a preliminary PUD plan including a site plan. The preliminary PUD plan
shall contain the following site plan information:
1. The original and revision dates, north arrow, and scale(s). The scale or scales
used shall be sufficient to enable the site plan to clearly show all necessary
detail for an accurate review of the site plan.
2. The name, address and phone number of the firm responsible for preparing
the site plan. Each page of the site plan must be sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect, landscape architect, surveyor or planner who prepared
that same page.
3. The name, address(s) and phone number(s) of the property owner(s) and
petitioner(s).
4. Legal description of the PUD site.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 7
SECTION 13.05: PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN APPLICATION – (Cont.)
5. The size (in acres) of the PUD site.
6. All property lines and proposed setbacks, shown and dimensioned.
7. A location or vicinity sketch.
8. The location of all existing structures and vehicle use areas, within 100’ of the
PUD site’s boundaries.
9. The location and dimensions of all existing structures and vehicle use areas on
the PUD site.
10. The location of all proposed structures on the PUD site. Realizing that this is
preliminary, dimensions are desired but not necessary until final approval.
11. The location and dimension of proposed lots or ownership divisions.
12. The location, pavement width and right-of-way width of all abutting roads,
streets, alleys, easements, and clear vision areas, and emergency vehicle
access locations.
13. The existing zoning and use of all properties abutting and including the PUD
site.
14. The location of all existing vegetation and the general location of all proposed
landscape areas, berms, landscape islands and buffers, including any fence or
wall areas.
15. The size and location of existing utilities, including a short narrative note on the
site plan pertaining to the PUD’s proposed, stormwater management and other
utility needs and concepts.
16. The proposed location and estimated size(s) of all surface and subsurface
water drainage facilities and features, natural or manmade.
17. Existing topographic contours at a maximum of two (2) foot intervals, and all
available soil conditions. Conceptual topographic patterns for the PUD site
shall also be provided, noting major earth moving and/or removal areas
(realizing that each plan receiving final PUD approval will be required to show
actual topographic contours, both existing and proposed).
18. Location, types and size of areas to be dedicated for common open space,
and natural, environmental or cultural features to be preserved.
19. Anticipated trash receptacle locations and method of screening.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 8
SECTION 13.05: PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN APPLICATION – (Cont.)
20. Proposed streets, alleys, curb cuts, acceleration/deceleration lanes, curbed
areas, service drives and parking lot locations, loading and truck dock
locations, including traffic calming concepts, driving surface widths as required
by this Ordinance, the Michigan Department of Transportation standards, or
the Marquette County Road Commission’s standards.
21. Proposed pedestrian sidewalk and non-motorized movements both within and
off the PUD site.
22. Proposed sign locations and sizes, and lighting concepts/styles and general
location areas.
23. Proposed architectural style/design concepts that will be incorporated into
final approval plans, including both buildings and structures (i.e. – gateways,
fence/wall concepts, artwork, etc.)
24. Proposed setbacks, lot widths, lot areas and building/structure heights.
25. Proposed uses to be included in the PUD project.
26. Any traffic impact studies, environmental impact analysis, economic impact
studies, etc. shall be performed by certified individuals or consultants on behalf
of Marquette Township and selected independently of any influences from the
applicant or party having interest in the development.
27. A table shall be provided on the final site plan which specifically details all
deviations from the established zoning area, height and setback regulations,
off-street parking regulations, general provisions, or Township subdivision
regulations which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and developments
proposed in the absence of this PUD article and rezoning.
b. Fee: Payment of a PUD fee, as established by the Township Board.
c. Narrative Statement: A narrative statement describing:
1. The objectives of the PUD and how it relates to the Intent of the PUD, as
described in Section 13.01.
2. The relationship of the PUD to the qualifying conditions listed in Section 13.02.
3. Phases of development and approximate time frames for each phase, including
anticipated start and completion dates of construction.
4. Proposed deed restrictions, covenants, or similar legal instruments to be used
within the PUD.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 9
SECTION 13.05: PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN APPLICATION – (Cont.)
B. PLANNING COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING AND REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PUD
1. The Zoning Administrator shall publish and send out public notices in the same manner
as prescribed for special land uses per Section 16.04 of this Ordinance, except the
Zoning Administrator sets a public hearing date and not the Planning Commission.
Following public notices, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
preliminary PUD plan for the purpose of receiving public comment on the PUD.
2. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the preliminary
PUD plan for conformance with the standards of Section 13.07 and make its findings
according to those standards and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
preliminary PUD plan.
3. An approval with conditions shall not be considered final until the applicant submits a
written acceptance of the conditions and all necessary revisions to the preliminary PUD
plan to the Planning Commission.
SECTION 13.06: FINAL PUD PLAN
A. FINAL PUD APPLICATION
1. Final Development Plan Approval Time Period – Single Phase: Within twelve (12)
months of the Planning Commission’s approval of the preliminary PUD plan, the
applicant shall submit an application to the Zoning Administrator for final PUD
approval. If the applicant fails to submit such within twelve (12) months as stated
above, then the preliminary PUD plan shall be determined to be invalid.
2. Final Development Plan Approval Time Period – Dual or Multi Phased: If the project
includes phases, then the applicant must submit a request within twelve (12) months of
the Planning Commission’s approval of the preliminary PUD plan for final development
plan approval of a phase. Following the final approval of the first PUD phase, the
applicant must submit each subsequent phase within twenty-four (24) months of the
approval date for the previous phase. If the applicant fails to submit the first phase
within twelve (12) months or each subsequent phase within the twenty-four (24) month
time period then the preliminary PUD plan incorporating all phases not already
approved for final site plan shall be determined to be invalid.
3. Approval Time Extension: Upon request to the Planning Commission and in accordance
with this Section 13.06, the time frames may be extended for a reasonable period of
time. The extension shall be applied for prior to the expiration of the above
timeframes.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 10
SECTION 13.06: FINAL PUD PLAN – (Cont.)
4. Final PUD Plan Application Requirements: A final PUD plan application shall be
processed in the same manner as for the preliminary PUD plan and consist of the
following (unless determined by the Zoning Administrator to be unnecessary):
a. A completed application form supplied by the Zoning Administrator.
b. Payment of a fee, as established by the Township Board.
c. A written response to the findings, review comments, and conditions, if any, from the
Planning Commission’s review and approval of the preliminary PUD plan and a
narrative explanation of the changes made to the plan in response to those items.
d. A site plan containing all of the information required in this PUD Article in Section
13.05 A.2.a., and the following information: (If the plan consists of phases, then the
above-mentioned information is only required for the specific phase(s) being
presented for final approval. Each subsequent phase shall be reviewed in the
same manner).
1. The location and dimensions of all proposed structures and buildings on the
PUD site.
2. The location of all proposed drives (including dimensions and radii),
acceleration/deceleration lanes, sidewalks/pathways/bikepaths, curbing,
parking areas (including the dimensions of a typical parking space and the
total number of parking spaces to be provided), and unloading areas. Street
names must also be included.
3. The location of all proposed signs and lighting, including the sizes and types.
4. The location, type and size of all proposed landscaping and site amenities
(artwork, fences, gateway features, etc.).
5. The location, type and size of all utilities and stormwater drainage facilities,
including fire protection, sanitary sewers, water services, etc.
6. Existing and proposed topographic contours at a maximum of two (2) foot
intervals.
7. Elevation views of all proposed structures and floor plans with dimensions, and
square footages.
8. Proposed open space areas, including recreational amenities (playgrounds,
etc.).
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 11
SECTION 13.06: FINAL PUD PLAN – (Cont.)
e. The Planning Commission may request any additional graphics or written materials,
prepared by a certified individual or consultant selected as specified in Section
13.05A.2.a.26, to assist in determining the appropriateness of the PUD site plan.
Such material may include, but need not be limited to, aerial photography,
photographs; traffic impact studies; impact on significant natural features and
drainage; soil tests; and other pertinent information.
B. PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW OF FINAL PUD PLAN
1. The Planning Commission shall review the final PUD plan in relation to its conformance
with the preliminary development plan and its conditions of approval, if any. If it is
determined that the final plan is not in substantial conformance with the preliminary
PUD plan, the review process shall be conducted as a preliminary PUD plan review, in
accordance with the procedures of Section 13.05 of this Ordinance.
2. Planned Unit Developments, whether established as a single or multiphase
development, shall comply with the intent of the PUD in each phase. If a portion of the
PUD intent is to provide for a variety of uses (i.e. – apartments and single family
homes), then the proposed phasing schedule shall show how the development of these
uses will be balanced in the phased development schedule.
3. If the final PUD plan is consistent with the approved preliminary PUD plan, the
Planning Commission shall review the final plan in accordance with the standards for
approval in Section 13.07 and shall prepare a record of its findings in accordance
with Section 13.07 and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final PUD
plan.
4. Any regulatory modification from traditional district requirements shall be approved
through a finding by the Planning Commission that the deviation shall result in a higher
quality of development than would be possible using conventional zoning standards.
However, all PUDs shall meet or exceed all requirements of SECTION 19.04:
BUFFERYARDS and SECTION 19.12 STANDARDS OF OPERATION, and ARTICLE 14
ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Regulatory modifications are not subject to
variance approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. No part of this PUD process of
the approved site plans may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. This
provision shall not preclude an individual residential lot owner from seeking a variance
following final approval of the PUD, provided such variance does not involve
alterations to open space areas as shown on the approved PUD site plan.
SECTION 13.07: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL (Both preliminary and final)
A PUD shall be approved only if it complies with each of the following standards:
A. The proposed PUD complies with all qualifying conditions of Section 13.02.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 12
SECTION 13.07: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL (Both preliminary and final) – (Cont.)
B. The proposed PUD is compatible with surrounding uses of land, the natural environment,
and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the development.
C. The proposed uses within the PUD will not possess conditions or effects that would be
injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare of the community.
D. The proposed project is consistent with the purpose and intent of the PUD, as described in
Section 13.01 and represents an opportunity for improved or innovative development for
the community that could not be achieved through conventional zoning.
E. The proposed PUD meets all the site plan requirements of this Article and the provisions of
Article 18: Site Plan Review Article, Section 18.07, respective of being either a
preliminary or final PUD request (Preliminary PUD’s must meet Section 13.05 and Final
PUD’s must meet Section 13.06.
SECTION 13.08: PUD AGREEMENT
A. Prior to this issuance of any building permits or commencement of construction on any
portion of the PUD, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the Township in
recordable form, setting forth the applicant’s obligations with respect to the PUD.
B. The agreement shall describe all improvements to be constructed as part of the PUD and
shall incorporate, by reference, the final PUD plan with all required revisions, other
documents which comprise the PUD, and all conditions attached to the approval by the
Planning Commission.
C. A phasing plan shall also be submitted describing the intended schedule for start and
completion of each phase and the improvements to be undertaken in each phase.
D. The agreement shall also establish the remedies of the Township in the event of default by
the applicant in carrying out the PUD, and shall be binding on all successors in interest to
the applicant.
E. The PUD agreement shall be executed and recorded in the office of the Marquette
County Register of Deeds. Any type of homeowners association or condominium
association must be established and recorded prior to the issuance of the zoning
compliance certificate.
SECTION 13.09: CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PUD
Changes to an approved PUD shall be permitted only under the following circumstances:
A. Notify Zoning Administrator: The holder of an approved PUD final PUD plan shall notify
the Zoning Administrator of any desired change to the approved PUD.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 13
SECTION 13.09: CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PUD – (Cont.)
B. Minor Change Determination: Minor changes may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator upon determining that the proposed revision(s) will not alter the basic design
and character of the PUD, nor any specified conditions imposed as part of the original
approval. Minor changes shall include the following:
1. Reduction of the size of any building and/or sign.
2. Movement of buildings and/or signs by no more than ten (10) feet.
3. Landscaping approved in the final development plan that is replaced by similar
landscaping to an equal or greater extent.
4. Changes in floor plans, of up to five (5) percent of the total floor area, which do not
alter the character of the use or increase the amount of required parking.
5. Internal rearrangement of a parking lot that does not affect the number of parking
spaces, landscaping, access locations, design or management.
6. Changes required or requested by Marquette Township, Marquette County, and other
State or Federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or regulations.
C. Major Change Determination: A proposed change not determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be minor shall be submitted as an amendment to the PUD and shall be
processed in the same manner as the original PUD application for the final PUD plan.
SECTION 13.10: TIME LIMIT FOR APPROVED PUD
Each development shall be under construction within twelve (12) months after the date of
approval of the PUD final development plan, except as noted in this Section. Such construction
shall continue until completion of the PUD development.
A. The Planning Commission may grant one (1) extension of up to an additional twelve (12)
month period if the applicant applies for such extension prior to the date of the expiration
of the PUD or PUD phase and provided that:
1. The applicant presents reasonable evidence that said development has encountered
unforeseen difficulties beyond the control of the applicant; and
2. The PUD requirements and standards, including those of the Zoning Ordinance and
Comprehensive Development Plan that are reasonably related to said development
have not changed.
ARTICLE 13 – PLANNED INIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 13 Page 14
SECTION 13.10: TIME LIMIT FOR APPROVED PUD – (Cont.)
B. Should neither of the provisions of Section 13.10.A. be fulfilled, or an extension has
expired without construction underway, the preliminary PUD plan approval(s) shall be null
and void. In order to utilize the property as a PUD, an applicant would have to resubmit
plans for preliminary and final PUD site plan approvals as stated in this Article as if it
were a new proposal.
SECTION 13.11: OPTION FOR DEVELOPMENTS WITH MULTIPLE USES AND PHASES
At the discretion of the applicant and/or the Planning Commission, there shall be an option
available to include in the PUD Agreement the process phasing multiple uses and multiple phases
into the overall development.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 14
ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
14.01: PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICATION 2
TABLE I: Examples of Land Use Thresholds Based On Trip Generation 5
Characteristics
14.02: ROADWAYS SUBJECT TO ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS 6
14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS 6
FIGURE 14-1: Clear Vision 8
TABLE II: Consideration of an Additional Driveway 11
TABLE III: Minimum Access Spacing Between Adjacent Access Points 13
TABLE IV: Minimum Access Point Spacing 14
FIGURE 14-2: Typical Configurations For Driveways 19
FIGURE 14-3: Channelization Island Options For Controlling Turns 20
TABLE V: Minimum Throat Length Requirement 21
FIGURE 14-4: Deceleration Taper 22
FIGURE 14-5: Low Volume Commercial or Residential Driveway Slopes 23
TABLE VI: Minimum Directional Median Opening Spacing 25
14.04: SERVICE DRIVES AND OTHER SHARED ACCESS STANDARDS 25
FIGURE 14-6: Service Drives and Other Shared Access Standards 30
14.05: TEMPORARY ACCESS PERMITS 31
14.06: NONCONFORMING DRIVEWAYS 31
14.07: INCENTIVES 32
14.08: WAIVERS AND VARIANCES 33
14.09: ONE ACCESS PER PARCEL 34
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 2
ARTICLE 14 ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION 14.01: PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICATION
A. The purpose of this Article is to establish minimum regulations for access to property.
Standards are established for new roads, driveways, shared access, parking lot cross
access, and service roads. The standards of this Article are intended to promote safe and
efficient travel within Marquette Township; minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous
traffic conflicts; ensure safe access by emergency vehicles; protect the substantial public
investment in the street system by preserving capacity and avoiding the need for
unnecessary and costly reconstruction which disrupts business and traffic flow; separate
traffic conflict areas by reducing the number of driveways; provide safe spacing
standards between driveways, and between driveways and intersections; provide for
shared access between abutting properties; implement the Marquette Township
Comprehensive Development Plan and the US-41/M-28 Corridor and Access
Management Plan recommendations; ensure reasonable access to properties, though not
always by the most direct access; and to coordinate access decisions with the Michigan
Department of Transportation and/or the Marquette County Road Commission, as
applicable.
B. The standards in this Article are based on extensive traffic analysis of this corridor by
Marquette Township, the Marquette County Road Commission and the Michigan
Department of Transportation (MDOT) as applicable. This analysis demonstrates that the
combination of roadway design, traffic speeds, traffic volumes, traffic crashes and other
characteristics necessitate special access standards. The standards in this Article apply
only to all private and public land within one-thousand (1,000) feet of US-41/M-28 and
which affronts the US-41/M-28 right-of-way or has its primary access directly to US-
41/M-28, which is under the jurisdiction of the Marquette County Road Commission or the
Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT), and which is named as US-41/M-28,
and as described below. The requirements and standards of this Article shall be applied
in addition to, and where permissible shall supersede, the requirements of the Michigan
Department of Transportation, Marquette County Road Commission, or other Articles of
this Zoning Ordinance.
C. The standards of this Article shall be applied by the Zoning Administrator and by the
Planning Commission during their respective plot plan or site plan reviews, as is
appropriate to the application. The Zoning Administrator and the Planning Commission
shall make written findings of nonconformance, conformance, or conformance if certain
conditions are met with the standards of this Article prior to disapproving or approving a
site plan per the requirements of Article 18. Marquette Township shall coordinate its
review of the access elements of a plot plan or site plan with the appropriate road
authority prior to making a decision on an application (see D. below). The approval of a
plot plan or site plan does not negate the responsibility of an applicant to subsequently
secure driveway permits from the appropriate road authority, either the Marquette
County Road Commission, or the Michigan Department of Transportation. Any driveway
permit obtained by an applicant prior to review and approval of a plot plan or site plan
that is required under this Ordinance will be ignored.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 3
SECTION 14.01: PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICATION – (Cont.)
D. Neither the Zoning Administrator nor the Planning Commission shall take action on a
request for a new road, driveway, shared access, or a service drive that connects to a
public road without first consulting the Marquette County Road Commission or the
Michigan Department of Transportation. To ensure coordination, applicants are required
to submit a plot plan, site plan or a tentative preliminary plat concurrently to both
Marquette Township, the Marquette County Road Commission, and the Michigan
Department of Transportation as applicable. Complete applications shall be received at
least ten (10) days before the Planning Commission meeting at which action is to be taken.
If the initial review of the application by the Zoning Administrator reveals noncompliance
with the standards of this Article, or if the proposed land use exceeds the traffic
generation thresholds in Table I, then the Zoning Administrator shall require submittal of a
traffic impact study as described below prior to consideration of the application by either
the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission.
1. At a minimum the traffic study shall contain the following:
a. Analysis of existing traffic conditions and/or site restrictions using current data.
b. Projected trip generation at the subject site or along the subject service drive based
on the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip
Generation Manual. Marquette Township may approve use of other trip
generation data if based on recent studies of at least three (3) similar uses within
similar locations in Michigan.
c. Illustrations of current and projected turning movements at access points. Include
identification of the impact of the development and its proposed access on the
operation of the abutting streets. Capacity analysis shall be completed based on
the most recent version of the Highway Capacity Manual published by the
Transportation Research Board, and shall be provided in an appendix to the
traffic impact study.
d. Description of the internal vehicular circulation and parking system for passenger
vehicles and delivery trucks, as well as the circulation systems for pedestrians,
bicycles and transit users.
e. Justification of need, including statements describing how the additional access will
meet the intent of this Section, will be consistent with the US-41/M-28 Corridor
Management Plan and the Marquette Township Comprehensive Plan, will not
compromise public safety and will not reduce capacity or traffic operations along
the roadway.
f. Qualifications and documented experience of the author, describing experience in
preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan. The preparer shall be either a
registered traffic engineer (P.E.) or transportation planner with at least three (3)
years of experience preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan. If the traffic
impact study involves geometric design, the study shall be prepared or supervised
by a registered engineer with a strong background in traffic engineering.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 4
SECTION 14.01: PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICATION – (Cont.)
2. Marquette Township shall utilize its own traffic consultant to review the applicant’s
traffic impact study and plot or site plan, with the cost of the review being borne by
the applicant per Section 25.13 FEES.
E. Failure by the applicant to begin construction of an approved road, driveway, shared
access, service drive or other access arrangement within twelve (12) months from the date
of approval, shall void the approval and a new application is required.
F. The Zoning Administrator or other authorized person shall inspect the driveway and any
other required access elements as constructed for conformance with the standards of this
Ordinance and any approval granted under it, prior to issuing an occupancy permit
and/or a letter of acceptance per ARTICLE 18:11 FINAL APPROVAL OF PROJECT.
1. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, inspections to determine conformance with
the requirements of this ARTICLE 14 and of any approved site plan, driveway permit
or other permit authorizing access to property may be contracted to a person or firm
qualified to administer the provisions of this ARTICLE 14.
2. Any inspection report prepared under contract shall be delivered to the Zoning
Administrator, prior to any zoning approval permitting occupancy of the property. If
the inspection report indicates nonconformance with this Ordinance, or with conditions
imposed with site plan review or other discretionary review, no final occupancy
approval shall be granted prior to changes being made and approved that
demonstrate conformance with this Ordinance.
3. Fees for such inspections shall be paid by the applicant according to a fee structure
adopted by the governing body and shall be collected prior to the inspection. Fees
shall not represent more than the actual cost of inspections, shall be based on an
estimate of actual costs prior to inspection, and shall be collected in escrow prior to
inspections being made. Any unused portion of an inspection fee shall be returned to
the applicant. If actual inspection costs exceed the amount of the fee collected in
escrow, the balance shall be collected prior to issuing the final approval for
occupancy. Disputes on the costs of inspections may be resolved by an arbitrator
mutually satisfactory to both parties.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 5
SECTION 14.01: PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICATION – (Cont.)
TABLE 1 : EXAMPLES OF LAND USE THRESHOLDS
BASED ON TRIP GENERATION CHARACTERISTICS
LAND USE
= 100 PEAK-HOUR
TRIPS
= 500 PEAK-HOUR
TRIPS
Residential:
Single-family 90 units 550 units
Apartments 150 units 890 units
Condominiums/Townhouses 180 units 1,260 units
Mobile Home Park 180 units 1,070 units
Shopping Center (GLA)* 6,000 SF 70,700 SF
Fast-Food Restaurant with Drive-In (GFA) ** 3,000 SF N/A
Gas with Convenience Store (Pumps) 7 pumps N/A
Banks with Drive-In (GFA)** 2,000 SF 9,000 SF
General Office (GFA)** 67,000 SF 335,500 SF
Medical/Dentist Office (GFA)** 30,000 SF N/A
Research and Development (GFA)** 71,000 SF 490,500 SF
Light Industrial (GFA)** 98,000 SF 463,000 SF
Manufacturing (GFA)** 145,500 SF 661,000 SF
Rates/equations used to calculate the above thresholds are from ITE Trip Generation, 6th
edition 1998 [7] for the p.m. peak hour of the adjacent street.
* GLA = Gross Leaseable Area.
** GFA = Gross Floor Area.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 6
SECTION 14.02: ROADWAYS SUBJECT TO ACCESS MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS
The access management regulations of this Article apply to all property according to the
roadway classification of the abutting streets and roads with the names of US-41/M-28, and as
described below.
A. Application of the access location and design standards of this Article requires
identification of the functional classification of the street on which access is requested and
then applying the appropriate spacing requirements. The streets and roads of Marquette
Township are classified as follows and are as defined in ARTICLE 2.02.
DEFINITIONS:
1. Local Street;
2. Collector;
3. Minor Arterial;
4. Major Arterial.
B. All unclassified public streets are local streets principally providing access to single family
residences. The functional classification of any street in Marquette Township not defined
and so indicated as an arterial or collector shall be determined using the functional sheet
classification defined by the AASHTO “Green Book”, A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets.
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS
All lots hereafter created and all structures hereafter created, altered or moved on property with
frontage on or access to a public road or street that is subject to regulation per Section 13.02,
shall conform with the following requirements:
A. General Standards
1. Access Approval Required – No road, driveway, shared access, parking lot cross
access, service road, or other access arrangement shall be established, reconstructed
or removed without first meeting the requirements of this Section.
2. Frontage on a Public Road or Street – Any lot created after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall have frontage upon a public street right-of-way or private road or
access easement recorded with the County Register of Deeds that meets the
requirements of this Article. Contiguous properties under one ownership or
consolidated for unified development will be considered one parcel for purposes of
this Article.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 7
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS - (Cont.)
3. Minimum Lot Width – Except for existing lots of record at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance, all lots whose access taken from a major arterial, minor arterial or
collector subject to this Section, shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet in width,
unless served by shared access or a service drive that meets the requirements of
Section 14.04, in which case minimum lot width may be reduced to the minimum lot
width of the district in which the lot is located provided no direct access comes from the
major arterial, minor arterial or collector subject to this Section.
4. Structure Setback – No structure other than signs, as allowed in Article 22, telephone
poles and other utility structures that are not buildings, transfer stations or substations,
shall be permitted within 25 feet of the roadway right-of-way.
5. Parking Setback and Landscaped Area – No parking or display of vehicles, goods or
other materials for sale, shall be located within 20 feet of the roadway right-of-way.
This setback shall be planted in grass, except small portions may contain four inch
deep wood chips or ground cover or a combination. It shall be landscaped with small
clusters of salt tolerant trees and shrubs suitable to the underlying soils unless per the
specifications in ARTICLE 21.06 DESIGN STANDARDS G.2.a.
6. Clear Vision – All access points shall maintain clear vision in accordance with ARTICLE
20.08 CLEAR VISION AREAS, FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENS and as illustrated in
Figure14-1.
7. Street Structures – No driveway shall interfere with municipal facilities such as street
light or traffic signal poles, signs, fire hydrants, cross walks, bus loading zones, utility
poles, fire alarm supports, drainage structures, or other necessary street structures.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to order and effect the removal or
reconstruction of any driveway which is constructed in conflict with street structures.
The cost of reconstructing or relocating such driveways shall be at the expense of the
abutting property owner.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 8
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS - (Cont.)
FIGURE 14-1
CLEAR VISION AT DRIVEWAYS
B. Access Location Standards
1. Access Point Approval – No access point shall connect to a public street or road,
without first receiving approval of the location and cross-section specifications from the
Marquette County Road Commission or the Michigan Department of Transportation.
No access point shall connect to a private road unless approved by the Planning
Commission and by the parties with an ownership interest in the private road.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 9
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
2. Factors on Location of Driveway Access – At a minimum, the following factors shall be
considered by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission prior to making a
decision on the location of a driveway or other access point:
a. The characteristics of the proposed land use;
b. The existing traffic flow conditions and the future traffic demand anticipated by
the proposed development on the adjacent street system;
c. The location of the property;
d. The size of the property;
e. The orientation of structures on the site;
f. The minimum number of driveways or other access points needed to accommodate
anticipated traffic based on a traffic analysis, as determined by Marquette
Township and applicable road agency. Such finding shall demonstrate traffic
operations and safety along the public street would be improved (or at least not
negatively affected), and not merely that another access point is desired for
convenience;
g. The number and location of driveways on existing adjacent and opposite
properties;
h. The location and functional classification of abutting streets or roads and the
carrying capacity of nearby intersections;
i. The proper geometric design of driveways;
j. The spacing between opposite and adjacent driveways and from any nearby
intersection;
k. The internal circulation between driveways and through parking areas;
l. The size, location and configuration of parking areas relative to the driveways;
and
m. The speed of the adjacent roadway.
n. The Planning Commission may allow a driveway through a bufferyard, provided
the site plan is in compliance with all other requirements of this ordinance. The
driveway shall generally cross through the bufferyard approximately
perpendicular to the bufferyard length and thereby prevent disruption of the
majority of the bufferyard. The Planning Commission’s approval must be based on
accomplishing access management objectives such as cross access to other
properties, roads, or service drives. The Planning Commission may require
landscaping, berms, or screening in addition to what is normally required to
mitigate a weakened bufferyard.
3. Access Point Location – Each access point location shall conform with access
management plans or corridor improvement plans that have been adopted by
Marquette Township, the Marquette County Road Commission, and/or the Michigan
Department of Transportation.
4. Access Points within Right-of-Way – Driveways including the radii but not including
right-turn lanes, passing lanes and tapers, shall be located entirely within the
right-of-way frontage, unless otherwise approved by the applicable road agency and
upon written certification from the adjacent land owner agreeing to such
encroachment.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 10
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
5. Backing-up from Parking or Loading Area Onto a Public Street or Service Drive –
Driveway access to arterials shall not be permitted for any parking or loading areas
that require backing maneuvers in a public street or road right-of-way. Driveway
access to collector streets, local streets, or service drives for commercial, office,
industrial, or multifamily developments shall not be permitted for parking or loading
areas that require backing maneuvers in a public street right-of-way or onto a public
or private service drive.
6. Relationship to Lot Line – No part of a driveway shall be located closer than 15 feet
from a lot line unless it is a common or shared driveway as provided in Section
14.03.F. or unless the driveway is crossing a lot line to gain access to a right-of-way
or another parking lot or property. This separation is intended to help control
stormwater runoff, permit snow storage on site, and provide adequate area for any
necessary on-site landscaping.
7. Existing Driveways – Except for shared driveways, existing driveways that do not
comply with the requirements of this Article shall be closed when an application for a
change of use requiring a zoning compliance permit or a site plan requiring approval
under ARTICLE 18 Site Plan Review is submitted and once approval of a new means of
access under this Article is granted. A closed driveway shall be graded and
landscaped to conform with adjacent land and any curb cut shall be filled in with curb
and gutter per the standards of the applicable road authority. See also Section
14.06.
8. Intersection Sight Distance – Driveways shall be located so as not to interfere with safe
intersection sight distance as determined by the appropriate road authority.
9. Adequate Corner Clearance – Driveways shall be located so as not to interfere with
safe traffic operations at an intersection as determined by Table IV as long as that
distance is beyond any clear vision area owned by a road authority.
10. Traffic Signals – Access points on arterial and collector streets may be required to be
signalized in order to provide safe and efficient traffic flow. Any signal shall meet the
spacing requirements of the applicable road authority. A development may be
responsible for all or part of any right-of-way, design, hardware, and construction
costs of a traffic signal if it is determined that the signal is warranted by the traffic
generated from the development. The procedures for signal installation and the
percent of financial participation required of the development in the installation of the
signal shall be in accordance with criteria of the road authority with jurisdiction.
C. Number of Driveways Permitted
1. Access for an individual parcel, lot, or building site or for contiguous parcels, lots or
building sites under the same ownership shall consist of either a single two-way
driveway or a paired system wherein one driveway is designed, and appropriately
marked, to accommodate ingress traffic and the other egress traffic.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 11
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
2. One driveway shall be permitted for each single and two-family residential lot or
parcel.
3. A temporary access permit may be issued for field entrances per Section 13.05 for
cultivated land, timber land, or undeveloped land, as well as for uses at which no one
resides or works such as cellular towers, water wells, pumping stations, utility
transformers, billboards, and similar uses. Field-entrance and utility-structure
driveways will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The review shall take into
account the proximity of the adjacent driveways and intersecting streets, as well as
traffic volumes along the roadway.
4. For a parcel, lot, or building site with frontage exceeding 600 feet, or where a parcel,
lot, or building site has frontage on at least two streets, an additional driveway may
be allowed, provided that a traffic impact study is submitted by the applicant showing
that conditions warrant an additional driveway and that all driveways meet the
spacing requirements.
5. Certain developments generate enough traffic to warrant consideration of an
additional driveway to reduce delays for exiting motorists. Where possible, these
second access points should be located on a side street or service drive, or shared with
adjacent uses, or designed for right-turn-in, right-turn-out only movements and shall
meet the spacing requirements of this ordinance. In order to be considered for a
second driveway on an arterial or collector street combined approach volumes
(entering and exiting) of a proposed development shall exceed 100 directional trips
during the peak hour of traffic and a traffic impact study shall be performed. Uses
where a second driveway could be considered are influenced by the trip generation
characteristics of the uses and the volumes of the adjacent roadway. Table II lists land
uses which may warrant consideration of an additional driveway. (Note: Where the
development has access to a signalized arterial or collector, the approach volume of
driveway traffic should be double that of unsignalized locations to warrant
consideration of a second access. See Section 14.03.D.1.a.
TABLE 2
Development That May Warrant Consideration
of an Additional Driveway
? Multiple family development with over 250 units
? A grocery store of over 50,000 square feet (GFA)
? A shopping center with over 80,000 square feet (GFA)
? A hotel or motel with over 400 rooms
? Industrial developments with over 300,000 square feet
(GFA) or 350 employees (although a secondary
entrance for trucks should be allowed)
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 12
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
Development That May Warrant Consideration
of an Additional Driveway
? Warehouses of over 750,000 square feet (GFA) or 350
employees
? A mobile home park with over 300 units
? General office building of 150,000 square feet (GFA)
or 500 employees
? Medical office building of 60,000 square feet (GFA) or
200 employees
? Fast food restaurant of over 8,000 square feet (GFA)
? Sit down restaurant of over 20,000 square feet (GFA)
6. When alternatives to a single, two-way driveway are necessary to provide
reasonable driveway access to property fronting on an arterial street, and shared
access or a service drive are not a viable option, the following progression of
alternatives should be used:
a. One (1) standard, two-way driveway;
b. Additional ingress/egress lanes on one (1) standard, two-way driveway;
c. Two (2), one-way driveways;
d. Additional ingress/egress lanes on two (2), one-way driveways;
e. Additional driveway(s) on an abutting street with a lower functional classification;
f. Additional driveway on arterial street.
NOTE: Restricted turns and roadway modifications will be considered in conjunction
with alternative driveway designs.
D. Access Point Spacing Standards
1. Separation from Other Driveways –
a. The minimum spacing between unsignalized driveways and other access points shall
be determined based upon posted speed limits along the parcel frontage unless
the appropriate road authority approves less based on the land use and restricted
turns in the driveway design or because of the location of other existing
driveways. The minimum spacings indicated below are measured from the
centerline of one driveway to the centerline of another driveway
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 13
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
For sites with insufficient road frontage to meet the table below, the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission shall require one of the following:
construction of the driveway along a side street, a shared driveway with an
adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line farthest
from the intersection, or a service drive as described in Section 14.04. The
Planning Commission may grant temporary access approval (see Section 14.05)
until such time that minimum spacing requirements can be met, or alternative access
meeting the requirements of this ordinance is approved.
TABLE 3
Posted Speed
Limit (MPH)
Minimum Access Spacing (in feet)
Between Adjacent Access Points
25 130
30 185
35 245
40 300
45 350
50 455
55 565
NOTE: The values in Table III are considered minimums based on the distances required to
avoid conflicts between vehicles turning right or left from adjacent driveways.
b. In the case of expansion, alteration or redesign of an existing development where
it can be demonstrated that pre-existing conditions prohibit adherence to the
minimum driveway spacing standards, the Planning Commission shall have the
authority to modify the driveway spacing requirements or grant temporary access
approval until such time that minimum spacing requirements can be met, or
alternative access meeting the requirements of this ordinance is approved. Such
modifications shall be of the minimum amount necessary, but in no case shall
driveway spacing of less than 75 feet be permitted by the Planning Commission.
2. Access Point Separation from Intersections – All one and two-family driveways shall be
separated from the nearest right-of-way of an intersecting street by at least 50 feet.
Driveways for all other land uses shall be separated from the nearest right-of-way of
an intersecting street according to Table IV below:
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 14
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
a. Access point spacing from intersections shall be measured from the centerline of the
driveway to the extended edge of the travel lane on the intersecting street.
b. The minimum distance between an access point and an intersecting street shall be
based on the following:
TABLE 4: Minimum Access Point Spacing from Street and Other Intersections*
Location of Access Point
Minimum Spacing for a Full
Movement Driveway or
other Access Point
Minimum Spacing for a Driveway
Restricting Left-turns (channelized
for right-turn-in and right-turn-out
only)
Along Arterial or from
Expressway ramps
600 feet 600 feet
Along Arterial or from
Railroad crossings
Contact MDOT for a site
specific determination
Contact MDOT for a site
specific determination
Along Arterial or from
Bridges
100 feet 100 feet
Along Arterial or from
Median openings
75 feet 75 feet
Along Arterial or from
another Intersecting Arterial
300 feet 125 feet
Along Arterial Intersecting a
Collector or Local Street
200 feet 125 feet
Along a Collector 125 feet 75 feet
Along a Local Street or
Private Road
75 feet 50 feet
* Regional Arterials, Arterials and Collectors are as classified in the Marquette Township
Comprehensive Plan (or on Figure 14.2 in this Ordinance).
c. If the amount of lot frontage is not sufficient to meet the above criterion, the
driveway shall be constructed along the property line farthest from the intersection
to encourage future shared use, and/or a frontage road or rear service drive shall
be developed as described in Section 14.04.
d. For parcels on which an alternative means of access (shared driveway, frontage
road, service drive or connected parking lots) is not feasible due to parcel size or
existing adjacent development, the Planning Commission may allow a nonchannelized,
full movement driveway provided that:
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 15
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
1. The driveway is spaced no closer to the intersection than the minimum spacing
allowed for a right-turn-in, right-turn-out driveway; and
2. A traffic study conducted by a registered traffic engineer shows a right-turn-in,
right-turn-out driveway does not provide reasonable access or desired safety;
and
3. A traffic study, conducted by a registered traffic engineer, provides substantial
justification that the driveway operation will not create safety problems at the
adjacent intersection.
3. Access Alignment –
In order to prevent left-turn conflicts, two-way driveways shall not be across from an
expressway ramp and shall be either;
a. Offset in accordance with the minimum spacing standards in Table IV or,
b. Perpendicular to the existing public street or an approved private road and shall
line up with the existing or planned driveways on the opposite side of the road
wherever facing lots are not separated by a median, unless doing so in a
particular case is substantially demonstrated by a registered traffic engineer to be
unsafe.
E. Driveway Design and Construction Standards
1. Driveway or Throat Width –
a. No single or two-family driveway shall have a width less than nine (9) feet nor
more than sixteen (16) feet at the public road right-of-way. The driveway
opening, including flares, shall not be more than 1.5 times the width of the
driveway at the right-of-way line.
b. The typical commercial driveway design shall include one ingress lane and one
egress lane with a combined maximum throat width of thirty (30) feet, measured
from face to face of curb (see Figure 14-2a).
c. Where exit traffic volumes are expected to exceed 100 directional trips per peak
hour, or in areas where congestion along the arterial may create significant
delays, as determined by the Planning Commission, two exit lanes shall be
required. The total width of such a driveway shall be between 37 and 39 feet,
with one 15 foot wide ingress lane and two 11-12 foot wide egress lanes (see
Figure 14-2b).
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 16
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
d. For access systems which include a pair of one-way driveways, each driveway
shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet wide, measured perpendicularly (see
Figure 14-2c).
e. As an alternative to (d) above, the driveway may be designed with a fully curbed
median dividing the ingress and egress driveways, with a maximum median width
of ten feet. The radii forming the edges on the median shall be designed to
accommodate the largest vehicle that will normally use the driveway. Where
median or boulevard driveways are located across the street from each other, the
left-turn egress lanes shall be aligned directly across from one another to minimize
left-turn conflicts (see Figure 14-2d) Boulevard driveways should not be
constructed at existing or future traffic signal locations unless there is a left-turn
lane where the boulevard meets the road right-of-way. Ground or monument
signs shall not be permitted in boulevards if they would block motorist vision or
otherwise create an unsafe condition. The Planning Commission may require
landscaping on the portion of the boulevard outside the public right-of-way. Such
landscaping shall use salt tolerant species.
2. Restricted Access Driveways –
Left and right-turn movements on and off roadways typically have the greatest impact
on traffic flow and crash frequency. Therefore, where driveways are to be located in
a segment defined in adopted corridor or other plans or studies as having a high
crash rate or significant traffic congestion/delays, or where left-turn access is
available through alternative means of access, the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission may require driveway design and signing which discourages certain
turning movements. Where driveways are intended to control specific left and/or
right-turn ingress and egress, the designs shown in Figure 14-3 shall apply. Similar
designs shall be accepted, provided that they are approved by the Michigan
Department of Transportation and/or the Marquette County Road Commission, if
applicable.
3. Throat Length or Vehicle Stacking/Storage Space –
There shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet of throat length for entering and exiting
vehicles at the intersection of a driveway and pavement of the public road or service
drive as measured from the pavement edge. For driveways serving between onehundred
(100) and four-hundred (400) vehicles in the peak hour (two-way traffic
volumes) the driveways shall provide at least sixty (60) feet of throat length. For
driveways serving over four-hundred (400) vehicles per peak hour (two-way traffic
volume) and for all driveways controlled by a traffic signal, adequate throat length
shall be determined by a traffic impact study. In areas where significant
pedestrian/bicycle travel is expected, the ingress and egress lanes should be
separated by a 4-10 feet wide median with pedestrian refuge area. In the absence
of adequate traffic volume data, application of the commonly used values in Table V
is appropriate.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 17
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
4. Construction Standards –
a. Curb radii:
1. Driveways shall be designed with minimum 25 foot radii where primarily
passenger vehicle traffic is expected.
2. For sites where truck traffic is expected, the driveways shall be designed with
minimum 30 foot radii unless a traffic analysis by a qualified traffic engineer
reveals another radii is more appropriate for the vehicles expected to use the
driveway.
b. Deceleration lanes and tapers:
1. Where it can be demonstrated that driveway volumes are expected to exceed
100 peak hour directional trips per hour, a right-turn taper, deceleration lane
and/or left-turn bypass lane may be required.
2. Where site frontage allows and a right-turn lane is warranted, a taper
between 50 and 225 feet may be required. See example in Figure 14-4a.
3. Where the amount of frontage precludes the construction of a deceleration
lane and taper combination entirely within the property lines of a parcel, a
request shall be made to the adjacent owner of the parcel to allow the
installation of a right-turn bay and taper which extends beyond the property
line. If permission cannot be obtained from the adjacent property owner for
an extension onto that parcel, a taper of at least 75 feet shall be constructed
as shown in Figure 14-4b.
4. A continuous right-turn lane, as shown in Figure 14-4c may be required where
driveway spacing requirements restrict the use of consecutive turn bays and
tapers, and a traffic engineer concludes it can be constructed without being
used as a through lane.
5. For driveways located along streets without an exclusive left-turn lane, a
bypass lane may be required. Such a lane shall be designed to the standards
in the Michigan Department of Transportation, Traffic and Safety Notes #7.7
and as shown in Figure 14-4d.
c. Acceleration lanes
1. Generally, acceleration lanes are not permitted. However, where site frontage
allows and large semi-trucks and other slow moving vehicles routinely access
an arterial, an acceleration lane may be required in consultation with the
applicable road authority.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 18
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
2. The acceleration lane shall be designed by a traffic engineer to meet the
needs of vehicles using it, topography, sight distance and other relevant
factors.
3. Driveways shall not be permitted within an acceleration lane.
d. Grades and drainage
1. Driveways shall be constructed such that the grade for the 25 feet nearest the
pavement edge or shoulder does not exceed 1.5% (one and one-half foot
vertical rise in one-hundred feet of horizontal distance) wherever feasible.
Where not feasible, grades shall conform with Figure 14-5.
2. Vertical curves, with a minimum length of 15 feet shall be provided on
driveway approaches at a change in grade of 4% or more.
3. Driveways shall be constructed such that drainage from impervious areas
located outside of the public right-of-way, which are determined to be in
excess of existing drainage from these areas shall not be discharged into the
roadway drainage system absent the approval of the responsible agency.
Storm drains, or culverts, if required shall be of a size adequate to carry the
anticipated storm flow and be constructed and installed pursuant to the
specifications of the responsible road authority.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 19
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
FIGURE 14-2
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 20
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
FIGURE 14-3
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 21
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
TABLE 5: Minimum Throat Length Requirement
Land Use Building Site
Minimum Throat Length (Feet)
Collector Arterial
Apartments <100 Units 25 50
100-200 Units 50 75
>200 Units 75 125
Office <50,000 Sq ft 25 50
50,001 – 100,000 Sq ft 25 75
100,001 – 200,000 Sq ft 50 100
200,001 – 500,000 Sq ft 100 150
<500,000 Sq ft 125 250
Retail <30,000 Sq ft 25 50
>30,000 Sq ft 25 75
Shopping Center <250,000 Sq ft 25 50
250,001 – 500,000 Sq ft 50 75
500,000 – 750,000 Sq ft 75 200
>750,000 Sq ft 125 250
Supermarket <20,000 Sq ft 50 75
>20,000 Sq ft 75 125
Restaurant <15,000 Sq ft 25 50
>15,000 Sq ft 25 75
Drive-in Restaurant <2,000 Sq ft 25 75
>2,000 Sq ft 50 100
Motel <150 Rooms 25 75
>150 Rooms 25 100
Light Industrial <100,000 Sq ft 25 50
100,001 – 500,000 Sq ft 50 100
>500,000 Sq ft 50 200
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 22
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
FIGURE 14-4
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 23
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
FIGURE 14-5
e. Surface and Curb Construction – Commercial and all other nonresidential
driveways shall be constructed of a permanent asphalt or concrete material
sufficient to provide the bearing capacity needed to carry the anticipated traffic
loads as determined by the appropriate road authority unless the road authority
approves use of another material. Where a driveway connects with a curbed
road, it shall be paved and curbed from the edge of pavement to either the rightof-
way line or point of curvature of the radius returns. All soil erosion and
sedimentation requirements shall be met.
f. Directional Signs and Pavement Markings – In order to ensure smooth traffic
circulation on the site, direction signs and pavement markings shall be installed at
the driveway(s) in a clearly visible location as required by Marquette Township as
part of the site plan review process and approved by the Michigan Department of
Transportation and Marquette County Road Commission (as appropriate), and
shall be maintained on a permanent basis by the property owner. Directional
signs and pavement markings shall conform to the standards in the Michigan
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
F. Shared Access
Shared access is strongly encouraged and in some cases may be required. When
required, one or more of the following options, and the standards of Section 14.04 apply.
1. Shared Driveways: Sharing or joint use of a driveway by two or more property
owners shall be encouraged. In cases where access is restricted by the spacing
requirements of Section 14.03.D. “Access Point Spacing Standards”, a shared driveway
may be the only access design allowed.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 24
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
The shared driveway shall be constructed along the midpoint between the two
properties unless a written easement is provided which allows traffic to travel across
one parcel to access another, and/or access the public street.
2. Frontage Roads: In cases where a frontage road exists, is recommended either in
Marquette Township’s Comprehensive Plan or in an adopted corridor study, and/or is
proposed in an approved site plan for an adjoining lot or parcel, access shall be
provided via such frontage road, rather than by direct connection to the abutting
arterial street.
3. Rear Service Drives: Rear service drives shall be encouraged, especially for locations
where connection to a side street is available. In addition to access along the rear
service drive, direct connection(s) to the arterial street may be allowed, provided that
the driveways meet the requirements of Section 13.03.C. “Number of Driveways”, and
14.03.D. “Access Point Spacing Standards.”
G. Parking Lot Connections
Where a proposed parking lot is adjacent to an existing parking lot of a similar use, there
shall be a vehicular connection between the two parking lots where physically feasible, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission. For developments
adjacent to vacant properties, the site shall be designed to provide for a future
connection. A written access easement signed by both landowners shall be presented as
evidence of the parking lot connection prior to the issuance of any final zoning approval.
H. Access Easements
Shared driveways, cross access driveways, connected parking lots, and service drives shall
be recorded as an access easement and shall constitute a covenant running with the land.
Operating and maintenance agreements for these facilities should be recorded with the
deed.
I. Medians and Median Openings
1. The type, location and length of medians on public roads shall be determined by the
entity having jurisdiction over such roads. This determination will be made in
consultation with the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission and will be based
on existing and projected traffic conditions; the type, size, and extent of existing and
projected development and traffic generated by development; traffic control needs;
and other factors.
2. The minimum spacing between median openings shall be shown in Table VI:
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 25
SECTION 14.03: DRIVEWAY AND RELATED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
TABLE 6: MINIMUM DIRECTIONAL MEDIAN OPENING SPACING
Location Directional Crossover Spacing
Urban 660 feet
Rural 1,320 feet
See MDOT Traffic and Safety Division, Directional Median Crossovers, #11.4 and Geometric
Design Guide VII-670.
3. Median openings intended to serve development must meet or exceed the minimum
median opening spacing standards and must also be justified by a traffic impact
analysis approved by the entity having jurisdiction over such roads, in consultation with
the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission. The cost for preparation of the
traffic impact analysis and construction of the median opening or openings, including
installation and operation of signals and other improvements where warranted, shall
be borne by the applicant.
SECTION 14.04: SERVICE DRIVES AND OTHER SHARED ACCESS
STANDARDS
A. The use of shared access, parking lot connections and service drives, in conjunction with
driveway spacing, is intended to preserve traffic flow along major thoroughfares and
minimize traffic conflicts, while retaining reasonable access to the property. Where noted
above, or where the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission determines that
restricting new access points or reducing the number of existing access points may have a
beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety while preserving the property owner’s
right to reasonable access, then access from a side street, a shared driveway, a parking
lot connection, or service drive connecting two or more properties or uses may be required
instead of more direct connection to the arterial or collector street. However, where
traffic safety would be improved, and the driveway spacing requirements of this
ordinance can be met, then direct connection to the arterial or collector street may be
allowed in addition to a required service drive.
1. In particular, shared access, service drives or at least a connection between abutting
land uses may be required in the following cases:
a. Where the driveway spacing standards of this section can not be met.
b. Where recommended in the US-41/M-28 Corridor Management Plan and/or
other corridor or sub-area master plans or the Comprehensive Plan or Marquette
Township.
c. When the driveway could potentially interfere with traffic operations at an
existing or planned traffic signal location.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 26
SECTION 14.04: SERVICE DRIVES AND OTHER SHARED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
d. The site is along a collector or arterial with high traffic volumes, or along segments
experiencing congestion or a relatively high number of crashes.
e. The property frontage has limited sight distance.
f. The fire (or emergency services) department recommends a second means of
emergency access.
2. In areas where frontage roads or rear service drives are recommended, but adjacent
properties have not yet developed, the site shall be designed to accommodate a
future road/facility designed according to the standards of this Section. The Planning
Commission may approve temporary access points where a continuous service drive is
not yet available and a performance bond or escrow is accepted to assure elimination
of temporary access when the service road is constructed. (See Section 14.05
Temporary Access Permits).
B. Notwithstanding the requirements of the Marquette Township Land Division Ordinance, the
standards for all service drives shall be as follows:
1. Site Plan Review – The Planning Commission shall review and approve all service
drives to ensure safe and adequate continuity of the service drive between contiguous
parcels as part of the site plan review process.
2. Front and Rear Service Drives – A front or rear service drive may be established on
property which abuts only one public road. The design of a service road shall
conform with national design guidelines such as those identified in the National Access
Management Manual by TRB, the AASHTO “Green Book”, and National Cooperative
Highway Research Program (NCHRP), “Access Management Guidelines to Activity
Centers” Report 348 and “Impacts of Access Management Techniques” Report 420.
3. Location – Service roads shall generally be parallel to the front property line and
may be located either in front of, or behind, principal buildings and may be placed in
required yards, but outside of bufferyards. However the Planning Commission may
allow a service road through a bufferyard, provided the site plan is in compliance
with all other requirements of this ordinance. The service road shall generally cross
through the bufferyard approximately perpendicular to the bufferyard length and
thereby prevent disruption of the majority of the bufferyard. The Planning
Commission’s approval must be based on accomplishing access management objectives
such as cross access to other properties, road, or service drives. The Planning
Commission may require landscaping, berms, or screening in addition to what is
normally required to mitigate a weakened bufferyard. In considering the most
appropriate alignment for a service road, the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission shall consider the setbacks of existing and/or proposed buildings and
anticipated traffic flow for the site.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 27
SECTION 14.04: SERVICE DRIVES AND OTHER SHARED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
4. Width and Construction Materials – A service drive shall be within an access easement
permitting traffic circulation between properties. The easement shall be recorded with
the County Register of Deeds. This easement shall be at least forty (40) feet wide. A
service drive shall have a minimum pavement width of 36 feet, measured face to face
of curb with an approach width of 39 feet at intersections. The service drive shall be
constructed of a paved surface material that is resistant to erosion and shall meet
Marquette County Road Commission or MDOT standards for base and thickness of
asphalt or concrete, unless Marquette Township has more restrictive standards or
because the service drive will have very limited use and the Township permits a lesser
standard.
5. Snow Storage and Landscaping Area – A minimum of fifteen (15) feet of snow
storage/landscaping area shall be reserved along both sides of the service drive.
Frontage roads shall have a minimum setback of 30 feet from the right-of-way, with a
minimum of 60 feet of storage at the intersection for entering and exiting vehicles as
measured from the pavement edge (See Figure 14-6a).
6. Distance from Intersection on Service Drives – Frontage road and service drive
intersections at the collector or arterial street shall be designed according to the same
minimum standards as described for driveways in Section 14.03.D.2.
7. Driveway Entrance – The Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission shall approve
the location of all accesses to the service drive, based on the driveway spacing
standards of this Article. Access to the service drive shall be located so that there is no
undue interference with the free movement of service drive and emergency vehicle
traffic, where there is a safe sight distance, and where there is a safe driveway grade
as established by the applicable road authority.
8. Driveway Radii – All driveway radii shall be concrete curbs and conform with the
requirements of Section 14.03.E.4.
9. Acceleration Lanes and Tapers – The design of the driveway, acceleration,
deceleration or taper shall conform with the requirements of Section 14.03.E.4.
10. Elevation – The elevation of a service drive shall be uniform or gently sloping between
adjacent properties.
11. Service Drive Maintenance – No service drive shall be established on existing public
right-of-way. The service drive shall be a public street (if dedicated to and accepted
by the public), or a private road maintained by the adjoining property owners it
serves who shall enter into a formal agreement for the joint maintenance of the service
drive.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 28
SECTION 14.04: SERVICE DRIVES AND OTHER SHARED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
1. The agreement shall also specify who is responsible for enforcing speed limits, parking
and related vehicular activity on the service drive. This agreement shall be approved
by the Marquette Township attorney and recorded with the deed for each property it
serves by the County Register of Deeds. If the service drive is a private road, the
local government shall reserve the right to make repairs or improvements to the
service drive and charge back the cost directly or by special assessment to the
benefiting landowners if they fail to properly maintain a service drive.
2. Landscaping – Landscaping along the service drive shall conform with the requirements
of Section 19.04 Bufferyards, Section 19.05 Additional Bufferyard Regulations, Section
19.06 Required Open Space, Section 21.06 Design Standards, and as allowed by this
Article 14. Installation and maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of
the developer or a property owners association.
3. Parking Areas – All separate parking areas (i.e. those that do not use joint parking
cross access) shall have no more than one (1) access point or driveway to the service
drive.
4. Parking – The service road is intended to be used exclusively for circulation, not as a
parking, loading or unloading aisle. Parking shall be prohibited along two-way
frontage roads and service drives that are constructed at the minimum width. Oneway
roads or two-way roads designed with additional width for parallel parking may
be allowed if it can be demonstrated through traffic studies that on-street parking will
not significantly affect the capacity, safety or operation of the frontage road or
service drive. Perpendicular or angle parking along either side of a designated
frontage road or service drive is prohibited. The Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission may require the posting of “no parking” signs along the service road. As
a condition to site plan approval, the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission
may permit temporary parking in the easement area where a continuous service road
is not yet available, provided that the layout allows removal of the parking in the
future to allow extension of the service road. Temporary parking permitted within the
service drive shall be in excess of the minimum required under Article 21, Off-Street
Parking Requirements.
5. Directional Signs and Pavement Markings – Pavement markings may be required to
help promote safety and efficient circulation. The property owner shall be required to
maintain all pavement markings. All directional signs and pavement markings along
the service drive shall conform with the current Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
6. Assumed Width of Pre-existing Service Drives – Where a service drive in existence
prior to the effective date of this provision has no recorded width, the width will be
considered to be 66 feet for the purposes of establishing setbacks and measured an
equal distance from the midpoint of the road surface.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 29
SECTION 14.04: SERVICE DRIVES AND OTHER SHARED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
7. Pedestrian and Bicycle Access – Separate, safe access for pedestrians and bicycles
shall be provided on a sidewalk or paved path that generally parallels the service
drive unless alternate and comparable facilities are approved by the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission.
8. Number of Lots or Dwellings Served – No more than twenty-five (25) lots or dwelling
units may gain access from a service drive to a single public street.
9. Service Drive Signs – All new public and private service drives shall have a
designated name on a sign meeting the standards on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator.
10. In the case of expansion, alteration or redesign of existing development where it can
be demonstrated that pre-existing conditions prohibit installation of a frontage road
or service drive in accordance with the aforementioned standards, the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission shall have the authority to allow and/or require
alternative cross access between adjacent parking areas through the interconnection
of main circulation aisles. Under these conditions, the aisles serving the parking stalls
shall be aligned perpendicularly to the access aisle, as shown in Figure 14-6c, with
islands, curbing and/or signage to further delineate the edges of the route to be used
by through traffic.
FIGURE 14-6
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 30
SECTION 14.04: SERVICE DRIVES AND OTHER SHARED ACCESS STANDARDS – (Cont.)
FIGURE 14-6
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 31
SECTION 14.05: TEMPORARY ACCESS PERMITS
A. A temporary access permit may be conditionally issued to a property included in an
adopted corridor or access management plan that programs road improvements and
installation of service drives and shared driveways that would eliminate the need for the
temporary driveway.
B. Conditions may be included in the temporary access permit including but not limited to, a
limitation on development intensity on the site until adjoining parcels develop which can
provide a shared driveway, shared access via a service drive, and/or cross parking lot
connection consistent with the requirements of Section 14.04.
C. A temporary access permit shall expire when the use of the site for which the temporary
access permit was granted has ceased for twelve (12) months or more, or the use of the
site or the driveway has changed such that the use of the driveway has increased from its
initial use level at least 10 percent.
D. A site plan for property that cannot meet the access requirements of Section 14.04 and
has no alternative means of reasonable access to the public road system may be issued a
temporary access permit. When adjoining parcels develop which can provide a shared
driveway, shared access via a service drive or a cross parking lot connection, the
temporary access permit shall be rescinded and an application for an access permit
consistent with requirements of Section 14.04 shall be required.
SECTION 14.06: NONCONFORMING DRIVEWAYS
A. Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this Article, and were legally
constructed before the effective date of this Article, shall be considered legal
nonconforming driveways and shall be allowed to remain provided the use of the
property continues in the same manner and to the same extent as existed when it became
nonconforming. Existing driveways granted a temporary access permit are legal
nonconforming driveways until such time as the temporary access permit expires.
B. Loss of legal nonconforming status results when a nonconforming driveway ceases to be
used for its intended purpose, as shown on the approved site plan, or plot plan, for a
period of twelve (12) months or more. Any reuse of the driveway may only take place
after the driveway conforms to all aspects of this Article.
C. When the owner of a property with an existing, nonconforming driveway or driveways,
applies for a permit to upgrade or change the use of the property, the Zoning
Administrator or Planning commission will determine whether it is necessary and
appropriate to retrofit the existing driveway or driveways.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 32
SECTION 14.06: NONCONFORMING DRIVEWAYS – (Cont.)
1. The property owner may be required to establish a retrofit plan. The objectives of the
retrofit plan will be to minimize the traffic and safety impacts of development by
bringing the number, spacing, location, and design of driveways into conformance with
the standards and requirements of this Article to the extent possible without imposing
unnecessary hardship on the property owner. The retrofit plan may include:
a. Elimination of driveways,
b. Realignment or relocation of driveways,
c. Provision of shared driveways and/or cross parking lot connection,
d. Access by means of a service drive,
e. Restriction of vehicle movements (e.g. elimination of left-turns in and out),
f. Relocation of parking,
g. Traffic demand management (e.g. a reduction in peak hour trips),
h. Signalization, or
i. Such other changes as may enhance traffic safety.
2. The requirements of the retrofit plan shall be incorporated as conditions to the permit
for the change or upgrade of use and the property owner shall be responsible for the
retrofit.
D. Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this Ordinance and have been
constructed after the adoption of this Ordinance, shall be considered illegal
nonconforming driveways.
E. Illegal nonconforming driveways are a violation of this Ordinance. The property owner
shall be issued a violation notice which may include closing off the driveway until any
nonconforming aspects of the driveway are corrected. Driveways constructed in illegal
locations shall be immediately closed upon detection and all evidence of the driveway
removed from the right-of-way and site on which it is located. The costs of such removal
shall borne by the property owner.
F. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the repair, improvement, or modernization of
lawful nonconforming driveways, provided it is done consistent with the requirements of
this Article.
SECTION 14.07: INCENTIVES
A. In order to ensure the safe and efficient movement of traffic along a road and between
the road and properties abutting the road, shared driveways, service roads, and
interconnected parking lots are encouraged.
B. The Planning Commission reserves the authority to determine, in its discretion, the
adequacy of the access management amenities to be accepted and the particular
incentive to be provided to a property owner.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 33
SECTION 14.08: WAIVERS AND VARIANCES
A. Any applicant for access approval under the provisions of this Section may apply for a
waiver of standards in Section 14.03 if the applicant cannot meet one or more of the
standards according to the procedures provided below:
1. For waivers on properties involving land uses with less than five-hundred (500) vehicle
trips per day based on rates published in the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers: Where the standards in this Section cannot be met, suitable
alternatives, documented by a registered traffic engineer and substantially achieving
the intent of the Section may be accepted by the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission, provided that all of the following apply:
a. The use has insufficient size to meet the dimensional standards.
b. Adjacent development renders adherence to these standards economically
unfeasible.
c. There is no other reasonable access due to topographic or other considerations.
d. The standards in this Section shall be applied to the maximum extent feasible.
2. For waivers on properties involving land uses with more than five hundred (500)
vehicle trips per day based on rates published in the Trip Generation Manual of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers: During site plan review the Zoning Administrator
or Planning Commission shall have the authority to waive or otherwise modify the
standards of Section 14.03 following an analysis of suitable alternatives documented
by a registered traffic engineer and substantially achieving the intent of this Section,
provided all of the following apply:
a. Access via a shared driveway or front or rear service drive is not possible due to
the presence of existing buildings or topographic conditions.
b. Roadway improvements (such as the addition of a traffic signal, a center turn lane
or bypass lane) will be made to improve overall traffic operations prior to project
completion, or occupancy of the building.
c. The use involves the redesign of an existing development or a new use which will
generate less traffic than the previous use.
d. The proposed location and design is supported by the Marquette County Road
Commission and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation, as applicable, as
an acceptable design under the circumstances.
3. Single family homes and duplexes with shared access on an individual lot of record
may be considered for a waiver without providing documentation by a registered
traffic engineer as otherwise required in Subsection 14.08.A.1.
B. Variance Standards: The following standards shall apply when the Zoning Board of
Appeals considers a request for a variance from the standards of this Section.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 34
SECTION 14.08: WAIVERS AND VARIANCES – (Cont.)
1. The granting of a variance shall not be considered until a waiver under Section
14.08.A. or a temporary access permit under Section 14.05 has been considered and
rejected.
2. Applicants for a variance must provide proof of practical difficulties unique to the
parcel (such as wetlands, steep slopes, an odd parcel shape or narrow frontage, or
location relative to other buildings, driveways or an intersection or interchange) that
make strict application of the provisions of this Section impractical. This shall include
proof that:
a. Indirect or restricted access cannot be obtained; and,
b. No reasonable engineering or construction solution can be applied to mitigate the
condition; and,
c. No reasonable alternative access is available from a road with a lower functional
classification than the primary road; and,
d. Without the variance, there is no reasonable access to the site.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a finding that the applicant for a variance
met their burden of proof under Section 14.08.A. above, that a variance is consistent
with the intent and purpose of this Section, and is the minimum necessary to provide
reasonable access.
4. Under no circumstances shall a variance be granted unless not granting the variance
would deny all reasonable access, endanger public health, welfare or safety, or cause
an unnecessary hardship on the applicant. No variance shall be granted where such
hardship is self-created.
SECTION 14.09: ONE ACCESS PER PARCEL
A. All land in a parcel or lot having a single tax code number, as of the effective date of the
amendment adding this provision to the Ordinance (hereafter referred to as “the parent
parcel”), that shares a lot line for less than six hundred (600) feet with right-of-way on
US-41/M-28 or on the following county primary roads Wright St, 492, and 550 shall be
entitled to one (1) driveway or road access per parcel from said public road or highway.
1. All subsequent land divisions of a parent parcel, shall not increase the number of
driveways or road accesses beyond those entitled to the parent parcel on the
effective date of this amendment.
2. Parcels subsequently divided from the parent parcel, either by metes and bounds
descriptions, or as a plat under the applicable provisions of the Land Division Act,
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, or as a condominium project in accord with the
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, shall have access by a platted
subdivision road, by another public road, by an approved private road, frontage
road or rear service drive.
ARTICLE 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 14 Page 35
SECTION 14.09: ONE ACCESS PER PARCEL – (Cont.)
B. Parent parcels with more than six hundred (600) feet of frontage on a public road or
highway shall also meet the requirements of Section 14.09.A. above, except that whether
subsequently divided or not, they are entitled to not more than one driveway for each six
hundred (600) feet of public road frontage thereafter, unless a registered traffic
engineer determines that topographic conditions on the site, curvature on the road, or sight
distance limitations demonstrate a second driveway within a lesser distance is safer or the
nature of the land use to be served requires a second driveway for safety.
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 15
PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
15.01: INTENT 2
15.02: LAND USE INTENSITY 2
15.03: PERMITTED, PERMISSIBLE AND NON-PERMITTED USES 2
A. Principal Uses Permitted by Right 2
B. Special Use Permits 3
C. Temporary Use Permits 3
D. Accessory Use Permitted 3
E. Principal Uses Not Permitted 3
F. Relationship to Other Articles 3
G. Solar Energy and Wind Energy Systems Permitted 4
H. Parcel Compliance 4
15.04: PRINCIPAL USES OUTLINED 4
15.05: TABLE 15; USE VS DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 5 - 20
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 2
ARTICLE 15: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
SECTION 15.01: INTENT
The intent of this Article is to achieve beneficial utilization of land while preventing adverse
impacts to the environment, neighboring properties, and the public interest. This objective is
attained by separating the unincorporated area of the Charter Township of Marquette into eight
(8) specific zoning districts and permitting compatible uses within each district, as outlined in
Section 15.05 of this Article, Table of Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Use vs. District
Nomograph, and providing specific land uses that shall meet all additional criteria specified in
The Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards for Each Zoning District
(Article 19, Sections 19.13 through 19.20). The performance zoning approach, while providing
more flexibility, requires that all performance criteria and other regulations specifying minimum
sizes, width, area, easements, parking, loading, etc., be strictly adhered to. The minimum
requirements of all state and local agency laws, rules, regulations, and standards regarding
individual potable water supplies and on-site waste disposal systems shall also be adhered to.
SECTION 15.02: LAND USE INTENSITY
Land Use Intensity (LUI) is a measure of the magnitude and potential negative impact of a land
use on the environment and neighboring land uses. All principal land uses permitted by this
Ordinance have been assigned a land use intensity class number. The class number is designated
under the LUI Column, Section 15.05, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, on the Use vs. District
Nomograph. Since performance is the basic concept of this Ordinance, all land uses are classified
and separated on the basis of the type and degree of nuisance or negative impact they are
likely to impose on neighboring uses. The range of LUI classes open to a specific use does not
affect whether that use can be located on a lot, but only how it can develop on that lot. Each LUI
class is comprised of uses, which when developed to a specified permitted maximum intensity,
have similar nuisance values. The individual zoning districts control whether or not a specific use
can locate and develop on a lot in that district, and the LUI class standards designate the degree
of protection required for adjacent uses.
SECTION 15.03: PERMITTED, PERMISSIBLE, AND NON-PERMITTED
USES
A. PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
A Principal Use listed in Section 15.55, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Use vs. District
Nomograph, in any district denoted by the letter “Y” is a use permitted by right, provided
that all other requirements of federal, state, county, and local law and this Ordinance
have been met and further provided that a zoning compliance certificate has been issued
in accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.05, Zoning
Compliance Permit.
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 3
SECTION 15.03: PERMITTED, PERMISSIBLE, AND NON-PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
B. SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A principal use listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Table
15, Use vs. District Nomograph, may be permitted as a Special Land Use in any district
denoted by the letter “S”, “S*”, “S**”, or by “Y*” provided that the requirements of
Articles 16, Detailed Use Regulations, and Article 17, Special Land Uses, have also been
met. The letter “S*” refers to uses allowable on lots abutting the West side of Ontario
Street between Fair and Beaudoin. The letter “S**” refers to uses allowable on lots
abutting Werner Street West of Ontario Street and on lots abutting the north side of
Bancroft Street West of Woodridge. The letter “Y*” refers to Land Uses proposed within
the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land Use, and/or Residential
Zoning Districts which require a public hearing as specified in Section 17.04 A.
C. TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
A principal use may be allowed under a temporary or a specific temporary use permit as
designated by the letter “T” or “SK” in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts,
Section 15.05, Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph, and must conform to all requirements
of this Ordinance and as designated in Article 16, Detailed Use Regulations, Sections
16.05, Temporary Uses, 16.06, Specific Temporary Uses Permitted, and 16.07, Additional
Regulations.
D. ACCESSORY USE PERMITTED
An Accessory Use is a land use whose purpose is incidental and subordinate to the
allowed use of the land and is allowable by right within the individual districts provided
that all other requirements of federal, state, and local law, and Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Sections 16.03, Accessory Uses, and Section 16.04, Detailed Accessory Use
Regulations, of this Ordinance have been met, and further provided that a zoning
compliance certificate has been issued in accordance with Article 26, Administration and
Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance Certificate.
E. PRINCIPAL USES NOT PERMITTED
A principal use specified in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05,
Table 15, on the Use vs. District Nomograph, is not permitted if the District column remains
blank.
F. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ARTICLES
Uses permitted by right or under a special or temporary land use permit shall be subject
to all criteria and other regulations as are specified herein and in other articles of this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 4
SECTION 15.03: PERMITTED, PERMISSIBLE, AND NON-PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
G. SOLAR ENERGY AND WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS PERMITTED
Solar Energy and Wind Energy Systems may be permitted as a Special Land Use in
designated districts. Refer to Article 16 Section 16.10 Alternative Energy for detailed use
regulations.
H. PARCEL COMPLIANCE
Although a principal use may be indicated as permitted by right or by a special use
permit in a particular district, it does not follow that the same such principal use is
permitted by right or by special use permit on every parcel in the district. General land
uses and minimum performance standards have been developed for each zoning district
and are specified in the Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance
Standards, Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.13 through 18.20. A
principal use is not permitted on any parcel unless it can be located thereon in full
compliance with all of the required performance standards as applicable to the specific
use and zoning district in which it is located. (See Article 19, Performance Requirements,
Section 19.13 through 19.20, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance
Standards.)
SECTION 15.04: PRINCIPAL USES OUTLINED
Principal land uses are outlined in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05
Table 15, Use vs. District Nomograph. Except as otherwise provided by law or in this Ordinance,
no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except in the zoning district indicated and
for the purposes permitted in said Section. Principal land uses not specified in the Use vs. District
Nomograph are not necessarily excluded. However, a formal appeal for review and
determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals regarding a specific land use may be required
prior to approval of the use in question. (See Article 24, Zoning Board of Appeals, Section 24.04,
Administrative Review.) Principal uses italicized in the following nomograph are subject to
detailed use regulations specific to these uses as set forth in Article 16.
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 5
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR…………Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ........... Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.) S* Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and
Beaudoin.
S** ......... Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the
North Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
AGRICULTURE FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Apiary I Y
Fish Hatchery II Y Y
Grain I Y
Horse Stables (Private) II
A/
S
A/
S
S Y
Intensive Agricultural Activity VI S
Light Agricultural Activity I S S Y
Poultry – Private II
A/
S
A/
S
Y
Traditional Agricultural Activity II Y
AGRICULTURAL SUPPORT
Agriculture Implement Sales/Service IV S
Auction Livestock V S
Cider Mill IV Y S Y
Dairy Products Processing & Sales V S Y S S
Feed & Grain Sales IV S Y
Food Processing & Packaging Plants V S S Y
Fruit & Vegetable Market IV Y Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 6
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................................ Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................................ Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ............................... Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ............................... Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ............................... General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................................ Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit required
FR……………..Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
AGRICULTURAL SUPPORT (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Poultry/Egg Sales on Site IV Y
Produce Sales – Seasonal On Site IV Y T
Produce Sales – Seasonal Off Site IV SK SK
COMMERCIAL & ENTERTAINMENT
Adult Sexually Explicit Entertainment V S
Amphitheaters V S Y* Y
Antique Sales V S* Y* Y
Appliances, Sales/Repair/Service V Y* Y
Art Gallery, Commercial IV S* Y Y
Art Supply Store V Y* Y
Auction House V Y* Y
Auditorium, Concert/Exhibit Halls Indoor V Y* Y
Barber/Beauty Shop IV S* Y Y
Bakery, Retail V Y* Y
Banking Institutions IV S* Y Y
Bicycle Sales/Repair V S* Y* Y
Blueprinting & Photostat Shop IV Y Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 7
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR …………... Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.) (Amend. 02-20-07)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
COMMERCIAL & ENTERTAINMENT (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Bookstore V S* Y* Y
Bowling Alley V Y* Y
Catalog Sales Office or Mail Order V Y* Y
Catering Services V Y* Y
Christmas Tree Sales IV SK SK Y Y
Cleaning/Dyeing Retail V Y* Y
Clothes Store V Y* Y
Club, Private (Indoor) V S* Y* Y S
Department Store V Y* Y
Dog Obedience School/Grooming V Y* Y Y
Drug Store V Y* Y
Dry Cleaning Store V Y* Y
Dry Goods Store V Y* Y
Floor Covering Sales V Y* Y
Florist Sales V Y* Y
Funeral Home, Mortuary V Y* Y
Furniture Sales, Retail IV Y* Y
Garden Supply Center V S* Y* Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 8
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR……………..Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
COMMERCIAL & ENTERTAINMENT (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Gift Shop V S* Y* Y
Grocery Store/Supermarket V Y* Y
Hardware Store, V Y* Y
Hotel, Motel V Y* Y
Ice Cream Sales V S* Y* Y
Kennel, Commercial V S Y S
Laundromat V Y* Y
Liquor Store V Y* Y
Lodge for Fraternal Orders III Y Y
Magazine and News Store V Y* Y
Mobil Home Sales V Y* Y
Nursery/Greenhouse, Retail IV Y* Y S
Office Equipment-Sales/Service/Repair V Y* Y
Pawn Shop V Y* Y
Pet Shop V Y* Y
Photography Studio V Y* Y
Plumbing Supplies/Sales V Y* Y
Printing/Photocopy Service V Y* Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 9
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR…………... Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
COMMERCIAL & ENTERTAINMENT (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Repair Stores V Y* Y
Retail Stores V Y* Y
Restaurant – Sit Down V S* Y* Y
Restaurant – Fast Food V Y* Y
Shopping Center V Y* Y
Sign Shop V Y* Y
Souvenir, Curio, Sales V S* Y* Y
Sporting Goods, Sales, Rental V S Y* Y
Tailor Shop IV Y Y
Teen Club V S* Y* Y
Theaters (Indoor) V Y* Y
Travel Agency V Y* Y
Water Softening Equipment Sales/Service V Y* Y
Warehouse Store V Y* Y
COMMERCIAL OFFICE
Clinic, Dental/Medical IV Y Y
Laboratory Dental/Medical Clinic IV Y Y
Office (General) IV Y Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 10
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR…………... Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
COMMERCIAL OFFICE (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Professional Offices IV Y Y
Real Estate Office IV SK SK SK Y Y SK SK
Union Hall III Y Y
Any Above Offices GFA<5,000 S.F.
As per Sec. 17.04 Item B(1) Requirements
S Y
FORESTRY
Governmental I Y Y
Commercial I Y Y
Non-Commercial I Y S Y Y Y Y Y
HEAVY INDUSTRY
Airport VI S
Batch Plant for Road Construction VI SK Y SK
Bulk Material Storage (Outdoor) VI Y
Bulk Material Storage (Indoor)
See Light Industry
Extraction of Earth Products VI SK S Y SK
Grain Elevators VI S
Junkyard VI S
Landfill, Sanitary VI S
Machinery Storage (Unenclosed) V Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 11
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR…………... Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
HEAVY INDUSTRY (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Manufacturing VI Y
Meat Packing/Slaughterhouse VI Y
Mining VI S Y
Paint/Wallpaper Plants VI Y
Paper/Pump Mill VI Y
Rail/Truck Terminal VI S Y
Refinery VI Y
Rental of Construction Equipment (Heavy) V S Y
Salvage or Scrap Yard, Recycling Centers VI S
Saw Mill VI SK Y S
Warehouse: See Bulk Material Storage
Wholesaling: See Bulk Material Storage
Wood Processing VI Y S
LIGHT INDUSTRY
Airfields, Private V Y S
Boatworks, Custom
Building/Repair/Storage
IV S S Y
Building Materials Sales Yard V Y* Y
Bulk Materials Storage (Indoor) V Y* Y Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 12
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR……………. Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
LIGHT INDUSTRY (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Contractor, General:
Equipment Sheds V SK SK S S Y SK
Equipment Storage (Outdoor) V S Y
Office – Portable/Temporary IV SK SK SK SK SK SK
Yard V S S Y
Dry Cleaning Plant V S Y
Exterminating and Fumigating Shop V S S Y
Food Warehousing V Y* Y Y
Food Processing & Packaging Plants V S S Y
Fuel – Above Ground Storage of
Flammable:
Liquids/Gases V S Y Y
Firewood Sales IV SK SK SK SK SK Y Y Y
Furniture & Upholstery
Stripping/Refinishing & Repair
V S S Y
Gas, Butane, & Propane Sales V S S Y
Laboratory, Non-Medical V S S S
Logging, Contractor/Operations:
Equipment Sheds V SK Y Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 13
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR……………. Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use,and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
LIGHT INDUSTRY (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Equipment Storage (Outdoors) V SK Y Y
Office V SK S Y Y
Yard V SK Y Y
Decking Area V SK Y Y
Manufacturing, Light V S Y
Machinery Storage (Yard) V S Y
Mini-Warehouses (Storage) V S S Y
Monument Works V Y* Y
Ornamental Iron Work Shop V S S Y
Printing Shop V Y* Y
Refinishing Shop V Y* Y Y
Rental of Equipment (Light) V Y* Y Y
Scientific Research Facilities V S S S Y S
Septic Tank Sales/Service V S Y Y
Trade Shops: Blacksmithing, Welding,
Heating/Plumbing/Electrical, Carpentry, Etc.
V Y* Y S
Truck Terminal VI Y
Veterinary Clinic (Fully Enclosed) V S Y* Y Y S
Warehouse: See Bulk Material Storage
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 14
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR……………..Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y*….Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land Use,
and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04 A.)
S*..Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S**….Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
LIGHT INDUSTRY (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Well Drilling Service V Y* Y Y
Wholesaling: See Bulk Material Storage
Windmill Farm VI Y S
PUBLIC SERVICE
Emergency Services Center III S S Y Y Y Y Y Y
Park and Ride V S S
Utility, Facilities (Local or Minor) II S S S S S S S S
Utility, Facilities (Regional or Major) V S S S S S
Utility, Service Centers IV S S S Y
Wireless Communication Facilities VI S S S S S Y S
RECREATION/COMMERCIAL
Amusement Parks V S S
Archery Range (Indoor) V S Y* Y
Archery Range (Outdoor) V S S S S
Carnival/Circus V S SK SK SK
Concerts (Outdoor) V S SK SK SK
Drive-In Theater V S
Fairground V S S
Firearm Shooting Range – Indoor V S S S
State or County Recreation Building III Y Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 15
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR……………..Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
RECREATION/COMMERCIAL (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Firearm Shooting Range – Outdoor V S S
Go-Kart Racetrack V S S
Miniature Golf IV Y* S
Horse Stable (Recreation) III S Y
Marina V S Y
Racetrack of Any Kind V S
Sports Arena V Y* S
Tennis Courts/Outdoor IV S Y S
Trails (All Terrain Vehicles) V S S S S S S S
Trails (Snowmobile) V S S S S S S S
RECREATION INDOOR/OUTDOOR
Aquarium III Y S
Arboretums III S S S S Y Y
Boat Launching Facilities III S S Y
Golf Course, Disc Course III S S S S S S
Health Club IV Y* Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 16
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR…………... Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
RECREATION INDOOR/OUTDOOR (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Ice Skating Rinks (Outdoor) III Y Y S S S Y
Indoor Recreation (<5,000 s.f.) III S S Y Y
Nature Areas/Open Space I Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Park (Public/Private) II S S S S Y S Y
Playground III S S S S S S Y
Pool Public (Indoor/Outdoor) III S S S S S Y
Ski Areas III Y S S Y
Tennis Courts (Public-Outdoor) III S S S S S S Y
Trails (Non-motorized) III Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
RECREATIONAL RENTAL DWELLING
Cabin/Camp/Cottage I Y
Campgrounds III S S Y
Resort III S Y
REGIONAL/OTHER SHOPPING CENTER
Regional/Other Center V Y* Y
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING
Cabin, Camp, Cottage (Seasonal) I S S Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 17
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR……………..Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
S*** ......Allowable by Special Use only within the Scenic Residential (SR) District (2 Acre Minimum)
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING (cont.) FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Duplex II S Y
Model Home/Unit IV SK SK SK
Multi-Family III S** Y S
Rooming House III S Y
Single Family Attached II Y S Y
Single Family Detached (>40,000 S.F. Lot) I
S**
*
Y Y Y S
Single Family Detached (<40,000 S.F. Lot) II S Y Y
SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL & INSTITUTIONAL
Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility III S S** Y
Adult Foster Care Family Home II Y Y Y Y S
Adult Foster Care Large Group Home III Y S** Y
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home III Y S** Y
Bed & Breakfast – Large III S Y* Y S
Bed & Breakfast – Small II S S S Y Y Y
Camp, Day or Youth IV S S S
Cemetery III S Y
Child Care Center/Day Care
Center/Nursery School
IV S** Y* Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 18
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR…………... Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL & INSTITUTIONAL
(cont.)
FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Church/Worship Centers III Y S S Y Y S
Community Center (Public) V Y S Y*
Convent/Monastery III Y S S Y Y Y
Cultural & Education Center V S Y S
Foster Family Group Home II Y Y Y S
Family Day Care Home II Y Y Y S
Group Day Care Home III S Y Y
Halfway House/Recovery Rehabilitation III Y
Home for the Aged III S** Y
Hospital V Y* Y
Library III Y Y Y
Mobile Home Park III S
Museum III Y Y
Nursing Home/Convalescent Home III S** S
Post Office III Y Y
Prison/Correctional Facility VI S S
Religious Retreat III Y
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 19
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR…………....Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL & INSTITUTIONAL
(cont.)
FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Schools Public/Private IV S S S S
Seminary, Theological III S S Y* Y Y
Shelter, Temporary III SK SK SK SK SK SK
Tent Meeting IV SK SK
Tiny Home (See Section 16.12) S S S S
ROAD SERVICE, VEHICLE SALE AND
SERVICE, AND FAST FOOD
Arcades V Y* Y
Automobile: See Vehicle
Billiard Parlor V Y* Y
Bus: See Vehicle
Commercial Garage V S
Convenience Store V S Y* Y
Dance Hall V Y* Y
Garden Supply Center V S* Y* Y
Gasoline Service Station V S* S S
Marine Sales & Service V Y* Y
Motorcycle: See Vehicle
ARTICLE 15 – PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 15 Page 20
Section 15.05: Table 15 USE VS. DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH
SR ................. Scenic Residential SB .................Segregated Business
RR ................. Rural Residential LUI ................Land Use Intensity Number
UR ................ Urban Residential Y ...................Permitted by Right With Accessory Use
DD ................ Development District S ....................Special Use Permit Required
GB ................ General Business T ....................Temporary Use Permit Required
RP ................. Resource Production SK .................Specific Temporary Use Permit Required
FR……………. Forest Recreation A ...................Accessory Use
Y* ..........Land Uses proposed within the DD, when located adjacent with existing Residential Land
Use, and/or Residential Zoning Districts, shall require a public hearing (see Section 17.04
A.)
S* ..........Allowable on Lots Abutting the West Side of Ontario St. Between Fair and Beaudoin.
S** ........Allowable on Lots Abutting Werner St. West of Ontario St. and on Lots Abutting the North
Side of Bancroft St. West of Woodridge
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
ROAD SERVICE, VEHICLE SALE AND
SERVICE, AND FAST FOOD (cont.)
FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Recreational Vehicle: See Vehicle
Tavern, Night Club, Bar V Y* Y
Truck: See Vehicle
Vehicle: Sales, Service, Repair, Parts &
Supply
V Y* Y
USE LUI ZONING DISTRICTS
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY FR SR RR UR DD GB SB RP
Solar Energy System III S S S S S S S S
(SWES) Small Wind Energy System III S S S S S S S S
(MWES) Medium Wind Energy System V S S S S S S
(LWES) Large Wind Energy System VI S S S
(MET) Meteorological Tower III S SK SK SK SK SK SK
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 16
DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
16.01: PURPOSE 3
16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES 3
A. Golf Driving Range 3
B. Junk, Scrap, or Salvage Yards 3
C. Outdoor Theater, Drive-In Theater 4
D. Emergency Service Centers 4
E. All Road Service Uses 4
F. Mobile Home Parks 5
G. Fuel/Service Stations 5
H. Two or More Single Family Detached Dwelling on A Lot 5
I. Extraction of Earth Products 6
J. Transmitting Towers & Facilities and Special Uses 10
K. Trails (Snowmobile) 20
L. Trails (Non-Motorized) 21
M. Trails (All terrain Vehicles) 21
16.03: ACCESSORY USES 21
A. Authorization 21
B. Compliance 22
C. Use Limitations 22
16.04: DETAILED ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS 23
A. Home Occupations 23
B. Private Stables and Recreation/Commercial Stables 24
C. Private Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts 26
D. General Business (GB) Dwelling Units 26
16.05: TEMPORARY USES 26
A. Authorization 26
B. Compliance 26
C. Use Limitations 26
16.06: SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED 26
A. Carnival or Circus 26
B. Christmas Tree Sales 27
C. Contractor’s Office and Construction Equipment Sheds 27
D. Events of Public Interest 27
E. Real Estate Sales Office 27
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 2
16.06: SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED (Cont.)
F. Seasonal Sales of Farm Products 27
G. Horse Show or Exhibition 28
H. Temporary Shelter 28
I. Tent Theater 29
16.07: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 29
16.08: SEXUALLY EXPLICIT ENTERTAINMENT 30
A. Purpose 30
B. Definitions 30
C. Restrictions and Prohibitions 31
16.09: CARE FACILILITES 32
A. Purpose 32
B. Definitions 32
1. Adult Care Facilities 32
2. Child Care Facilities 33
3. Halfway Houses 34
C. Application of Regulations 34
1. Family Day Care Homes 34
2. Adult Foster Care Homes 35
3. Halfway Houses-Recovery and Rehabilitation 37
16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY 38
A. Purpose 38
B. Solar Energy 39
C. Wind Energy 39
1. Definitions 39
2. Meteorological Towers (MET) & Wind Energy Systems (WES) 41
a. Meteorological Towers (Met Tower) 41
b. Small Wind Energy System (SWES) 41
c. Medium Wind Energy System (MWES) 43
d. Large Wind Energy System (LWES) 44
16.11: PARK & RIDE 46
16.12: TINY HOMES 46
16.13: SHORT-TERM RENTALS 46
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 3
ARTICLE 16: DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
SECTION 16.01: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to specify detailed regulations, including bulk, layout, yard size, and
lot area, that apply to specific land uses. Standards over and above those imposed by other
sections of this Ordinance are necessary for certain land uses which, although permitted as of
right or allowable as special uses in certain districts have characteristics that might have negative
impacts on nearby uses without these additional regulations. This Article also specifies the
regulations applicable to temporary and accessory uses. The Reclamation of Mineral Mining
Lands, Act P.A. 92 of 1970, amended, shall be supplemental to applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES
In addition to compliance with other regulations imposed by this Ordinance, the following
standards are required of the specific uses as noted.
GOLF DRIVING RANGE
1. The site plan required pursuant to Article 18, Site Plan Review, shall show the layout of
property and indicate the location of all driving ranges, fairways, roughs, putting
greens, fences, structures, and parking areas.
2. Accessory uses permitted shall be limited to a refreshment stand, a maintenance shed,
a miniature golf course, and a pro shop.
JUNK, SCRAP, OR SALVAGE YARDS
1. The site plan required pursuant to Article 18, Site Plan Review, shall show the location
of all buildings and the location of storage areas designed or used for automobiles
and other vehicles, parts, lubricants, fuel, and other storage.
2. Outdoor displays for sale or storage of vehicles shall not be located within a street
right-of-way.
3. All lubricant and fuel oil substances which are to be stored on the site shall be stored
with all necessary precautions taken to prevent their leakage and/or surface or
subsurface drainage into the water table, streams, creeks, or other bodies of water. A
plan detailing how materials will be stored shall be submitted with the application for
a zoning compliance certificate.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 4
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
4. All hazardous materials shall be stored in a safe manner and, whenever a permit is
required by federal, state, county, or local ordinances, it shall be mandatory for the
owner/agent to obtain the necessary permit(s).
5. Bufferyards and screening requirements shall be in accordance with Article 19,
Performance Requirements and the Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards as outlined for each specific district in Section 19.13 through
Section 19.20, inclusive. In addition, all junk, scrap, and/or salvage yard operations
shall be obscured from public view along adjacent road right-of-ways as well as from
abutting properties.
OUTDOOR THEATER, DRIVE-IN THEATER
Accessory uses permitted shall be limited to the use by patrons of the principal use. Accessory
uses shall be limited to a refreshment/souvenir stand or booth, restroom, and a tot lot.
EMERGENCY SERVICE CENTERS
Because of their necessity, emergency service centers are permitted in all zoning districts. If the
Township Zoning Administrator determines that the use may cause either a possible hazard to
nearby residents, passersby, or an interference with the development, use, or enjoyment of
surrounding property, fencing and/or screening with densely planted materials shall be required
to a greater extent than the required buffer strip.
ALL ROAD SERVICE USES
1. Any outside display of vehicles or other merchandise for sale or storage shall not be
located within any street or highway right-of-way.
2. All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair
of material, goods, or products shall conform to all applicable requirements of this
Ordinance.
3. All repair, painting, and body work activities shall take place within a building.
4. All damaged and/or dismantled vehicles shall be visually screened from the view of
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 5
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Mobile Home Parks shall be developed in accordance with the applicable standards and
regulations of the State of Michigan Mobile Home Commission and with the applicable provisions
of this Ordinance, including those of Article 19, Performance Requirements, Sections 19.04 and
19.05 and subject to Planning Commission review and approval.
FUEL/SERVICE STATIONS
1. All services except fuel sales shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
2. Within seventy-five (75) feet of a residential use, a fuel/service station shall store all
refuse and vehicle parts within a completely enclosed building or within an area which
is visually screened from the view of residences.
TWO OR MORE SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS ON A LOT
Two or more single family detached dwellings are permitted on a lot, subject to the
following conditions:
1. Each such dwelling be allotted no less than the minimum site (lot) area, site (lot) width,
front, rear, and side yards required of a single family detached dwelling on a single
lot in the zoning district in which such dwellings are located, or are to be located, and;
2. A plot plan, complying with submittal requirements specified in Article 18, Site Plan
Review, Section 18.03: Required Plan Approvals, A. Plot Plans, be submitted to, and be
approved by the Zoning Administrator for lots proposed to contain fewer than five
such dwellings not necessitating the dedication or use of a new public or private street,
right-of-way or access easement, or;
3. A site plan, complying with:
a. Submittal requirements specified in Article 18, Site Plan Review, Section 18.06:
Required Information;
b. General Standards for Site Plan Approval specified in Article 18, Site Plan Review,
Section 18.07: General Standards for Site Plan Approval, and;
c. Applicable improvements and design standards provisions of the Charter Township
of Marquette Subdivision Ordinance except that any existing or proposed private
street or road is not subject to Marquette County Road Commission Standards;
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 6
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
Shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and be subject to its approval, for lots proposed to
contain five or more such dwellings and for lots proposed to contain fewer than five such
dwellings which necessitate or will necessitate, the dedication of a new public or private street,
right-of-way, or access easement.
EXTRACTION OF EARTH PRODUCTS
1. Intent
Extraction of earth products includes the extraction and processing of iron ore, copper,
gravel, sand, stone, gypsum, peat, topsoil, silver, gold, uranium, and/or other minerals.
It is the intent of these regulations to:
a. Provide for proper environmental management during the site planning,
operational and reclamation stages of the mineral extraction process;
b. Provide the Township with information important to overall planning and orderly
economic growth, and;
c. Provide for the right to extract mineral deposits where located.
2. Exemptions
The following shall not require an application for a mineral extraction permit:
a. Any active mining operation at the date of enactment of this Ordinance to continue
mineral extraction from existing holes or shafts, which may be enlarged on the
land constituting the site on the effective date of this Ordinance. This exemption
does not apply to new holes or shafts.
b. An extraction of less than five hundred (500) cubic yards of minerals from a
parcel.
c. Site development preparation authorized by zoning compliance permit.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 7
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
3. Permit Application and Review Procedure
No mineral extraction shall be undertaken without first obtaining a mineral extraction
permit from the Planning Commission, and upon payment of a reasonable fee
established by the Township. A zoning compliance permit shall also be obtained
pursuant to Sections 26.03 and 26.04. The Zoning Administrator, upon receipt of the
completed application for mineral extraction permit, shall provide a copy of the same
within forty-five (45) days (unless extended by the Zoning Administrator) to the
Planning Commission for its review and action. The Planning Commission shall review
the application for mineral extraction permit at a public hearing to be scheduled an in
accordance with applicable provisions of Section 17.04 and 17.05 and in accordance
with the provisions of Section 16.02, I, and approve, approve with conditions, or reject
the mineral extraction permit with explanation. If any of the application information is
available in the form of an environmental impact assessment or other appropriate
documents which are required to be submitted to various county, state, and/or federal
agencies, a copy of that information may be submitted in place of the following
appropriate sections.
4. Application Submittal Requirements
An application for a mineral extraction permit must contain a site plan, operation plan,
reclamation plan, and information regarding the status of all state or federal permits,
as described herein.
The applicant shall submit the following documents, including a cover letter with the
signature of the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent to the Zoning
Administrator.
a. Site Plan Requirements
A site plan consisting of two (2) identical copies on one or more sheets at a scale
adequate to illustrate the proposed operation.
(1) A legal description of the lot; the name, address, and telephone number of
the owner, developer and licensed professional(s) who prepared the plan;
(2) Date, North Point, scale and the seal of the licensed engineer, surveyor,
landscape architect, or planner who prepared the plan;
(3) The actual dimensions of the proposed developed area (as shown by a
surveyor or engineer, with the survey stakes visible) showing the relationship
of the subject property to abutting properties;
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 8
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
(4) The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property
and all existing structures on land immediately adjacent to the site within
100 feet of the site’s parcel lines;
(5) The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas;
(6) The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and easements
including required bufferyards as set forth in Section 18.04 and 18.05 of this
Ordinance which shall, further, include identifiable features to protect
individuals from injury, as warranted;
(7) The location and plans for all proposed planting and fencing;
(8) The height and floor area of all proposed building structures;
(9) The size and location of all existing and proposed public and private
utilities;
(10) Proposed location, area extent, and estimated depth of excavation;
(11) Proposed location of waste dumps, tailing ponds, sediment basins, stockpiles,
and other permanent or temporary facilities used in mining;
(12) The general groundwater conditions and the possible impact of mining
operations upon adjacent groundwater levels and quality. The operator
must identify plans to alleviate possible problems in the groundwater supply
to adjacent land owners;
(13) Any other information necessary to establish compliance with this Ordinance.
b. Operation Plan Requirements
(1) A narrative description outlining the estimated time span which the operation
will cover; the type of material to be extracted; the type of mining operation
and processing equipment to be used; measures to control noise, vibration,
and pollution from the operation; effect on groundwater condition; proposed
travel routes to be used to transport the mined material to processing plant
or markets, and the proposed steps to be taken to relieve adverse effects;
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 9
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
(2) A narrative description of the social and economic impact on Marquette
Township including an estimate of the number of potential employees, and
any changes in the present road system that might be made necessary by the
proposed operation;
(3) Bufferyards as required by applicable provisions of Article 19, Performance
Requirements, Sections 19.04 and 19.05 and subject to the Planning
Commission review and approval;
(4) A description of the measures to be taken to assure that any dangerous
excavations, pits, pond areas, banks or slopes be adequately guarded or
fenced and posted with signs to prevent injury to individuals;
(5) Identify plans for utilities, access roads, drainage, traffic plans, and other
site improvements showing appropriate measures that have been, are, or will
be provided.
c. Reclamation Plan Requirements
A reclamation plan shall include a map and description showing:
(1) Final grading, anticipated final slope angles, wall reduction, benching and
terracing of slopes, slope stabilization and revegetation, and erosion control,
and alternative future land uses;
(2) Description of topsoil stripping and conservation during storage and
replacement;
(3) Plan and description of anticipated final topography, water impoundments,
and artificial lakes on property;
(4) Plans for disposition of surface structures, roads, and related facilities after
cessation of mining;
(5) A plan for disposal or treatment of any harmful or toxic materials found in
any formation penetrated by the mining operations or produced during the
processing of minerals, and of chemicals or materials used during the mining
or processing operations;
(6) A timetable for completion of reclamation requirements.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 10
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
d. Status of Permits
A mineral extraction permit shall not be issued until the applicant has received all
applicable state and federal permits.
5. General Review Standards
The Planning Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
application for a mineral extraction permit in terms of the following standards and
shall find adequate evidence showing that the proposed use:
a. Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general policies or with any
specific objectives of the Comprehensive Development Plan;
b. Will provide adequate site drainage so that waters will not adversely affect
neighboring properties;
c. Will not be hazardous or cause serious consequences to existing neighboring uses,
including, but not limited to, its affect from noise, traffic, smoke, fumes, glare, or
odors;
d. Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services;
e. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public costs for public
facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the
community, and;
f. Will protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community.
TRANSMITTING TOWERS & FACILITIES AND SPECIAL USES
1. Purpose and Intent.
It is the general purpose and intent of the Township to carry out the will of the United
States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless
communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and intent of the Township
to provide for such authorization in a manner which will retain the integrity of
neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the
community at large.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 11
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempt has been made
to balance these potentially competing interests.
Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless
communication services and coverage, it is the further purpose and intent of this section
to:
a. Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication
facilities.
b. Establish predetermined districts or zones of the number, shape, and in the
location, considered best for the establishment of wireless communication facilities,
subject to applicable standards and conditions.
c. Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the
establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined districts or
zones. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be
greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the community.
Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should apply to the review,
approval and use of such facilities.
d. Ensure that wireless communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations
and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings.
e. Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and
avoid adverse impact upon existing population, transportation systems, and other
public services and facility needs.
f. Promote the public health, safety and welfare.
g. Provide for adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities
in order to permit the community to effectively plan for the location of such
facilities.
h. Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities,
including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely
manner.
i. Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on
neighborhoods, community land marks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty
areas and public right-of-ways.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 12
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
j. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible,
and the use of structures which are designed for compatibility, including the use of
existing structures and the avoidance of lattice structures that are unnecessary,
taking into consideration the purposes and intent of this section.
k. The Township Board finds that the presence of numerous tower structures,
particularly if located within residential areas, would decrease the attractiveness
and destroy the character and integrity of the community. Therefore, it is
necessary to minimize the adverse impact from the presence of numerous relatively
tall tower structures having low architectural and other aesthetic appeal to most
persons, recognizing that the absence of regulation would result in a material
impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further
recognizing that this economic component is an important part of the public health,
safety and welfare.
2. Authorization.
a. Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in this ordinance, wireless
communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the following circumstances, and
in the following districts:
(1) Circumstances Creating Permitted Use Treatment.
In all Zoning Districts, a proposal to establish a new wireless communication
facility shall be deemed a permitted use in the following circumstances, even
when it is listed as a special use in Article 15 Section 15.05:
(a) An existing structure that will serve as an Attached Wireless Communication
Facility within a nonresidential zoning district, where the zoning
administrator finds that the existing structure will not be either materially
altered or changed in appearance.
(b) A proposed collocation upon an Attached Wireless Communication Facility,
which has been pre-approved for such collocation as part of an earlier
approval by the Township.
(c) An existing structure which will serve as an Attached Wireless
Communication Facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-ofway,
where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner
which would materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of
sight lines or other safety interests.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 13
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES
– (Cont.)
(2) Permitted Use Districts.
Wireless communication facilities shall be a permitted use in the SB
Segregated Business Districts.
b. Wireless communication facilities shall be allowed in areas other than those
identified in Subsection 16.02.J.2.a. above, only as a special land use, subject to
the following:
(1) Any special land use application shall establish that: At the time of submittal, if
there exists no site within the districts set forth in Subsection 16.02.J.2.a., which
can reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity objectives of the
applicant.
(2) The proposed wireless communication facility is of a design which is compatible
with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general
area, and which is to the extent possible, designed to camouflage the wireless
communication facility (e.g., within a bell tower, clock tower, in a steeple, manmade
tree, or attached to the exterior of a water tower).
(3) All other criteria and standards set forth in this ordinance are met.
3. General Regulations.
a. Standards and Conditions Applicable to All Facilities.
The Planning Commission shall review all special use and site plan applications for
wireless communication facilities and the applications shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if approved, shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions. The
Planning Commission may have such application reviewed by an independent,
licensed professional engineer, attorney or other consultant. In addition, if the
facility is approved, it shall be constructed and maintained with any additional
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission in its discretion:
(1) Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise
detrimental to the public safety and welfare.
(2) Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the surrounding
area.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 14
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
(3) Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and
state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions. If any of these applicable standards should change then any
existing wireless communication facility shall immediately be brought into
compliance unless waived by controlling state and federal agency.
(4) Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed height of the
structures and an evaluation of alternative designs that might result in lower
heights.
(5) The wireless communication facility shall meet or exceed the current provisions
of the National Tower Code ANSI TIA/EIA-222-F, as amended.
(6) The following additional standards shall be met:
(a) The maximum height of the new or modified wireless communication
support structures and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated
to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant. The
accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as switching
equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures
within the respective district.
(b) The setback of the wireless communication support structure from any lot
line shall be at least the height of the highest point of said wireless
communication support structure and antenna(s). The setback of the
wireless communication support structure(s) and antenna(s) from any
existing or proposed rights-of-way or other publicly traveled roads shall
be no less than the height of said wireless communications support structure
and antenna(s). Any application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a
setback variance for the wireless communication support structure and its
antenna(s) shall include a signed certification by a State of Michigan
licensed professional engineer with regard to the matter in which the
proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with
other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in
determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure and
other facilities.
(c) The minimum setback of all principal and accessory buildings, and guy
wires, shall be the more restrictive of 20 feet or the minimum required
setbacks for principal buildings as provided in the schedule of regulations
for the zoning district in which the wireless communication support structure
is located. Guy wires may be located within the required bufferyards
outside the setbacks described in this section.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 15
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
(d) There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for operation,
maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided
through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location
determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and
traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower
and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities;
proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural
landscape; and, the type of equipment which will need to access the site.
(e) The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless
communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and
conditions are met.
(f) Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof
of a building, if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof appliance
or penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed and
maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building.
Equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may
be an accessory building.
(g) The Planning Commission shall, with respect to the design and appearance
of the support structure and all principal and accessory buildings, review
and approve so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize
aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless
communication facility in a neat and orderly condition. Additionally, the
wireless communication facilities shall meet the following requirements:
(i) They shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(ii) The design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that
will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(iii) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna
and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a
neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of
the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 16
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
(iv) Where a feasible alternative exist, wireless communication support
structures shall not utilize a power source which generates noise able to
be heard by a person of normal aural acuity at adjoining property
lines or public property; however, this section shall not be construed as
limiting the use of temporary generators or similar devices used to
create power during periods of interruption of the primary power
source.
(h) The wireless communication facilities shall be grounded for protection
against a direct lightening strike, constructed in accordance with all
applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report
from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan. This soils
report includes soil borings and statements indicating the suitability of soil
conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation
Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan
Aeronautics Commission shall be noted.
(i) A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be
presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility.
Such plans shall be designed to insure reasonable long-term maintenance
of the proposed facility. The Planning Commission may require that the
applicant provide yearly maintenance records or updates to insure
compliance with the maintenance plan.
(j) Signs shall not be placed on the support structure or antenna except as
required by any federal, state, local or other governing body.
(k) The wireless communication support structures and its antenna(s) shall not be
artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable
authority. If the lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design
chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
(l) The wireless communication facilities shall be located so that they do not
interfere with television and radio reception to neighboring residential
areas.
b. Standards and Conditions Applicable to Special Land Use Facilities.
Applications for wireless communication facilities which may be approved as
special land uses under Subsection 16.02.J.2.b. above, shall be reviewed, and if
approved, constructed and maintained, in accordance with the standards and
conditions in this ordinance and in accordance with the following standards:
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 17
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility to be
located as proposed based upon the presence of one or more of the following
factors:
(a) Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare.
(b) Areas of population concentration.
(c) Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers.
(d) Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses
of trees, or other obstructions.
(e) Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities
with which the proposed facility is to operate.
(f) Other specifically identified reason creating facility need.
(2) The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the collocation requirements
of this ordinance.
4. Application Requirements.
a. A site plan prepared in accordance with Article 18 shall be submitted, showing the
location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences,
and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and
species of proposed landscaping.
b. The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan where the support
structure is being placed at a location which is not otherwise developed, or where
a developed area will be disturbed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide
screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings
and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the plan fencing which is
required for protection of the support structure and security from children and
other persons who may otherwise access facilities.
c. The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed wireless
communication facilities within the Township, and further showing existing and
known proposed wireless communication facilities within areas surrounding the
borders of the Township in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in
terms of potential collocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed
facility.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 18
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the community, the
applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any proprietary
information may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with
the development of governmental policy, in accordance with MCL 15.243(1)(g).
This ordinance shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent
permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be prominently stated in
order to bring it to the attention of the community.
d. The name, address, and phone number of the person to contact for engineering,
maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously
updated during all times the facility is on the premises.
e. The application must be signed by the property owner(s) and their agent, if any,
and all application fees must be paid at the time of submission of the application.
5. Collocation.
a. Statement of Policy:
It is the policy of the Township to minimize the overall number of newly established
locations for Wireless Communication Facilities and Wireless Communication
Support Structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing
structures for Attached Wireless Communication Facility purposes, consistent with
the statement of purpose and intent, set forth in Subsection 16.02.J.1. Purpose and
Intent above. Each licensed provider of a Wireless Communication Facility must,
by law, be permitted to locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives
promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light of the
dramatic increase in the number of Wireless Communication Facilities reasonably
anticipated to occur as a result of the change of federal law and policy in and
relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the
Township that all users should collocate on Attached Wireless Communication
Facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures in the interest of
achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in
Subsection 16.02.J.1. Purpose and Intent. If a provider fails or refuses to permit
collocation on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where collocation is
feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be
compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy,
intent and purpose of the Township. The provisions of this subsection are designed
to carry out and encourage conformity with the policy of the Township, and all
applicable federal, state and local laws.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 19
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
b. Feasibility of Collocation:
Collocation shall be deemed to be “feasible” for purposes of this section where all
of the following are met:
(1) The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for collocation
will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for
collocation.
(2) The site on which collocation is being considered, taking into consideration
reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide
structural support.
(3) The collocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the
collocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate
physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the
like.
(4) The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased
beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the Township, taking into
consideration the several standards contained in Subsections 16.02.J.2. and
16.02.J.3., above.
c. Requirements for Collocation:
(1) A special land use permit for the construction and use of a new Wireless
Communication Facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant
demonstrates that a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area
and capacity needs.
(2) All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and
constructed so as to accommodate collocation.
6. Removal.
a. The Township reserves the right to request evidence of ongoing operation at any
time after the construction of an approved tower.
b. A condition of every approval of a Wireless Communication Facility shall be
adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners
upon the occurrence of abandonment. Abandonment shall be presumed if the
facility has not been utilized for one year, or more.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 20
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the
facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio
signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
c. The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in Subsection
16.02.J.6.b., may be applied to portions of a facility.
d. Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, specified in
Subsection 16.02.J.6.b., the property owner or persons who had used the facility
shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or
removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the
demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as
reasonably determined by the Zoning Administrator. Prior to the removal, due
notice shall be given to the property owner and the Planning Commission shall hold
a public hearing.
e. If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully
completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty
(30) days written notice, the Township, following a hearing on the issue may remove or
secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and
reasonable administrative charge to be billed to the property owner and/or placed
on the tax role.
K. TRAILS (SNOWMOBILE)
The land use Trails (snowmobile) shall not be required to comply with the minimum requirements
for public road access, public utilities and on site permits, which are normally required in Sections
19.13 through 19.19, unless required by another governing agency or another Charter Township
of Marquette ordinance. The land use Trails (snowmobile) shall not be required to comply with
the minimum lot size and width, maximum depth: width, and the minimum open space, all of which
are normally required in Sections 19.13 through 18.199 These exceptions are not to be
construed as applying to any buildings or other land uses on the same lot. Trails (snowmobile)
shall comply with all bufferyard requirements in Sections 19.04 and 19.05, except that, trails
(snowmobile) shall be allowed to cross through a bufferyard required along a street. Trails
(snowmobile) shall be a minimum of 40 feet from any lot line or easement line except where they
cross into a duly authorized adjoining street right-of-way or property. Parking spaces shall not
be required but any vehicular or trailer-parking area provided shall comply with Article 21 and
be located outside of any street right-of-way.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 21
SECTION 16.02: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES – (Cont.)
L. TRAILS (NON-MOTORIZED)
The land use Trails (non-motorized) shall not be required to comply with the minimum requirements
for public road access, public utilities and on site permits, which are normally required in Sections
20.13 through 20.19, unless required by another governing agency or another Charter Township
of Marquette ordinance. Trails (non-motorized) shall not be required to comply with the minimum
lot size and width, maximum depth: width, and the minimum open space, all of which are normally
required in Sections 19.13 through 19.19. These exceptions are not to be construed as applying
to any buildings or other land uses on the same lot. Trails (non-motorized) shall not be required to
comply with all bufferyard requirements in Sections 19.04 and 19.05. Trails (non-motorized) shall
be a minimum of 10 feet from any lot line or easement line except where they cross into a duly
authorized adjoining street right-of-way or property. Parking spaces shall not be required but
any vehicular or trailer-parking area provided shall comply with Article 21 and be located
outside of any street right-of-way.
M. TRAILS (ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES)
The land use Trails (all terrain vehicles) shall not be required to comply with the minimum
requirements for public road access, public utilities and on site permits, which are normally
required in Sections 19.13 through 19.19, unless required by another governing agency or
another Charter Township of Marquette ordinance. The land use Trails (all terrain vehicles) shall
not be required to comply with the minimum lot size and width, maximum depth: width, and the
minimum open space, all of which are normally required in Sections 19.13 through 19.19. These
exceptions are not to be construed as applying to any buildings or other land uses on the same
lot. Trails (all terrain vehicles) shall comply with all bufferyard requirements in Sections 19.04 and
19.05, except that trails (all terrain vehicles) shall be allowed to cross through a bufferyard
required along a street.
Trails (all terrain vehicles) shall be a minimum of 40 feet from any lot line or easement line except
where they cross into a duly authorized adjoining street right-of-way or property. Parking
spaces shall not be required but any vehicular or trailer-parking area provided shall comply with
Article 21 and be located outside of any street right-of-way.
SECTION 16.03: ACCESSORY USES
A. AUTHORIZATION
Except as otherwise expressly provided or limited by this Ordinance, accessory structures and
uses are authorized and permitted in any zoning district in connection with any principal use
lawfully existing within a district. Any question of whether a particular use is permitted as an
accessory use by the provisions of this section, shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 22
SECTION 16.03: ACCESSORY USES – (Cont.)
B. COMPLIANCE
An accessory use or structure shall not be established or constructed unless a zoning compliance
certificate has been issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Section 25.03.
C. USE LIMITATIONS
Accessory structures shall include but not be limited to attached and detached garages, carports,
and storage shed. In addition to complying with all other regulations, an accessory use shall not
be permitted unless it complies with the following use limitations:
1. The principal use or structure, together with any accessory use or structure, shall not
jointly exceed the land use intensity class criteria specified in Article 19 –
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS.
2. All signs are subject to the provisions of Article 22 - SIGNS.
3. An accessory structure or use shall not be constructed or established on any lot prior to
the time of the substantial completion of the principal structure to which it is accessory.
4. An accessory structure or use on any lot shall not cause the impervious surface ratio or
exterior storage area to exceed the maximum standards permitted on the site by this
Ordinance.
5. Accessory structures shall maintain the same minimum front and side yards as required
for the principal structure; such structure may in part or whole be located within a
required rear yard, but not closer to the rear lot line than the minimum side yard
setback applicable to the lot where such structure shall be located.
6. An accessory structure, unless attached and structurally made a part of the principal
structure, shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any other building or structure on the
lot or parcel.
7. Accessory structures and uses shall comply with all applicable area, bulk, and yard
regulations.
8. In the RR and SR Districts accessory structures are restricted as follows:
The total area of all accessory buildings/ structures shall not exceed sixteen hundred
(1600) sq. ft. On parcels of three (3) acres or more, the total area of all accessory
buildings/ structures shall not exceed twenty-five hundred (2500) sq. ft. nor shall the
combined area of all accessory buildings/ structures be larger than the square
footage of the principal structure.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 23
SECTION 16.03: ACCESSORY USES – (Cont.)
In the UR District, the total sq. ft. area of all accessory structures located on a lot or
parcel, including an attached or detached garage, shall not exceed one thousand
(1000) sq. ft.
9. Accessory structures in the UR District containing less than 700 square feet shall
maintain all of the same required setbacks as the principal structure except that the
rear yard setback may be reduced to five (5) feet. Also in the UR District, accessory
structures containing 700 or more square feet shall maintain the required rear yard
setback for the principal structure. Any accessory structures in the RR, and the SR
Districts shall maintain the required setback for the principal structure.
10. The maximum height of detached accessory structures in the UR, RR, and SR Zoning
Districts shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height, as defined in Article 2,
Definitions, Section 2.02, Building Height, except where restricted by other section(s) of
the Zoning Ordinance. Accessory structures attached to the principal structure for
permitted residential uses shall not exceed the maximum allowed height of the
principal structure. Detached accessory structures, for permitted nonresidential uses,
may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height for principal structures in
the respective zoning district.
11. Shipping containers, cargo containers, semi-trailers, and soft-sided accessory structures
are prohibited.
SECTION 16.04: DETAILED ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
The following accessory uses and structures constitute accessory uses and structures when they
comply in all respects with the standards set forth below:
A. HOME OCCUPATIONS
It is the intent of this section to regulate the operation of home occupations so that the average
neighbor, under normal circumstances, will not be aware of their existence. Any resident desiring
to conduct a home occupation shall initially apply for and receive a zoning compliance certificate
in accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.03, Zoning Compliance
Certificate, and Section 26.04, Application Requirements for Zoning Compliance Certificates and
annually thereafter apply for and receive a temporary permit, from the Zoning Administrator,
subject to the following regulations:
1. Any occupation which is customarily, in whole or in part, conducted in a residence and
not in an accessory structure, may be conducted in any dwelling unit, provided that all
of the following criteria are met:
a. The occupation must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
dwelling as a residence.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 24
SECTION 16.04: DETAILED ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS - (Cont.)
b. No outdoor display or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment used in
the home occupation shall be permitted on the premises.
c. There shall be no visible evidence that the residence is being operated as a home
occupation.
d. A maximum of one (1) person other than the members of the immediate family
residing in the dwelling shall be employed in the home occupation.
e. Off-street parking shall be provided on the premises, as required by Article 21 or
as otherwise required under the provisions of this Ordinance.
f. A home occupation use shall not generate nuisances such as traffic, on-street
parking, noise, vibration, glare, odors, fumes, electrical interference, or hazards to
any greater extent than what is usually experienced in the residential
neighborhood.
g. Such use shall be permitted only within a dwelling occupied by the proprietor and
shall not utilize more than twenty (20) percent of the total floor area of a dwelling
unit.
h. No commodity other than what has been produced or processed on the premises
shall be sold there.
i. The home occupation shall not require the use of a vehicle requiring a commercial
license.
B. PRIVATE STABLES AND RECREATION/COMMERCIAL STABLES
1. The minimum lot area for private stables shall be ten (10) acres.
a. When horses are fed by grazing or pasture for at least one (1) season of the
year, there shall be a minimum of one (1) acre of pasture per horse.
b. When horses are not pastured but are fed indoors or in a dry lot, no minimum
pasture area per horse shall be required.
c. If horses are kept inside a building, one (1) stall shall be provided for each horse.
A tie down stall shall be a minimum of four (4) feet by eight (8) feet; a box stall
shall be minimum of ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 25
SECTION 16.04: DETAILED ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS - (Cont.)
2. The following minimum setbacks shall be provided in addition to the requirements as
outlined in Article 19, Performance Requirements, Section 19.13 through Section 19.19,
The Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards.
a. Stables, corrals, and piles of manure, feed, and bedding shall be located at least
seventy-five (75) feet from any street or lot line, in order to minimize odor and
nuisance problems. Pasture may extend to the line of a required buffer yard;
however, when all of the runoff from a corral or exercise area is controlled and
directed over a two-hundred (200) foot long grass swale before reaching the
property line, the corral or unvegetated exercise area may be located at a
minimum of forty (40) feet from any street right-of-way or lot line.
b. Manure piles shall be stored, removed, and/or applied in accordance with the
Small Farms, Livestock Buildings and Equipment, Michigan State University Extension
and Michigan Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. NRAES-6/MWPS-27
regulations; however, manure shall not be applied on land that is closer than one
hundred (100) feet to a residential lot line.
3. A one hundred (100) foot wide area of vegetation cover, exclusive of pasture area,
shall be maintained between any corral, unvegetated exercise area, manure pile, or
manure application area and any surface water or well, in order to minimize runoff,
prevent erosion, and promote quick nitrogen absorption.
4. In areas with a slope of five (5) percent or less, corrals, unvegetated exercise areas,
and manure piles shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet from a well and two
hundred (200) feet from any surface water, unless the water is upgrade or there is
adequate diking to comply with the Marquette County Health Department Standards.
5. Corrals, unvegetated exercise areas, manure piles, and manure application are
prohibited in areas with slopes greater than five (5) percent in ten (10) year
floodplains, in waterways, and on soils classified as very poorly drained by the
U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey for the Marquette-Humboldt Area, 1977.
6. Manure shall not be stockpiled closer than one hundred (100) feet from a well or to
any surface water, unless the water is upgrade or there is adequate diking to comply
with the Marquette County Health Department Standards.
7. Special events, such as shows, exhibitions, and contests, shall be permitted only when a
zoning compliance permit has been granted. Such events are subject to the
requirements of this Article as outlined in Section 16.05, Temporary Uses, and Section
16.06, Specific Temporary Uses Permitted.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 26
SECTION 16.04: DETAILED ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS – (Cont.)
C. PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS AND TENNIS COURTS
1. Pools and Tennis courts, including but not limited to aprons, walls, and equipment
rooms.
a. Shall not protrude into any required yard.
b. Shall not be operated as a business or a private club.
2. Additionally, pools shall be fenced or otherwise protected against intrusion.
D. GENERAL BUSINESS (GB) DWELLING UNITS
1. Dwelling unit(s) may be authorized in the General Business (GB) Zoning District, if a
permitted principal use exists; but shall not exceed fifty-percent (50%) of the
permitted use’s gross floor area.
SECTION 16.05: TEMPORARY USES
A. AUTHORIZATION
Temporary Uses are authorized and permitted as provided for in this section and Article 15,
Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, the Use vs. District Nomograph.
B. COMPLIANCE
A Temporary Use shall not be established unless a Zoning Compliance Certificate has been issued.
C. USE LIMITATIONS
1. A principal use or structure, together with any temporary uses of structures, shall not
jointly exceed the land use intensity class criteria specified in Article XVIII, Performance
Requirements, or any standard contained in this Ordinance.
2. Signs in connection with a temporary use shall not be permitted except in accordance
with the requirements of Article 22, Signs.
SECTION 16.06: SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED
A. CARNIVAL OR CIRCUS
1. Permitted in designated districts with approval of the Zoning Administrator.
2. The maximum length of permit shall be fifteen (15) days.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 27
SECTION 16.06: SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED – (Cont.)
3. No structure or equipment shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any
residence.
B. CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
1. Permitted in designated districts with approval of the Zoning Administrator.
2. The maximum length of permit for display and open-lot sales shall be forty-five (45)
days.
C. CONTRACTOR’S OFFICE AND CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT SHEDS
1. Such uses are permitted in any district with the approval of the Zoning Administrator
where the use is incidental to a construction project. An office or shed shall not contain
sleeping or cooking accommodations.
2. The maximum length of permit shall be one (1) year and may be renewed by written
request.
3. An office or shed shall be removed upon completion of construction project.
D. EVENTS OF PUBLIC INTEREST
1. Permitted in designated districts with approval of the Zoning Administrator.
2. Events may include but are not limited to outdoor concerts, auctions, snowmobile
events, etc.
E. REAL ESTATE SALES OFFICE
1. Such uses are permitted in designated districts with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator for any new subdivision approved in accordance with The Marquette
Township Subdivision Control Ordinance as a temporary sales office.
2. The maximum length of permit shall be one (1) year and may be renewed by written
request.
3. The office shall be removed upon completion of the development of the subdivision,
unless a model home has been used as a temporary sales office.
F. SEASONAL SALES OF FARM PRODUCTS
1. Sales are permitted in designated districts with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator on parcels having a minimum area of eighty-thousand (80,000) square
feet and a minimum road frontage of two hundred (200) feet.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 28
SECTION 16.06: SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED – (Cont.)
2. If the site is used for growing a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the farm produce
sold, the owner or operator of the site may import a maximum of five (5) farm
produce products not grown on the site for seasonal sale.
3. If the site has a minimum area of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet and a
minimum road frontage of three hundred (300) feet, the owner or operator of the site
may import a maximum of ten (10) farm produce products not grown on the site for
seasonal sale.
4. The maximum length of permit shall be for three (3) months of each calendar year.
5. Sales areas, including the produce stands, shall not be located within the right-of-way
of any street or highway. Entrances and exits to the parking lot shall be a minimum of
thirty (30) feet from any intersection.
G. HORSE SHOW OR EXHIBITION
This is a permitted use in designated districts with the approval of the Zoning Administrator for a
commercial or private stable for special events, including but not limited to shows, exhibitions, and
contests.
H. TEMPORARY SHELTER
When fire or natural disaster has rendered a single-family residence unfit for human habitation,
the temporary use of a mobile home located on the single family lot during rehabilitation of the
original residence or construction of a new residence is permitted with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator and subject to the following additional regulations.
1. Required water and sanitary facilities must be provided.
2. The maximum length of permit shall be six (6) months, however, the Zoning
Administrator may extend the permit for a period or periods not to exceed sixty (60)
days in the event of extenuating circumstances. Application for the extension shall be
made at least fifteen (15) days prior to expiration of the original permit.
3. At the time of permit issuance, the applicant shall provide written consent to the
Township, authorizing them to remove the mobile home within thirty (30) days of
permit expiration or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the new residence, and
to store the mobile home at the owner’s expense if the owner fails to have it removed
on their own initiative.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 29
SECTION 16.06: SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED – (Cont.)
I. TENT THEATER
1. Permitted in designated districts with the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
2. The maximum length of permit shall be five (5) months per calendar year.
SECTION 16.07: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
A. A carnival or circus, tent theater, horse show, or exhibition and all events of public interest
shall be subject to the following additional regulations:
1. Documentations from the Marquette County Health Department stating that adequate
arrangements for temporary sanitary facilities have been provided.
2. Permanent or temporary lighting shall not be installed without an electrical permit and
inspection.
3. All uses shall be confined to the dates specified on the permit.
4. Hours of operations shall be limited to those specified on the permit.
5. The site shall be cleared of all debris at the end of the special event and cleared of
all temporary structures within thirty (30) days after the closing event. A cash bond
for a minimum of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) and not to exceed Five Thousand
Dollars ($5,000.00) shall be posted or a signed contract with a disposal firm shall be
required as part of the application for a zoning compliance certificate to ensure that
the premises will be kept free of all debris during and after the event.
6. Public parking for the exclusive use of the facility shall be provided, and a stabilized
drive to the parking area shall be maintained. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to guide traffic to and from these areas and to prevent patrons from
unlawful parking.
7. Traffic control requirements as specified by the local law enforcement authority shall
be arranged for by the applicant.
8. A cash bond for a minimum of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) and not to exceed Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) shall be posted with the Township to ensure the repair
of any damage resulting to any public right-of-way as a result of the event.
9. The serving of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted without authorization from
the Township Board and a permit from the State Liquor Control Commission and any
other such permits that may be required.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 30
SECTION 16.08: SEXUALLY EXPLICIT ENTERTAINMENT
A. PURPOSE
In the development and execution of this Ordinance, it is recognized that there are some uses
which, because of their very nature are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when located so as to have a deleterious effect upon the adjacent
areas. Special Detailed Use regulations are necessary to insure that these adverse effects will
not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These Detailed
Use regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose
of preventing the location of these uses within specified distances from residentially zoned land,
single or multiple family dwellings, a church or other religious institution, or a public park or land
zoned for such use.
B. DEFINITIONS
1. For the purpose of this section, “specified sexual activities” is defined as:
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
c. Fondling or other erotic touching human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female
breast.
2. For the purpose of this section, “specified anatomical areas” are defined as:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered: (a) human genitals, pubic region, (b)
buttock and (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
b. Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
3. As used in this section, “sexually explicit entertainment” is the offering for observation
by patrons or members of the public, whether or not a fee, compensation or other
goods and services are sold or offered in conjunction therewith, of entertainment which
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts depicting, suggesting,
describing, displaying or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
4. As used in this section “adult bookstore” is an establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock and trade, videos, books, magazines or other periodicals
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”
as the same as defined herein, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of such material.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 31
SECTION 16.08: SEXUALLY EXPLICIT ENTERTAINMENT – (Cont.)
5. For the purpose of this section, adult motion picture or video theater is defined as: an
enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specific anatomical areas” as the same is defined herein, for observation by patrons
therein.
6. For the purpose of this section “used” is defined as: a continuing course of conduct of
exhibiting “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas” in a
manner which appeals to a prurient interest.
C. RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS
1. No persons shall use, establish, build, operate, or allow to be operated an adult
bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, an adult video rental store, or sexually
explicit entertainment in any building or on any lands:
a. Within one thousand (1,000) feet from any residentially zoned lands, or;
b. Within one thousand (1,000) feet from any church or other religious institution,
school, or public park.
2. An adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, or an adult video rental store is
only permitted within a GB, General Business District, and shall be located within such
District subject to the restrictions of this section relating to distance separations as set
forth in Section C.1. above.
3. No person shall use or allow to be used, any land or building within the Charter
Township of Marquette for sexually explicit entertainment, if any portion of such land
or building is occupied, used, owned or leased by a license or permittee under any
license or permit issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
4. Sexually explicit entertainment is only permitted in a GB, General Business District,
and shall be located within such District subject to the restrictions of this section relating
to distance separations as set forth in Section C.1. above.
A. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to define the various types of care facilities and to specify the
zoning districts where these facilities may locate in accordance with the various requirements and
performance standards as outlined in this Ordinance.
The regulations which apply have been developed in accordance with the requirements of The
Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, and state statutes including The Child Care
Organizations Act, P.A. 116 of 1973, as amended and The Adult Foster Care Licensing Act, P.A.
218 of 1979, as amended.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 32
SECTION 16.09: CARE FACILITIES – (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as ascribed to them:
1. Adult Care Facilities
The following definitions are based upon The Adult Foster Care Licensing Act, P.A. 218
of 1979, as amended:
(a) An Adult Foster Care Facility is a governmental or nongovernmental establishment
that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes for
adults who are aged, mentally ill, develop-mentally disabled, or physically
handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require
continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing
homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation
center, or a residential center for persons released from or assigned to a
correctional facility.
(b) An Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility is an adult foster care facility with the
approved capacity to receive more than twenty (20) adults to be provided with
foster care.
(c) An Adult Foster Care Family Home is a private residence with the approved
capacity to receive six (6) or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five
(5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. The adult
foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an
occupant of the residence.
(d) An Adult Foster Care Small Group Home is a facility with the approved capacity to
receive twelve (12) or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care,
and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day,
five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for
compensation.
(e) An Adult Foster Care Large Group Home is a facility with approved capacity to
receive at least thirteen (13) but not more than twenty (20) adults to be provided
supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for
twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or
more consecutive weeks for compensation.
2. Child Care Facilities
The following definitions are based upon The Child Care Organization Act, P.A. Act
116 of 1973, as amended:
(a) A Child Caring Institution means a child care facility which is organized for the
purpose of receiving minor children for care, maintenance, and supervision, usually
on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, in a building maintained for that purpose, and
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 33
SECTION 16.09: CARE FACILITIES – (Cont.)
(b) operates throughout the year. It includes a maternity home for the care of
unmarried mothers who are minors, an agency group home, and institutions for
mentally retarded or emotionally disturbed minor children. It does not include
hospitals, nursing homes, boarding schools, or an adult foster care facility in which
a child has been placed.
(c) A Family Day Care Home is a private home in which one (1) but less than seven (7)
minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less than twentyfour
(24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or guardian, except children
related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
Family day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child
for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.
(d) A Foster Family Group Home is a private home in which more than four (4) but less
than seven (7) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided care for twenty-four
(24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more
consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
(e) Group Day Care Home is a private home in which seven (7) but not more than
twelve (12) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less
than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian,
excepting children related to an adult member of the family. Includes a home that
gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year.
Halfway Houses
(f) Halfway House – Recovery, is a facility licensed by the Michigan Department of
Public Health to provide substance abuse treatment and support services in
addition to room and board to recovering alcoholics and drug abusers.
(g) Halfway House – Rehabilitation is a facility licensed by the Michigan Department of
Corrections or the Federal Bureau of Prisons which provides supervision and
rehabilitation support services in addition to room and board to criminal offenders.
C. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
1. Family Day Care Homes
a. A State Registered Family Day Care Home shall be considered a residential use of
property and shall be permitted use in all Residential Districts.
b. A State Licensed Group Day Care Home shall be considered a special land use and
may be permitted upon approval and issuance of a Special Land Use Permit in
Residential Districts when the following performance standards have been
satisfied.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 34
SECTION 16.09: CARE FACILITIES – (Cont.)
c. Performance Standards: The following standards apply to group day care homes
only. Family day care homes are exempt from all special use permit standards
not required of similarly zoned dwellings.
(1) A Group Day Care Home shall not be located closer than 1,500 feet to any
of the following facilities as measured along a street, road, or other public
thoroughfare excluding an alley:
A. Another licensed group day care home.
B. An adult foster care large group home licensed by the State of Michigan.
C. A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services to
seven (7) or more people which is licensed by the State of Michigan.
D. A community correction center, resident home, halfway house or other
similar facility which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Corrections.
(2) All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a non-climbable fence that is at
least forty-eight (48) inches high.
Forty-eight inches is the minimum height necessary to “secure” children in a
yard. A taller fence may provide additional security and a better buffer.
When establishing a fencing standard for day care uses, the Standard
should be consistent or at least compatible with other local fence standards.
(3) The property (landscaping and architecture) shall be maintained in a manner
that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood. A group day care
home should not require exterior modifications to the dwelling nor should the
front yard be the location of play equipment, except on a corner lot.
(4) One (1) identification sign shall be permitted. Such sign face shall not be
greater than two (2) square feet, shall be mounted flush to a wall, made of
material that is compatible with the dwelling unit, and shall not be
illuminated. Sign text shall be limited to the name of the day care operator
and address.
(5) One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each non-family
employee of the group day care home in addition to the parking normally
required for the residence. A driveway may be used to fulfill this
requirement.
(6) Family day care homes shall be inspected by the Zoning Administrator at the
time of occupancy. Group day care homes shall be inspected by the same
agency prior to the issuance of any special conditional use permit and
annually thereafter to ensure continued conformance with the Ordinance.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 35
SECTION 16.09: CARE FACILITIES – (Cont.)
2. Adult Foster Care Homes
a. A State Licensed Adult Foster Care Home which provides supervision or care, or
both, to six (6) or fewer persons shall be considered a residential use of property
and shall be permitted in all Residential Districts.
b. A State Licensed Adult Foster Care Small Group Home which provides supervision or
care, or both, to more than six (6) but less than thirteen (13) persons shall be
considered a Special Land Use in the Urban Residential (UR) District. A Special
Use Permit shall be issued if the Adult Foster Care Use meets the following
performance standards. A state licensed Adult Foster Care Large Group which
provides supervision or care, or both, to more than twelve (12) persons shall be a
Special Land Use in the Urban Residential District. A Special Use Permit shall be
issued if the Adult Foster Care Use meets the following performance standards;
c. Performance Standards: The following are standards which apply to adult foster
care small group homes that care for more than six persons.
(1) A state licensed adult foster care small group home shall not be located
within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of another similar state licensed facility.
(2) One (1) on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in
addition to the parking required for the dwelling unit. The driveway may be
used for this purpose.
(3) The property (architecture and landscaping) shall be maintained in a manner
that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
(4) Notice to neighbors and/or neighborhood associations is highly
recommended, though not required, to promote the integration of adult
foster care residents into the neighborhood.
If the proposal does not meet the above criteria, a variance may be sought
according to the procedures and standards as outlined in Article XXIII,
Zoning Board of Appeals, Section 23.05, Variances, and Section 23.06,
Variance Standards.
d. Adult Foster Care Large Group Homes shall adhere to the following standards:
(1) A state licensed adult foster care large group home shall not be located
within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of another similar state licensed facility.
(2) One (1) on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in
addition to the parking required for the dwelling unit or other accessory uses.
(3) A designated passenger loading/unloading area of adequate dimensions
shall be provided near a barrier-free entrance to the facility.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 36
SECTION 16.09: CARE FACILITIES – (Cont.)
(4) A loading/unloading area of adequate dimensions shall be provided for
delivery vehicles servicing the facility.
(5) A landscaped buffer shall be provided along all property lines that abut a
less intense land use (or name zoning districts) and around the visible
perimeters of all parking and loading/unloading areas.
(6) All exterior lighting of entryways, parking spaces, or loading/unloading
areas shall not reflect onto adjacent properties and, preferably, should be
motion activated.
(7) Notice to neighbors and/or neighborhood association is highly
recommended, though not required, to promote the integration of adult
foster care residents into the neighborhood.
If the proposal does not meet any of the above criteria, a variance may be
sought according to the procedures and standards outlined in Article 24,
Zoning Board of Appeals, Section 24.05, Variances, and Section 24.06,
Variance Standards.
3. Halfway Houses - Recovery and Rehabilitation
a. A State Licensed Residential Substance Abuse Facility shall be considered a
permitted use in the Development District when the following Performance
Standards have been satisfied.
b. Performance Standards: The following standards apply to Small Recovery or
Rehabilitation Halfway Houses.
1. A state licensed residential substance abuse or state or federally licensed
correctional facility shall not be located within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of
another similar state licensed facility.
2. One (1) on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in
addition to the parking required for the dwelling. The driveway may be used
for this purpose.
3. The property (architecture and landscaping) shall be maintained in a manner
that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
4. Notice to neighbors is highly recommended, though not required to promote
the integration of the halfway house into the neighborhood.
5. A recovery or rehabilitation halfway house shall be located in an area
reasonably accessible to public transportation, employment and vocational
activities as well as other community resources and agencies which may be
utilized by the facility’s residents, or provisions must be made so that the
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 37
SECTION 16.09: CARE FACILITIES – (Cont.)
6. facility’s residents have ready access to these services and agencies when
necessary.
If the proposal does not meet in any of the above criteria, a variance may be
sought according to the procedures and standards outlined in Article 24,
Zoning Board of Appeals, Section 24.05, Variances, and Section 24.06,
Variance Standards.
c. Large Recovery or Rehabilitation Halfway Houses shall adhere to the following
standards:
1. A state licensed residential substance abuse or state or federally licensed
correctional facility shall not be located within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of
another similar state licensed facility.
2. One (1) on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in
addition to the parking required for the dwelling unit.
3. A designated passenger loading/unloading area of adequate dimensions shall
be provided near a barrier-free entrance to the facility.
4. A loading/unloading area of adequate dimensions shall be provided for
delivery vehicles to service the facility.
5. A landscape buffer shall be provided along all property lines that abut a less
intense land use and around the visible perimeters of all parking and
loading/unloading areas.
6. All exterior lighting of entryways, parking spaces, or loading/unloading areas
shall not reflect onto adjacent properties and, preferably, should be motion
activated.
7. A recovery or rehabilitation halfway house shall be located in an area
responsibly accessible to public transportation, employment, and vocational
activities as well as other community resources and agencies which may be
utilized by the facility’s residents, or provisions must be made so that the
facility’s residents have ready access to these services and agencies when
necessary.
8. Notice to neighbors and/or neighborhood associations is highly recommended
though not required, to promote the integration of adult foster care residents
into the neighborhood.
If the proposal does not meet all of the above criteria, a variance may be sought
according to the procedures and standards as outlined in Article 24, Zoning
Board of Appeals, Section 24.05, Variances, and Section 24.06, Variance
Standards.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 38
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
A. PURPOSE
It has become increasingly desirable in time of rising energy costs and shortages to look to
alternative energy sources, solar and wind, for both residential and commercial uses. While
utilization of these sources may reduce greenhouse gas emissions, implementation without realistic
standards can cause problems visually and operationally both on and off site. These regulations
are designed to balance rights of all parties and assist in benefitting the end user and the
community as a whole in minimizing visual impacts and the potential for nuisance.
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
B. SOLAR ENERGY
Solar energy equipment consists of photovoltaic solar arrays and/ or a solar collection system. In
addition to local ordinances and Marquette County Building Codes, they may also be subject to
Restrictive Covenants or Owner’s Association and/or Condominium Bylaws for specific sites.
Common building code issues to address include exceeding roof load, unacceptable heat
exchangers, improper wiring, inadequate separation from potable water supplies, etc. Potential
zoning issues can include sideyard/bufferyard obstruction, exceeding height limits, visual
degradation due to improper siting, off-premise vegetation growth affecting efficiency of ground
mounted systems, etc. These items and other situation specific issues will be addressed upon
application, site plan preparation and submittal, and a Public Hearing conducted by the Planning
Commission.
C. WIND ENERGY
1. DEFINITIONS
Ambient Sound Level: The amount of background noise at a given location prior to
the installation of a Wind Energy System (WES) which may include, but not be limited
to, traffic, machinery, lawnmowers, human activity, and the interaction of wind with the
landscape. The ambient sound level is measured on the dB(A) weighted scale as
defined by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and is the sound pressure
level exceeded 90% of the time (L90).
Commercial Freestanding Tower: Any tower except those used for Meteorological
Tower (MET) measurement or Wind Energy Systems (WES).
Decibel (Db): The unit of power ratio equal to one tenth of a bell.
Noise: Any activity which creates or produces sound regardless of
frequency exceeding the ambient noise levels at the property line of any
property.
Noise Contour: The graphic depiction of the extent to which an average
noise level affects the area surrounding a source of noise.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 39
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY – (Cont.)
Noise, Decibel (dB): A unit for measuring the amplitude of sounds, equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals.
Practically defined; the loudness of sound is measured in decibels.
Whispering is approximately 30 decibels; conversational speech, 60; a
garbage disposal, 80. Sound above 85 decibels may damage delicate
hearing cells in the inner ear.
Meteorological Tower (MET): Includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy cables and
hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold
equipment anemometers and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring, and any telemetry
devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics
for no more than a three (3) year period to record instantaneous wind information or
to characterize the wind resource at a given location.
Non-Participating Parcel: A parcel of real estate that is neither a Project Parcel nor a
Participating Parcel.
Participating Parcel: A parcel of real estate that is not a Project Parcel, but is subject
to an agreement between the owner and developer allowing the construction of all or
part of a LWES closer to a Participating Parcel property line or habitable structure
than would be permitted in the absence of such an agreement.
Project Parcel: The parcel or parcels of real estate on which all or any part of a
LWES will be constructed.
Tower Height: The height above average grade of the fixed portion (hub) of the
tower.
Total Extended Height: For a Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine it is the distance from the
average grade to highest point of the rotor blade and for a Vertical Axis Wind
Turbine it is the distance from the average grade to the highest point of the wind
turbine.
Wind Energy System (WES): A means of generating electrical power through the
utilization of wind power which is further defined on the basis of capacity as:
Small Wind Energy System (SWES): A tower mounted system which
includes the foundation, tower, generator, blades, wire or other
components used in the system and which is primarily intended to reduce
residential on-site consumption of utility power. The nameplate capacity
rating shall not exceed sixty (60) kilowatts and the tower height shall not
exceed one hundred (100) feet.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 40
Medium Wind Energy System (MWES): A tower mounted system which
includes the foundation, tower, generator, blades, wire or other
components used in the system and which is primarily intended to reduce
commercial, municipal, or industrial on-site consumption of utility power. The
nameplate capacity is rated for more than sixty (60) kilowatts to up to a
maximum of three hundred (300) kilowatts and the tower height shall not
exceed one hundred sixty-four (164) feet.
Large Wind Energy System (LWES): A tower mounted system which
includes the foundation, tower, generator, blades, wire or other
components used in the system and which is primarily intended to supply
electricity to a grid system for off-site customers. The nameplate capacity is
rated to be more than three hundred (300) kilowatts and the tower height
will exceed one hundred sixty-four (164) feet.
2. METEOROLOGICAL TOWERS (MET) AND WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (WES)
a. METEOROLOGICAL TOWERS (MET TOWER)
Meteorological Towers (Met Towers) are permitted as a Temporary
Conditional Use in the same districts as any Wind Energy System (WES).
Met Towers shall be permitted for not more than twelve (12) months for a
Small Wind Energy System (SWES), twenty-four (24) months for a Medium
Wind Energy System (MWES) and thirty-six (36) months for a Large Wind
Energy System (LWES), and are subject to all applicable requirements and
application procedures for Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES) regulated
under Section b below.
b. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (SWES)
The primary use for this Small Wind Energy System, is for residential, onsite
consumption of utility power produced by a generator of sixty (60)
kilowatts or less and located on a tower not to exceed one hundred (100)
feet in height above grade.
All applications shall be accompanied by the following informational
requirements:
i. A completed Application Form, a Plot or Site Plan {Article 18- Site Plan
Review, Section 18.03 (A) or Section 18.06} and a statement with
supporting evidence, as specified in Article 17- Special Land Uses,
Section 17.03 ( C ) APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
ii. Evidence of compliance with a setback of 110% of the total extended
height of the Small Wind Energy System (SWES), from public road
Right-of-Ways, overhead utility lines and all property lines. Guy wire
anchors, if required, shall be placed a minimum of fifteen (15) feet
from any property line and shall be clearly visible to a height of six (6)
feet above grade.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 41
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY – (Cont.)
iii. The Small Wind Energy System (SWES) specifications including the
manufacturer, & model number, etc.; rotor diameter; tower height, type
with drawings; tower foundation drawings.
iv. The method of restricting access to ground mounted electric/ control
equipment and tower access to a height of ten (10) feet above grade.
v. Description of lightning protection and location of all underground
wiring.
vi. Artificial lighting is prohibited unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
vii. Copies of written utility notification and permission to interconnect with
the electric grid, unless the system is to be installed off-grid.
viii. Documentation that the rotor blade clearance will be a minimum of
twenty (20) feet above grade.
ix. Evidence that turbine blade, shadow flicker will not fall on public
roadways or off-site habitable structures.
x. A detailed description of the automatic braking, governing or
feathering system to prevent uncontrolled blade rotation or overspeeding.
xi. Submission of a sound level analysis prepared by the turbine
manufacturer or a Professional Engineer indicating that noise emissions
from the Small Wind Energy System (SWES) will not exceed fifty (50)
dB(A) measured at the property lines. This sound pressure level may be
exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or
severe wind storms. In the event the ambient sound pressure level
exceeds 50 dB(A), the standard shall be ambient plus 5 dB(A).
xii. A Small Wind Energy System (SWES) that is out-of-service for a
continuous 12-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
The Zoning Administrator may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the
Owner of a SWES that is deemed to have been abandoned. The
Owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment
within thirty (30) days from receipt of the Notice of Abandonment. The
Zoning Administrator shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and
notify the Owner of such withdrawal if the Owner provides information
that demonstrates the SWES has not been abandoned.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 42
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY – (Cont.)
xiii. If the Small Wind Energy System (SWES) is determined to be
abandoned, the Owner of the SWES shall remove the wind generator
and the tower at the Owner’s sole expense within ninety (90) days of
receipt of the Notice of Abandonment. If the Owner fails to remove the
wind generator and tower, the Zoning Administrator shall submit a
recommendation to the Township Board to pursue legal action to have
the wind generator and tower removed at the Owner’s expense.
c. MEDIUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (MWES)
The primary use of this system is for commercial, municipal, or industrial onsite
consumption of utility power produced by a generator rated at more
than sixty (60) kilowatts up to a maximum of three hundred (300) kilowatts
and located on a tower not to exceed one hundred sixty-four (164) feet in
height above grade.
All applications shall be accompanied by the informational requirements of
Section b above except amended as follows:
i The Site Plan shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Article 18- Site Plan Review, Section 18.06 REQUIRED
INFORMATION.
ii Medium Wind Energy System (MWES) specifications including
manufacturer & model numbers, etc.; rotor diameter; tower height,
type & professionally certified drawings; professionally certified
tower foundation drawings.
iii The method of restricting access to ground mounted electric/ control
equipment and tower access to a height of twelve (12) feet above
grade.
iv Demonstration that the rotor blade clearance is a minimum of thirty
(30) feet above grade.
v Submission of a sound level analysis prepared by a Professional
Engineer indicating that noise emissions from the Medium Wind
Energy System (MWES) will not exceed forty-five (45) dB(A)
measured at the property lines. This sound pressure level may be
exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or
severe wind storms. In the event the ambient sound pressure level
exceeds 45 dB (A), the standard shall be ambient plus 5 dB (A).
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 43
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY – (Cont.)
A Medium Wind Energy System (MWES) that is out-of-service for a
continuous 12-month period will be deemed to have been
abandoned. The Zoning Administrator may issue a Notice of
Abandonment to the Owner of a MWES that is deemed to have
been abandoned. The Owner shall have the right to respond to the
Notice of Abandonment within thirty (30) days from receipt of the
Notice of Abandonment. The Zoning Administrator shall withdraw
the Notice of Abandonment and notify the Owner of such
withdrawal if the Owner provides information that demonstrates
the SWES has not been abandoned.
If the Medium Wind Energy System (MWES) is determined to be
abandoned, the Owner of the MWES shall remove the wind
generator and the tower at the Owner’s sole expense within ninety
(90) days of receipt of the Notice of Abandonment. If the Owner
fails to remove the wind generator and tower, the Zoning
Administrator shall submit a recommendation to the Township Board
to pursue legal action to have the wind generator and tower
removed at the Owner’s expense.
d. LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (LWES)
NOTE A: The construction of a Large Wind Energy System (LWES) is
typically preceded by an investigation of on-site wind characteristics to
assess suitability for power generation. This generally involves wind
monitoring over several months with the installation of a Meteorological
Tower (Met Tower), which due to its height, would necessitate an
application for and approval of a Temporary Use Permit.
Prospective applicants are apprised that the Charter Township of
Marquette has initially adopted basic regulations for Large Wind Energy
System (LWES) to assist developers in site assessment and up-front
planning to minimize potential problems.
Upon granting a Special Use for a Meteorological Tower in districts where
LWES are conditionally permitted, the Charter Township of Marquette
Planning Commission will commence work to complete this section of the
ordinance within eleven (11) months. Topics to be addressed may include,
but are not limited to, Road Use and Restoration Plan, Design Site Plan,
Aircraft Protection, Blasting Plan, Avian & Wildlife Impact, Microwave and
Electromagnetic Interference, Shadow Flicker Analysis, Noise & Testing
Parameters, Lightning & Stray Voltage Assessment, Security & Emergency
Response Plan, Emergency Shutdown Plan, Decommissioning & Site
Restoration Plan and Bonding/Financial Guarantee Agreement, etc.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 44
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY – (Cont.)
The primary use of this system is to supply electricity to a grid system for
off-site customers produced by a generator rated at more than three
hundred (300) kilowatts, and located on a tower exceeding one hundred
sixty-four (164) feet in height above grade. Property may be owned or
leased by the developer.
LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (LWES) WILL BE INITIALLY SUBJECT TO
THE FOLLOWING REQUIREMENTS:
(1) The Site Plan shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Article 18- Site Plan Review, Section 18.06 REQUIRED
INFORMATION.
(2) Turbine rotor blade clearance shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet
above grade.
NOTE B: Noise related to Large Wind Energy System (LWES) installations
is a serious concern for impacted communities and the emergent wind
industry. Available information about the negative effects of these systems
upon individuals appears to be contradictory, although research completed
and in progress appears to support the potential for public health risks for
a segment of the population and other negative impacts upon property.
Progress within the wind industry is continuous with increasingly higher
generating capacity available in individual wind turbines. More study is
required to assess the impact of these industrial-sized systems on the
health, safety, and welfare of people residing, pursuing recreation and/or
working in their general vicinity. Options presently available to reduce
Large Wind Energy System (LWES) noise emissions involve reducing the
sound power at the source or increasing the distance between source and
receiver.
(3) SETBACKS
( a ) Each Large Wind Energy System (LWES) shall be setback
150% of the total extended height of the LWES from any
Participating Parcel or Project Parcel property boundary
lines.
( b ) Each Large Wind Energy System (LWES) shall be setback
200% of the total extended height of the LWES from any
public road Right-of-Way and any overhead utility line.
( c ) Each Large Wind Energy System (LWES) shall be located
sixteen hundred (1600) feet from any single family or
seasonal dwelling located on a Participating Parcel.
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 45
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY – (Cont.)
( d ) Each Large Wind Energy System (LWES) shall be located
thirty three hundred (3300) feet from any single family or
seasonal dwelling located on a Non-Participating Parcel.
(4) SOUND EMISSION TESTING
All testing, modeling, and analysis of each Large Wind Energy
System (LWES) shall conform to the measurement standards and
protocols of The American Standards Institute (ANSI) S12.9, Parts
1-5: (ANSI) S12.17; (ANSI) S12.18 and International Electric Code
(IEC) 61400 - 11 and be performed by a qualified Professional
Consultant/Engineer selected by the Charter Township of
Marquette and paid for by the applicant via an Escrow Account
established by the Township.
( a ) In order to establish long-term background noise, the preconstruction
La90 and Lc90 ambient sound levels are to be
measured at the property lines of Non-Participating Parcels
during night time hours of 9:00 PM to 6:00 AM.
( b ) Post-construction operating sound levels are to be measured
within nine (9) months of a fully operational Large Wind
Energy Systems (LWES) installation at the property lines of
Non-Participating Parcels during night time hours of 9:00
PM to 6:00 AM. The maximum noise emission at any Non-
Participating Parcels containing a single family or seasonal
dwelling shall not exceed the following limits:
i Maximum Emission Level - 40dB(A)
ii Maximum Emission Level - 55 dB(C)
iii Maximum emission above preconstruction ambient
level - La90 + 5dB
iv Maximum emission above preconstruction ambient
level - Lc90 + 5dB
v Emission Spectra Imbalance - Lc90 + 5dB - (La90 +
5dB) < 20dB
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 46
SECTION 16.10: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY – (Cont.)
Each limit (?) through (v) above is independent and exceeding any
of the limits will be determined to be evidence of non-compliance.
The Zoning Administrator shall immediately inform the operator of
non-compliance with the Emission Limits. The Large Wind Energy
System (LWES) shall be removed from operation until such time as
compliance with noise levels can be demonstrated. (End Amend. 08-
02-10)
Information in the Sounds Emission testing section is based in part upon “The How To Guide To Siting
Wind Turbines To Prevent Health Risks From Sound” by G. W. Kamperman and R. R. James Version
2.1, dated October 28, 2008.
SECTION 16.11: PARK & RIDE
1. Park & Ride land use may only be located in the zoned, General Business (GB) Zoning
District and Development District (DD).
2. Park & Ride land use shall be subject to the review and approval requirements set forth in
Article 14 – ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS, ARTICLE 17 SPECIAL LAND USES,
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW, ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS, and
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
3. A Park & Ride Lot shall not have more than 150 parking stalls in a single development.
SECTION 16.12: TINY HOMES
1. In addition to complying with of other relevant Sections of this Ordinance, except for
minimum square footage requirements, petitioners desiring to site and/or construct a Tiny
Home (as defined in Section 2.02) shall also provide the following information to be
considered for a special land use permit:
a. Marquette County Building Permit(s)
b. Marquette County Health Department Permit(s)
c. Off-street parking conforming to residential single-family dwelling units under Article
21.
d. Connection to a public sewer and water supply in compliance with the Marquette
Township requirements, or to such private facilities as approved by the Marquette
County Health Department.
SECTION 16.13: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
1. In addition to complying with other relevant sections of this Ordinance, petitioners desiring
to conduct a short-term rental unit (as defined in Article 2), the petitioner shall also
provide the following information in order to be considered for a special use permit:
ARTICLE 16 – DETAILED USE REGULATIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 16 Page 47
a. Fire code review by the Marquette Township Fire/Rescue
Department every two (2) years.
b. A Marquette Township Business License.
c. Off-street parking conforming to residential single-family dwelling units
under Article 21.
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 17
SPECIAL LAND USES
SECTION TITLE PAGE
17.01: PURPOSE 2
17.02: APPLICABILITY 2
17.03: APPLICATION PROCEDURE 2
A. Applicant 2
B. Application 2
C. Information Required on Application 3
D. Zoning Administrator 4
17.04: REVIEW AND FINDING PROCESS 4
A. Planning Commission Public Hearing 4
B. Planning Commission Decision 5
17.05: CONDITIONS ON SPECIAL LAND USE APPROVALS 5
17.06: GENERAL USE STANDARDS 5
17.07: CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS 6
17.08: DECISION RECORD 7
A. Written Record 7
17.09: AMENDMENTS TO PERMIT FOR SPECIAL LAND USES 8
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 2
ARTICLE 17: SPECIAL LAND USES
SECTION 17.01: PURPOSE
Special Land Uses are those which have some impact or uniqueness such that their effect on the
surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of the use being proposed for a
particular location. Prior to approval, a review of the location, design, configuration, and impact
is conducted by comparing the proposed use to fixed standards. This review determines whether
the proposed use should be permitted by weighing the public need for, and the benefit to be
derived from the proposed use, against any local impact which it may cause. The review
considers the proposal in terms of existing zoning and land use in the vicinity of the proposed use,
the effects of the proposed use on planned and proposed public and private developments,
whether and to what extent the proposed use at that particular location for which it is suggested
is a necessary or desirable development in the interest of the public convenience or general
welfare of the area or Township. It is important to provide control and reasonable flexibility in
requirements for certain kinds of uses to not only allow practical latitude for the investor, but to
also maintain adequate provision for the security of the health, safety, convenience, and general
welfare of the community’s inhabitants. In order to accomplish this dual objective, provisions have
been made in this Ordinance for flexibility within individual district regulations. Detailed
consideration of certain specified activities as each may relate to proposed conditions of location,
design, size, operation, intensity of use, generation of traffic and traffic movements, concentration
of population, processes and equipment employed, amount and kind of public facilities and
services required, together with many other possible factors must be considered. Land and
structure uses possessing unique characteristics are designated as SPECIAL USES and may be
authorized by the issuance of a SPECIAL USE PERMIT with such conditions and safeguards
attached as deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare. The following sections,
together with previous references in other articles, designate what uses require a Special Use
Permit.
SECTION 17.02: APPLICABILITY
Any use which is permitted as Special Land Use denoted by the letter “S” in Article 15, Principal
Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, Use vs. District Nomograph, of this Ordinance shall
comply with this Article.
SECTION 17.03: APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A. APPLICANT - Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an
application for one or more Special Use Permits provided for in this Ordinance.
B. APPLICATION – Applications shall be submitted through the Zoning Administrator to the
Planning Commission. Each application shall be signed by both the property owner and
the applicant and be accompanied by the payment of a fee in accordance with the duly
adopted “Schedule of Fees” to cover costs of processing the application. No part of any
fee shall be refundable.
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 3
SECTION 17.03: APPLICATION PROCEDURE – (Cont.)
C. INFORMATION REQUIRED IN APPLICATION.
Applications provided by the Zoning Administrator shall be fully executed and
accompanied by a minimum of two (2) copies of the following information. Certain
specific items of required information may be waived at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator if deemed appropriate. However all of the following information shall not
be waived for all Trails (snowmobile) and Trails (all terrain vehicles).
1. Applicant’s name and address in full.
2. Statement identifying the landowner, if not the applicant, and the applicant’s
relationship to the landowner (i.e., land contract vendee, purchaser, optionee,
designated delegated agent, etc.)
3. Property boundary survey/map and legal description with the seal of the registered
surveyor who prepared them.
4. Uses and structures existing on the land.
5. Existing zoning of the parcel in question along with zoning district classifications of all
adjacent properties.
6. For non-residential developments proposed to contain 50,000 square feet or more of
gross floor area in one or more buildings in one or more development phases, a traffic
analysis which relates the trip generation likely from the proposed development to
existing street volume capacities.
7. For residential developments proposed to contain 50,000 square feet or more of
gross floor area in one or more development phases, the following:
a. A traffic analysis which relates the trip generation likely from the proposed
development to existing street volume capacities.
b. An analysis of the impacts of the proposed developments upon schools and parks.
8. Site plan or plot drawn to scale, and containing information specified in Article XVII,
Site Plan Review, Section 17.03, Required Plan Approvals and Section 17.06, Required
Information.
9. Preliminary plans and outline specifications identifying the Proposed Special Land Use
as listed in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, Section 15.05, the Use vs.
District Nomograph, and in accordance with the performance criteria specified in
Article 19, Performance Requirements.
10. Supporting documents from relevant public agencies.
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 4
SECTION 17.03: APPLICATION PROCEDURE – (Cont.)
D. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
To help assure full disclosure of relevant information to all potentially impacted review
and/or approval agencies having jurisdiction within the proposed site development or
special use area, the Zoning Administrator shall direct one (1) copy of the complete plot
plan or site plan to be transmitted to each of the following agencies determined necessary
for their review and comment.
1. Marquette County Road Commission.
2. Marquette County Health Department.
3. Marquette County Drain Commissioner.
4. Michigan Department of Transportation.
5. School district – Superintendent of Schools.
6. Marquette Township Fire Chief.
7. Chief of the local law enforcement agency.
8. Affected utility companies.
9. Nearby operating railroads which may be affected by the Special Land Use.
10. Charter Township of Marquette Department of Public Works.
11. Other federal, state, county, or local agencies which may be impacted by the
proposed development.
The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the remaining copies of the application and
supporting documentation to the Planning Commission for their review. The Planning
Commission shall proceed with scheduling a public hearing regarding the request.
.
SECTION 17.04: REVIEW AND FINDING PROCESS
A. PLANNING COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING
The Planning Commission shall review the complete application for a Special Use Permit at
its next regular scheduled meeting following filing by the Zoning Administrator and, if
required, shall set a date for the public hearing within forty-five (45) days thereafter. A
public hearing shall be required for a Special Land Use to be located in the Development
District (DD), if the proposed Special Land Use is located adjacent with existing Residential
Land Use and/ or adjacent with a designated Residential Zoning District; i.e. Scenic
Resource (SR), Rural Residential (RR), or Urban Residential (UR). The Township Clerk shall
publish one (1) notice of public hearing, not less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such
hearing and shall notify by regular mail or personal delivery the parties of interest and
all property owners and occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the
boundaries of the subject property.
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 5
SECTION 17.04: REVIEW AND FINDING PROCESS – (Cont.)
In situations where a single structure contains four (4) or more dwelling units, businesses, or
organizations, notice must be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be
requested to post notice at the primary entrance of the structure. The notice shall describe
the special nature of the land use request; the legal description, and a location map of the
property; specify the date, time, and place of the hearing; indicate when and where
written comments will be received concerning the request.
B. PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION
The Planning Commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions, a request for a
Special Land Use approval. The decision on a Special Land Use shall be incorporated in
a statement containing the conclusions relative to the Special Land Use under consideration
which specifies the basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed.
SECTION 17.05: CONDITIONS ON SPECIAL LAND USE APPROVALS
Every special land use permit shall be conditioned upon the proposed development fully
complying with all requirements of this Ordinance and, where applicable, the Township
Subdivisions Regulations and any other pertinent federal, state, county, or local statutes or
ordinances. The violation of any condition contained in a special land use permit shall be a
violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 17.06: GENERAL USE STANDARDS
An application for a Special Land Use permit shall not be approved unless the Planning
Commission specifically finds the proposed Special Land Use to be appropriate in the location for
which it is proposed. This finding shall be based on the following criteria:
A. The proposed use shall be in harmony with the general purpose, goals, objectives, and
standards of the Comprehensive Plan of the Charter Township of Marquette, this
Ordinance, or any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted, or under
consideration pursuant to official notice, by the Township.
B. There shall be a community need for the proposed use at the proposed location; in the
light of existing and proposed uses of a similar nature in the area and of the need to
provide or maintain a proper mix of uses both within the Township and also within the
immediate area of the proposed use:
1. The proposed use in the proposed location shall not result in either a detrimental over
concentration of a particular use within the Township or within the immediate area of
the proposed use.
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 6
SECTION 17.06: GENERAL USE STANDARDS – (Cont.)
2. The area for which the use is proposed is not better suited for or likely to be needed
for uses which are permitted as a matter of right within that district, in light of policies
or provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, this Ordinance, or other plans or programs of
the Township.
C. The proposed use at the proposed location shall not result in a substantial or undue
adverse effect on adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions,
parking, public improvements, public sites or rights-of-way, or other matters of welfare,
either as they now exist or as they may in the future be developed as a result of the
implementation of provisions and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, this Ordinance, or
any other plan, program, map, or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to
official notice, by the Township to guide growth and development.
D. The proposed use in the area under consideration shall be adequately serviced by and
will not impose an undue burden on any of the improvements, facilities, utilities, and
services specified in this subsection. Where improvements, facilities, utilities, or services
are not available or adequate to service the proposed use in the proposed location, the
applicant shall, as part of the application and as a condition to approval of the proposed
Special Land Use permit, be responsible for establishing the ability, willingness, and a
binding commitment to provide the improvements, facilities, utilities, and services in
sufficient time and in a manner consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, this Ordinance,
and other plans, programs, maps, and ordinances adopted by the Township to guide its
growth and development. The approval of the Special Land Use permit shall be
conditional upon the improvements, facilities, utilities, and services being provided and
guaranteed by the applicant.
E. The proposed use in the proposed location shall fully comply with the requirements set
forth in this Ordinance and shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of Article 15,
Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, and Article XVIII, Performance Requirements.
SECTION 17.07: CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS
A. Prior to granting any Special Use Permit, the Planning Commission may impose any
additional conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, or operation of the use authorized by the Special Use Permit which may be
necessary for the protection of the public interest. Conditions imposed shall further be
designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as the social
and economic well being of those who will utilize the land use, or activity under
consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use
or activity, and the community as a whole. The conditions shall be consistent with the
general standards as established in this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 7
SECTION 17.07: CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS – (Cont.)
B. Conditions and requirements stated as part of the Special Use Permit authorization shall
be a continuing obligation of Special Use Permit holders. The Zoning Administrator shall
make periodic investigations of developments authorized by Special Use Permit to
determine compliance with all requirements.
C. Special Use Permits may be issued for time periods as determined by the Planning
Commission. Special Use Permits may be renewed in the same manner as originally
applied for.
D. In authorizing a Special Use Permit, the Planning Commission may require that a cash
deposit, certified check, bond, letter of credit, or other financial guarantee acceptable to
the Township, of adequate sum be provided by the developer prior to the issuance of the
Special Use Permit to ensure installation of such necessary improvements including but not
limited to drives, walks, utilities, parking, landscaping, etc. The financial guarantee shall
be deposited with the Township Clerk at the time of issuance of the permit authorizing the
use or activity. Upon completion of significant phases of the scheduled improvements, the
Planning Commission shall authorize a proportional rebate of the financial guarantee.
E. Continuance of a Special Use Permit shall be withheld by the Planning Commission only
upon its determination that:
1. The required conditions, as prescribed in conjunction with the issuance of the original
permit, required the use to be discontinued after a specified time period.
2. Violations of the conditions pertaining to the granting of the Special Use Permit
continue to exist more than thirty (30) days after written order to correct the violation
has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
F. All plans, specifications, and statements submitted with the application for a Special Use
Permit shall become, along with any changes ordered by the Planning Commission, a part
of the conditions of any Special Use Permit issued.
G. An application for a Special Use Permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the
Planning Commission shall not be resubmitted until one (1) year or more has expired from
the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of
changed conditions sufficient to justify reconsideration by the Township.
SECTION 17.08: DECISION RECORD
A. WRITTEN RECORD
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a written record of Special Use Permits issued in
accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. The record shall contain:
1. All written materials produced as a result of the proceedings.
2. All written statements received regarding the proposed special use.
ARTICLE 17 – SPECIAL LAND USES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 17 Page 8
SECTION 17.08: DECISION RECORD – (Cont.)
3. A written statement of findings of fact together with the final decision and supporting
reasons. The decision must include a statement of facts, the decision, the basis for the
decision, and any conditions imposed on the Special Land Use.
SECTION 17.09: AMENDMENTS TO PERMITS FOR SPECIAL LAND USES
Following the issuance of a Special Land Use permit pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance,
such permit may be amended, varied, or altered only in accordance with the standards and
procedures established by this Article for its original approval.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 18
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION TITLE PAGE
18.01: PURPOSE 2
18.02: EXCEPTIONS 2
18.03: REQUIRED PLAN APPROVALS 2
A. Plot Plans 2
B. Plot Plans Reviewed By the Planning Commission 3
18.04: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY 3
18.05: PROCEDURES FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW 4
18.06: REQUIRED INFORMATION 5
18.07: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL 8
18.08: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR/PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW 10
18.09: REVISIONS-MODIFICATIONS-CORRECTIONS-EXPANSIONS TO
AN APPROVED SITE PLAN 10
18.10: FINANCIAL GUARANTEES 12
18.11: FINAL APPROVAL OF PROJECT 12
18.12: TIME LIMIT TO IMPLEMENT APPROVED SITE PLAN 12
18.13: ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION AND APPEALS 12
18.14: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS PROCEDURE 13
18.15: AS-BUILT SITE PLAN 13
18.16: LAND CLEARING 13
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 2
ARTICLE 18: SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION 18.01: PURPOSE
The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that a proposed land use or activity is in compliance
with local ordinances and state and federal statutes. The term “Site Plan” includes all documents,
plans, and drawings associated with a site plan as required by the Zoning Ordinance. The site
plan should specifically denote the detailed intent of the petitioner. The specified standards and
required procedures contained herein are intended to promote the orderly development of the
Township, assure compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local ordinances, promote the
public, health, safety, and welfare of Township residents and the public at large, preserve
taxable values, pedestrian and traffic safety, and move the Township towards sustainability.
SECTION 18.02: EXCEPTIONS
Wherever conflict may arise between the Required Information to be provided with an
application for site plan review as stated in Section 18.06 of this Article, with the requirements as
set forth in Public Act 96 of 1987, as amended, relative to mobile home parks, the state statute
shall prevail. All other required information items noted in this section shall, however, be
provided as stated herein.
SECTION 18.03: REQUIRED PLAN APPROVALS
Site plan review is required for all proposed land uses and activities containing at least 10,000 sf
of impervious surface, or impervious surface occupying at least 50% of a lot, whichever is less.
An exception to the above shall be that plot plan review and not site plan review is required for
Trails (non-motorized), regardless of the amount of impervious surface. Other proposed land uses
and activities, involving at least 500 sf of impervious surface, shall be shown on a plot plan in
accordance with the following requirements:
A. PLOT PLANS.
The following information shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review.
1. A legal description or survey map of the site.
2. All lot lines and dimensions of the lot.
3. All existing and proposed buildings/building uses on the lot, showing exterior
dimension and closest distance to lot lines.
4. For buildings set back 100’ or more from a public street right-of-way accessible by
motor vehicles, the location of any driveway access to a street or lot line, sufficient to
show compliance with Section 21.07, Emergency Vehicle Access.
5. The location of any road or easement on or adjacent to the site.
6. Natural features affecting development (rock, bluff, water, wetland).
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 3
SECTION 18.03: REQUIRED PLAN APPROVALS – (Cont.)
7. All well and septic locations, or water and sewer lateral locations, as applicable.
8. If bufferyards are required, a landscaping plan showing compliance with Section
19.04, Bufferyards.
9. For non-residential uses containing at least one principal building and for multi-family
developments of five or more units, the following additional information:
a. The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking area sufficient to
show compliance with Section 21.06, Design Standards.
b. The location of proposed planting and screening, fencing, and signs.
c. For sites of an acre or more in size, the surface water drainage pattern, and any
existing and proposed surface water impoundments.
10. For trails (non-motorized) an accurate map, which identifies the trail locations by
points with 100’ intervals. The trail shall be accurately shown on the map with the
method of determining the accuracy and the margin of error stated on the map.
B. PLOT PLANS REVIEWED BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
The following types of land use, development, or changes shall be submitted through the
Zoning Administrator for review by the Planning Commission. The Zoning Administrator
shall review other plot plans.
1. New trails (non-motorized) which equal one mile or more in length.
2. Relocation of existing trails (non-motorized), or a portion thereof, equaling one mile or
more in length.
SECTION 18.04: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY
The Township of Marquette, with the assistance of its designated Zoning Administrator, is the legal
entity charged with review and approval of all site plan documents, except that the Planning
Commission is the official designated legal entity charged with the review and approval of all
site plan documents for the following types of developments:
A. Developments involving one or more special uses as specified in Article 17 Special Land
Uses of this Ordinance.
B. New developments or redevelopments containing:
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 4
SECTION 18.04: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY – (Cont.)
1. A gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or more in one or more principal buildings.
This does not apply to single-family residential home construction unless Section
18.04B.4 does apply.
2. Expansion of one or more existing principal buildings by 1,000 square feet or more, if
the expanded gross floor area combined with the existing gross floor area will total
5,000 square feet or more. This does not apply to single-family residential home and
accessory building construction unless Section 17.04B.4 does apply.
3. Service stations.
4. Lots proposed to contain five (5) or more single-family detached dwellings, and lots
proposed to contain fewer than five (5) such dwellings which necessitate the dedication
of a new public or private street, right-of-way, or access easement.
5. Extraction of earth products.
6. Trails (snowmobile), and Trails (all terrain vehicles).
7. All developments or redevelopments in which Article 14 Access Management
Regulations, Section 14.01.B. applies to except that single-family detached
dwellings shall be a plot plan reviewed by the Zoning Administrator.
Certain specific items of required information may be waived by the Zoning Administrator,
if determined to be inapplicable to a specific site or site development proposal. Site Plan
Review and not merely a plot plan review, shall be required for all developments listed in
this Section 18.04B and shall be in accordance with Section 18.06: Required Information.
SECTION 18.05: PROCEDURES FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW
A. Upon request, an application form shall be provided to the petitioner by the Zoning
Administrator. All questions on the form shall be completed, signed by the petitioner or
representative, and returned to the Zoning Administrator. The proposed site plan,
specifications, and the required payment of a non-refundable fee, as outlined in Article
26, Section 26.14, Fees, shall accompany the application.
If the Zoning Administrator determines that the site plan submission does not include all of
the required information, a written notice of denial, including the reasons for rejection,
along with instructions for revising the submission to make it acceptable, will be provided
to the petitioner within thirty (30) days of the original submission.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 5
SECTION 18.05: PROCEDURES FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW – (Cont.)
It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to forward the completed
application along with all other final plan documents to the Planning Commission in those
site plan reviews for which the Planning Commission has jurisdiction for review and
consideration at their next regularly scheduled meeting if all of the required information
has been received at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the next regularly scheduled
meeting. To help assure full disclosure of relevant information to all potentially impacted
review and/or approval agencies having jurisdiction within the proposed site development
area, the Zoning Administrator shall direct one (1) copy of the complete site plan to be
transmitted to each of the following agencies determined necessary for their review and
comment:
1. Marquette County Road Commissioner.
2. Marquette County Health Department.
3. Marquette County Drain Commissioner.
4. Michigan Department of Transportation.
5. School District – Superintendent of Schools.
6. Charter Township of Marquette Fire Chief.
7. Chief of the local law enforcement agency.
8. Affected utility companies.
9. Nearby operating railroads which may be affected by the proposed plan.
10. Charter Township of Marquette Department of Public Works.
11. Other federal, state, county, or local agencies which may be impacted by the
proposed development.
The Zoning Administrator or, in those site plan reviews for which the Planning Commission
has jurisdiction, the Planning Commission shall base its review and evaluation of the site
plan upon the Appropriate Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance
Standards, Sections 19.13 through 19.20, and the General Standards for Site Plan
Approval, Section 18.07.
SECTION 18.06: REQUIRED INFORMATION
A. Every application will be accompanied by the following applicable informational
requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission.
1. An application form as provided by the Zoning Administrator fully completed and
signed by the petitioner or representative.
2. A minimum of four (4) full-size hard copies of all plans, documents and/or drawings,
and one digital set containing the following information and data for all proposed
land uses and activities as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
3. A complete legal description of the parcel(s) as it appears on the deed and the total
site area of the proposed site in acres.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 6
SECTION 18.06: REQUIRED INFORMATION – (Cont.)
4. A fully dimensioned map/drawing, at a scale of 1”=50’ or less, showing all relevant
data including buildable setbacks, spatial relationship of all buildings, scale,
directional arrow, original dates, revision dates, if any, and a vicinity sketch or
location map (1”=500’ or less) showing all abutting properties, and properties directly
across the street(s) up to 500’ from the site’s property line, and property owner names
for any such properties.
5. The name of the proposed project/development/activity.
6. The name, address, and telephone number of all fee interest holders and type of
ownership/interest.
7. Any deed restrictions or covenants affecting the proposed plan and future on or offsite
development.
8. The size, shape, location, and use of all existing and proposed structures.
9. The location of all existing and proposed driveways, curb cuts, and points of ingress
and egress.
10. The location, names, and widths of all existing and proposed public or private rightsof-
way including roads, railroads, easements, clear view triangles, utility licenses, and
the jurisdiction or ownership status of each.
11. The existing and proposed zoning classification and/or land use intensity of the plan
site and all adjacent or abutting properties, and if platted, the liber and page
numbers of records plats.
12. The designated access locations for fire vehicles and emergency apparatus along with
fire lane widths, type of road surfacing, and any turnaround areas along with all
relevant dimensions.
13. The existing and proposed pavement widths, condition, and type, and the location of
any acceleration or deceleration lanes existing or proposed.
14. The existing or proposed vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation systems
including all relevant dimensions; parking space sizes and numbers; designated
handicapped parking areas and numbers; customer/employee parking areas, and all
such other information as required in Article XX.
15. The location, size, and depth as may be required for all public or private utility lines,
individual service leads, storage tanks, and fire hydrants existing and/or proposed to
service the project.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 7
SECTION 18.06: REQUIRED INFORMATION – (Cont.)
16. The definition, location, and relevant dimensions of all loading areas, truck docks,
service drives, and truck wells.
17. The location of all permanent or temporary signs, existing or proposed, including their
design, area, size, height, illumination, and the type of construction.
18. A complete landscaping plan, including the location of all greenbelts and bufferyards,
fencing, or screening, with specific indication of all landscape materials to be utilized.
19. The location of all proposed trash and refuse receptacles and the method to be used
for screening these areas.
20. A complete set of architectural floor plans including all relevant square footage
calculations, exterior building elevations, and the existing and proposed building
grades and heights. Multiple unit proposals shall include all density and area
calculations.
21. Any existing and/or proposed exterior lighting plans for parking areas, and general
information regarding maximum illumination and candlepower of proposed lighting
systems.
22. The existing and proposed topography of the site with elevations based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 and mapped utilizing two (2) feet minimum contour
intervals; five (5) foot intervals may be used where grades are in excess of ten (10)
percent. All benchmark locations, descriptions, and elevations shall be noted.
23. The notation of any significant or distinctive features which may be desirable to
protect as natural features including all beaches, bluffs, dunes, shorelands, ravines,
ravine buffers, and steep slopes.
24. The location and names of all existing and proposed water courses, water bodies,
floodplains, wetland surface drainageways, basins and facilities, either natural or
manmade.
25. All available information on sub-surface water table depths or elevations, along with
the quantity and quality of potential potable water supplies as required.
26. All available information relative to on-site soil conditions, profiles, inventories,
borings, and the source of all related reference material.
27. The nature, size, type, and specific location of any forest or vegetative cover.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 8
SECTION 18.06: REQUIRED INFORMATION – (Cont.)
28. If the application relates to property scheduled for phased development, the
proposed layout for the total projected development shall be indicated, and the
projected scope and time period shall be estimated for each additional phase.
29. All applicable calculations in accordance with Article 19, Performance Requirements,
referring the basic information cited in Section 19.03, Performance Standards.
30. The seal of the licensed engineer, architect, landscape architect, surveyor, or planner
who prepared the plan.
31. Any such other information as may be required and/or deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator to properly and adequately evaluate the
proposed project site plan or land use activity, and to assure the public health, safety
and welfare of the existing and future residents and businesses.
SECTION 18.07: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL
A. The following general standards for site plan approval shall be utilized by the Zoning
Administrator and, for site plan reviews under its jurisdiction, by the Planning Commission
as part of the review process.
1. The site plan shall be organized into a document reflecting adequate consideration of
the various design alternatives in accommodating the physical site characteristics and
constraints. The site plan shall further reflect the use of lands in accordance with their
character and adaptability providing for orderly development within the framework
of this Ordinance.
2. The proposed land use and activity will be established in conformance with the
requirements of the existing or proposed zoning district for the site, and shall be
developed in such manner as to maximize the harmony and compatibility with the
surrounding area.
3. Any adverse effects created on-site by the proposed land use or activity shall be
minimized utilizing effective landscaping design and screening techniques.
4. The natural features of the site shall be protected and preserved in their original state
in so far as practical wherever they can be utilized to enhance the development of the
site.
5. The proposed plan shall reflect a proper relationship between existing and proposed
streets and highways within the vicinity. Every structure shall have adequate
pedestrian access to public right-of-way, walkway, or other common use areas.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 9
SECTION 18.07: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL – (Cont.)
6. All buildings and structures within the proposed site plan shall be accessible on all
sides to emergency vehicles and emergency apparatus systems unless otherwise
determined acceptable by the Marquette Township Fire Chief. Emergency vehicle
access shall be available to the site by a public street and provided through the site
for general and emergency vehicular access.
7. To complete the Site Plan Review (SPR) process, and to assure compliance with the
requirements of the Township Life Safety and Pre-Fire Plan Review, the applicant shall
submit three (3) complete sets of the final electrical/mechanical plans for all proposed
on-site buildings, as submitted to the Marquette County Building Codes Department, to
the Township Zoning Administrator for review and comment by the Township Fire
Marshall. A written response, within ten (10) days from the date of submission, from
the Township Fire Marshall to the applicant with copies provided to the Zoning
Administrator and the Planning Commission shall be required prior to final Site Plan
Approval by the Planning Commission.
8. Physical improvements to the site, including vehicular and pedestrian circulation
systems, water and sewer service, storm drainage, electric power, and telephone
utilities, as well as land balance, grading, and erosion control measures shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the individual,
federal, state, county, or local agencies adopted standards and specifications.
9. Adequate measures shall be taken to control and minimize adverse impacts to
neighboring areas due to on-site land uses or activities. Nuisance controls, addressing
problems of noise, vibration, smoke, odor, glare, light, heat, and drifted or fugitive
materials shall be incorporated into the plan as required and in accordance with
Article XVIII, Performance Requirements, and the Schedule of District Regulations and
Minimum Performance Standards for each District.
10. A storm water management plan, which addresses on-site surface runoff problems and
which can be integrated into a general drainage scheme for the area, shall be
provided to assure against any adverse affects to neighboring or off-site property
owners as well as to users of the site. Such plan shall indicate that no water run-off
will occur onto any abutting property, greater than that occurring prior to
development, unless appropriate riparian rights are secured from any such abutter.
For any property located within the Whetstone Creek Drainage District or within a
platted subdivision outside the Badger Creek Drainage District, all on-site water runoff
greater than that occurring prior to development, shall be accommodated on the
site itself.
11. Accessibility (ingress and egress) to the site shall be designed to assure safety and
convenience to the general public. All parking areas located within the proposed site
plan shall be in compliance with the requirements set forth in Article 21, Off-Street
Parking Requirements.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 10
SECTION 18.07: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL – (Cont.)
12. Exterior lighting plans shall anticipate adverse impact to adjacent properties;
therefore, adequate design considerations shall be required to deflect or limit
excessive light and glare which could impede the vision of drivers on adjacent roads
or become a nuisance to adjacent property owners.
13. All development in Marquette Township is strongly encouraged to use green building
and site design techniques. Green building and site design techniques are techniques
that significantly reduce or eliminate the negative impact of building and site
development on the environment and on the building occupants. Green building and
site design and construction practices address sustainable site planning, protection of
water and water efficiency, energy efficiency, conservation of materials and
resources, and indoor environmental quality.
SECTION 18.08: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR/PLANNING COMMISSION
REVIEW
Upon receipt of the complete site plan submission along with the receipt of comments from any
affected federal, state, county, or local approving agencies, the Zoning Administrator or the
Planning Commission for site plan review under its jurisdiction shall proceed with the review of the
site plan documents to determine compliance with the requirements and general intent of the
Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Commission for site plan reviews under its jurisdiction may, at its
option may schedule and conduct a public hearing prior to the final approval of any site plan
required by this Ordinance.
Within forty-five (45) days (unless extended by the Zoning Administrator) of the complete site
plan submission, the Zoning Administrator or, for site plan reviews under its jurisdiction, the
Planning Commission through the Zoning Administrator shall respond to the petitioner with a
written approval, approval with conditions of modification, or disapproval. If approved, the
Zoning Administrator and additionally the Planning Commission Chairperson, for site plan reviews
under its jurisdiction shall sign and date three (3) complete sets of the site plan. One (1)
approved, signed and dated set shall be returned to the petitioner and the other two (2) copies
shall be retained by the Township for record purposes. If the site plan is disapproved, the
reason(s) will be set forth in writing and forwarded to the petitioner by the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 18.09: REVISIONS-MODIFICATIONS-CORRECTIONSEXPANSIONS
TO AN APPROVED SITE PLAN
Once a site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator or, for site plan
reviews under its jurisdiction, by the Planning Commission, it shall become a part of the record of
approval. Subsequent actions relating to the authorized activity shall be consistent with the
approved site plan unless a minor change, conforming to the procedures set forth in this
Ordinance, is mutually agreed upon by the petitioner and the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission. Any major changes requested specifically by the petitioner shall require a
resubmission of the revised site plan in accordance with Section 18.06 of this Article, and will
require payment of an additional review fee. Any expansion of an approved site plan and/or
existing development involving 10,000 sf or more of impervious surface shall require submittal of
a site plan for such expansion. If such expansion involves at least 500 sf, but less then 10,000 sf
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 11
of impervious surface, a plot plan shall instead be submitted, in accordance with Section 18.03 of
this Article.
SECTION 18.10: FINANCIAL GUARANTEES
To ensure compliance with certain provisions of the Zoning Ordinance requiring bufferyards and
landscaping, and with any conditions imposed thereunder by the Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall require that a cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the Township in the
amount of one percent of the 1% of the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project
or aspect thereof for which site plan approval is sought be deposited with the Township Clerk to
insure faithful completion of the affected improvements.”
The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the zoning
compliance permit authorizing the activity or project. The Township may not require the deposit
of the performance guarantee prior to the time when the Township is prepared to issue the
permit. The Township shall establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits in
reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements will be made
as work progresses.
SECTION 18.11: FINAL APPROVAL OF PROJECT
When the site has been substantially developed in compliance with the approved site plan
documents, the petitioner shall request an on-site inspection by the Zoning Administrator. The joint
on-site inspection shall require the review and approval of all the required plan elements to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements as set forth in this
Ordinance. After the joint field inspection has been completed, and the site has been approved
by the Zoning Administrator, a letter of acceptance will be forwarded to the petitioner. If there
are deficiencies on the site and the improvements are not in compliance with the approved site
plan documents, a similar letter setting forth the reasons for such denial shall be sent to the
petitioner. Until such time as the stated deficiencies are corrected, an official letter of acceptance
will not be authorized.
SECTION 18.12: TIME LIMIT TO IMPLEMENT APPROVED SITE PLAN
The approved site plan shall be implemented and all required improvements completed no later
than two (2) years after the date of initial approval. The Zoning Administrator or, for site plan
reviews under its jurisdiction, the Planning Commission, at its option, may authorize a one (1) year
extension to the initial approval if extenuating circumstances justify an extension of time.
SECTION 18.13: ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION AND APPEALS
An individual aggrieved by an action of the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission in the
approval, or denial of a site plan submission may appeal any interpretations of this Ordinance to
the Township Zoning Board of Appeals for their review and final determination. The factual basis
for the appeal must be specific, in writing and filed with the Township Clerk within seven (7) days
after the date of the decision of the Planning Commission. An appeal shall stay action on the
issuance of any permit pursuant to an approved site plan.
ARTICLE 18 – SITE PLAN REVIEW
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 18 Page 12
SECTION 18.14: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS PROCEDURE
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the record of action taken on the final site plan and
shall determine whether the record supports the action taken. No new evidence shall be
presented. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall approve the final site plan if the requirements of this Section and
other applicable ordinance requirements are met. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make
written findings in support of its opinion on the appeal.
SECTION 18.15: AS-BUILT SITE PLAN
Upon completion of the installation of required improvements as shown on the approved site plan,
the property owner shall submit to the Zoning Administrator one (1) reproducible copy of an “asbuilt”
site plan, certified by a licensed professional as noted in Section 18.06, Required
Information, Item 30, at least ten (10) days prior to the anticipated occupancy of any building.
SECTION 18.16: LAND CLEARING
Grading, clearing, cutting and filling, excavating or tree removal associated with site
development shall be consistent with an approved site plan pursuant to Article 18, Site Plan
Review, Section 18.08: Zoning Administrator/Planning Commission Review, including any required
bufferyards and landscaping that are part of an approved site plan. Such activity shall not
proceed without first obtaining any necessary soil erosion and sedimentation control permits,
wetland permits or floodplain permits, as applicable.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 19
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
19.01: PURPOSE 3
19.02: DEFINITIONS 3
19.03: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 3
A. Estimating Site Adequacy (All Developments Requiring a Site Plan) 4
B. Estimating Site Adequacy (5+ Unit Multi-Family Dwellings) 5
19.04: BUFFERYARDS 6
A. Purpose and Intent 6
B. Preservation of Existing Woodlands and Vegetative Cover 6
C. Location of Bufferyards 7
D. Basic Elements of Bufferyard Composition 8
E. Procedure to Identify Required Bufferyard Type 8
TABLE I: Proposed Land Use Intensity vs. Adjacent Land Use 9
TABLE II: Zoning of adjacent vacant land vs. Proposed Lane Use 9
F. Required Bufferyard Type and Alternative Option 10
G. TABLE III: Required Bufferyard Type Alternative Options A thru F 11
H. Typical Screening Options 13
I. Suggested Trees, Plant Material and Structure Types 13
J. Transitional Land Use Intensity (LUI) Gradient Schematic 16
K. Use 17
L. Increase of Land Use Intensity 17
M. Ownership Options 17
N. Responsibility 17
O. Excess Bufferyard 17
P. Contractual Reduction 17
Q. Maintenance 18
R. Additional On-Site Open Space 18
19.05: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE 19
A. Use 19
B. Perpetuation of Required Common Open Space 20
19.06: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY AND
TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS 21
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 2
SECTION TITLE PAGE
19.07: SPECIAL HOUSING TYPE DEFINITIONS 21
A. Lot Line House 21
B. Twin House 21
19.08: TWO-FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS 22
19.09: INSTITUTIONAL (PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC) USES OR
STRUCTURES ALLOWABLE IN RURAL RESIDENTIAL AND
URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 23
19.10: OFFICE, PUBLIC SERVICE, COMMERCIAL AND
ENTERTAINMENT AND INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES OR USES 23
19.11: STANDARDS OF OPERATION 24
19.12: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 25
A. Introduction 25
19.13: SCENIC RESIDENTIAL (SR) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 26
19.14: RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RR) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 27
19.15: URBAN RESIDENTIAL (UR) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 28
19.16: DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 30
19.17: GENERAL BUSINESS (GB) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 33
19.18: SEGREGATED BUSINESS (SB) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 35
19.19: RESOURCE PRODUCTION (RP) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 36
19.20 FOREST RECREATION (FR) DISTRICT NOMOGRAPH 38
19.21 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND 40
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
19.22 OUTDOOR LIGHTING 41
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 3
ARTICLE 19: PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 19.01: PURPOSE
Traditionally, zoning ordinances have been designed to minimize land use conflicts by attempting
to group compatible land uses together. These land use groups are then relegated to districts
which have been pre-arranged into patterns intended to minimize the differences between
adjacent districts. The districting system has not always worked efficiently in practice because
when zoning ordinances are formulated, it is impossible to foresee all future development
patterns. The desires of property owners also often do not conform to district regulations and
conflicts invariably arise. Therefore, the purpose of this Article is to not only specify the schedule
of district regulations but, also to apply minimum performance standards applicable for each
individual situation. Performance requirements are intended to minimize the possible adverse
impacts of new developments on adjacent land uses. The requirements will vary depending on a
number of factors including the zoning district in which the parcel is located, the natural physical
limitations of the site, the type and intensity of the proposed land use, the intensity of existing
adjacent land use, the zoning district of adjacent land, the existing land use and/or the zoning
district across the street and the size of the parcels.
SECTION 19.02: DEFINITIONS
Terms used in the text and tables of this Article are defined in Article II, Definitions.
SECTION 19.03: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards for each of the eight (8))
specific zoning districts are designated on the nomographs in Sections 19.13 through 19.21, of
this Article, and contain the minimum standards applicable to the various uses permitted within
each of the zoning districts. The nomographs summarize many requirements governing allowable
land uses within each zoning district. Different zoning districts provide varying requirements
depending upon the type of land use proposed.
The following formulas are to be utilized to assist the developer in estimating site adequacy for
proposed development requiring a site plan.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 4
SECTION 19.03: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS – (Cont.)
A. ESTIMATING SITE ADEQUACY (ALL DEVELOPMENTS REQUIRING A SITE PLAN; FOR
5+ UNIT MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING DEVELOPMENT, See Sub-Section B., First)
1. Total site area; (=)__________sq. ft.;
2. Less the larger of any required bufferyards or setback areas (-)__________sq. ft.;
(exclude areas occupied by roadways) and less any required parking lot planting
strips/open space (see Article 19, Sections 19.04 & 19.05 and Article 21, Section
21.06 A. 9 & 10);
3. Less required or planned parking area*, whichever is (-)__________sq. ft.;
greater;
4. Less access roadways and aisles**; (-)__________sq. ft.;
5. Less required or planned loading area***, whichever is (-)__________sq. ft.;
greater;
6. Sub-total (lines 3 through 5) (=)__________sq. ft.;
* Number of parking spaces x 180 sf (see Article 21, Section 21.04 for Required
Number of Parking Spaces).
** Number of parking spaces x 320 sf.
*** Number of loading spaces x 400 sf (see Article 21, Section 21.08 for Required
Number of Loading Spaces).
7. Required Open Space (Line 6 x applicable Open Space Ratio (=)__________sq. ft.;
from Article 19, Section 19.13 through 19.19 x line 6);
8. Any additional open space required (If Line 7 is greater than (-)__________sq. ft.;
(line 2, additional open space is required, estimated by entering the difference
between line 7 and line 2);
NOTE: If line 7 is less than line 2, no additional open space is required.
9. Any other miscellaneous site area, excluding actual (-)__________sq. ft.;
building site;
10. Total site area exclusive of building site(s) (=)__________sq. ft.;
(sum of lines 2, 6, 8 and 9);
11. Remainder of site available for building site(s) (=)__________sq. ft.;
(line 1 minus line 10);
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 5
SECTION 19.03: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS – (Cont.)
12. Planned gross floor area of proposed building(s); (=)__________sq. ft.;
13. Portion of gross floor area planned for ground floor; (=)__________sq. ft.;
14. Estimated site adequacy:
a. Site is estimated to be adequate if line 13 is less than line 11 ______sq. ft.;
b. Site is estimated to be inadequate if line 13 is greater than ______sq. ft.;
line 11. (check here);
NOTE: If line 14 b is checked, (a) a different, larger site is needed, or (b) the existing site needs
to be expanded if feasible, or (c) the building size needs to be reduced or, alternatively,
the ground floor area has to be reduced where a 2+ story building is planned or
feasible to be planned.
B. ESTIMATING SITE ADEQUACY (5+ UNIT MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS)
1. Total lot area (=)__________sq. ft.;
2. Preliminary required lot area:
a. Required lot area for first three to four units 16,000 sq. ft.;
b. Added lot area required for additional dwelling units:
(1) 4,000 sq. ft./3 BR unit (#3 BR units x 4,000 sf)=; (+)________sq. ft.;
(2) 3,200 sq. ft./2 BR unit (#2 BR units x 3,200 sf)=; (+)________sq. ft.;
(3) 2,400 sq. ft./1 BR unit (#1 BR units x 2,400 sf)=; (+)________sq. ft.;
(4) 1,600 sq. ft./studio or eff. Unit (+)________sq. ft.;
(# studio/eff. units x 1,600 sf)=;
c. Total (sum of lines 2a through 2b.4.) (=)__________sq. ft.;
3. Gross Site Area (=)_________sq. ft.;
(Enter line 1 here, and on line A.1. If larger than line 2.c., above, proceed with
balance of estimating procedure under Sub-section A).
NOTE: If line 1 is less than line 2.c., the planned number and/or mix of dwelling units is not
allowable on this site. Either the size of the development has to be reduced, the site
enlarged, or a different, larger site sought.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 6
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
A Bufferyard is a designated strip of land, unit of yard or open area of plantings
surrounding a land use which screens or blocks vision, noise pollutants, or other negative
by-products associated with that use. In the case of very intense land uses abutting
considerably less intense uses, the addition of structural components such as berms, fences,
or walls may also be a part of a Required Bufferyard. Bufferyards provide visual
barriers which block out the glare of lights, signs, and other visual nuisances, and in
addition, natural or planted Bufferyards function in two ways to block noise. Distance and
plant material reduce the intensity of noise, and wooded areas introduce the background
sounds of trees, wind, birds, and while these background noises do not actually reduce
noise, they make it less noticeable and therefore less annoying. Bufferyards shield the
source of the noise from view, which tends to distract attention from the nuisance and
thereby minimizes its perceived impact. They may also serve as a protective or safety
barrier insofar as they block physical passage. Heavily planted Bufferyards also reduce
air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter however, the ultimate purpose of the Bufferyard is to
mitigate any potentially negative impact between Adjacent Parcels which differ in Land
Use Intensity (LUI).
1) Bufferyards and Land Use Intensity (LUI)
Article 15: Principal Uses Permitted in Districts, classifies all land uses permitted
within a District according to their type and degree of Land Use Intensity (LUI), or
impact which they may impose on the Adjacent land use. Accordingly, all land use
categories are assigned a Land Use Intensity (LUI) Number, ranging from I - VI.
Greater Land Use Intensities are reflected by the higher (LUI) Numbers, and are
typically the result of increased on-site activities due to additional vehicular
and/or pedestrian traffic, along with the impact of associated noise, congestion,
glare, larger buildings and increased storm water run-off. While the specific
Zoning District controls whether a land use is permitted to locate within that District,
the Land Use Intensity (LUI) Number, is the basis for determining the type and
extent of the Required Bufferyard. Therefore, by utilizing a combination of
distance/space, natural features, landscape manipulation, berms, fences, or walls,
the Required Bufferyard is designed to create the necessary screening between
varying Land Use Intensities (LUI), and to establish a transitional, land use intensitygradient
between Existing, Altered, Expanded, Proposed, or Vacant Land Uses on
Adjacent parcels.
B. PRESERVATION OF EXISTING WOODLANDS AND VEGETATIVE COVER
Marquette Township has been endowed with beautiful woodlands and forests along with
native and naturalized vegetative cover, therefore, it is strongly recommended and
encouraged that these natural areas be preserved, and any pre-construction, on-site
clearing and land balance be very limited in scope or completely discouraged until a
detailed inventory of on-site natural features, including site topography, can first be
identified.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 7
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
In many instances, natural woodlands and existing vegetative cover is very desirable to
retain as they are already effectively buffering adjacent areas, and being native to the
area, can be expected to thrive with little or low-maintenance if left in their natural state.
Preservation of the existing tree and plant materials may be utilized to fulfill a part or all
of the Bufferyard requirements as outlined in this Section.
1) Tree Preservation
Approximately 90-95% of tree root systems are in the top 3 feet of soil with more
than 50% within the top foot. Root zones, typically extend 2 to 3 times the
distance from the tree trunk to the tips of the branches, and this area should also
be protected from any on-site pre-construction activities. Maintaining positive
drainage away from existing trees and protecting roots from drainage and
compaction are also essential in preserving existing trees
C. LOCATION OF BUFFERYARDS
Bufferyards, create screening between differing land use intensities adjacent with each
other, and generally are to be located along the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel and
extend to the lot or parcel boundary line. Bufferyards shall not extend into, nor be
located on any part of an existing or future proposed road or dedicated public or private
street Right-of-Way. It is recognized however, that the specific Bufferyards, as outlined
within this Section may not always “fit” the variety of on-site scenarios which may exist,
due to variations in terrain along with site specific limitations. Utilization of a Natural
Bufferyard or by choosing one or a combination of the several Options A-F as shown in
Table III, provides the flexibility to make cost tradeoffs in deciding which Option is best.
Depending on the size of the parcel, flexibility may become extremely relevant. A narrow
Bufferyard can impose a considerable developmental constraint on a small site however,
on a large parcel, very little buildable land will be lost. The Zoning Administrator and/or
the Planning Commission are therefore, authorized to address unforeseen and unique onsite
situations and to approve the appropriate Bufferyard Required in accordance with
the spirit and intent of this ordinance. Fences, berms, retaining walls, plantings, and/or
hedges shall be located on the property burdened with the Bufferyard requirement, unless
there is a written agreement to the contrary, with the adjacent land owner(s), and
recorded in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 19.05, F. All Required
Bufferyards shall be located as close as possible to the property line(s) consistent with
future maintenance requirements. When mixed, on-site, Land Use Intensities (LUI) are
proposed, as in a Planned Unit Development (PUD), a line separating the different Land
Use Intensities (LUI) shall be identified on the site plan and the Required Bufferyards shall
be provided as detailed in this Section. When a Bufferyard is required under this Section
as well as in Section 21.06, G-2a, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 8
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
D. BASIC ELEMENTS OF BUFFERYARD COMPOSITION
The following four (4) Basic Elements of Bufferyard Composition are manipulated through
design to create the Required Bufferyard screening and to establish the transitional, land
use intensity-gradient between Land Use Intensities (LUI) for existing, altered, expanded,
proposed, or vacant land uses on adjacent parcels.
1) Distance/Space
2) Plant Material Type
3) Plant Material Density
4) Structural Elements or Land Forms
E. PROCEDURE TO IDENTIFY REQUIRED BUFFERYARD TYPE
The following procedures apply to all of Proposed, Altered and/or Expanded land
uses:
1) To IDENTIFY the Type of Bufferyard required between AN EXISTING LAND USE
ADJACENT WITH A PROPOSED LAND USE, follow this procedure:
a) IDENTIFY The Land Use Intensity (LUI) Number of the Proposed Land Use:
Refer to Use -vs- District Nomograph, Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in
Districts, Section 15.05, Table 15;
b) IDENTIFY The Land Use Intensity (LUI) Number of the Existing Land Use
Adjacent with the Proposed Land Use by referring to the above referenced
a), Use -vs- District Nomograph in Table 15, Section 15.05;
c) IDENTIFY the Type of Bufferyard required Along the Boundaries of the
Proposed Land Use by referring to the nomograph in Table I of this Section;
Proposed Land Use Intensity (LUI) No. -vs- Adjacent Land - Existing Land Use
Intensity (LUI).
2) To IDENTIFY the Type of Bufferyard required between a PROPOSED LAND USE AND
ADJACENT VACANT LAND, follow this procedure:
a) IDENTIFY The Zoning District of the Proposed Land Use and the
Adjacent Vacant Land by referring to the zoning map and the nomograph in
Table II of this Section; Zoning District of Adjacent Vacant Land -vs- Proposed
Land Use Intensity (LUI) No.
b) IDENTIFY the Land Use Intensity (LUI) Number of the Proposed Land Use in the
first column under Proposed LUI No.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 9
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
c) IDENTIFY the Required Bufferyard Type located at the intersection of the
Zoning District of Adjacent Vacant Land with the Proposed Land Use Intensity
(LUI) Number in the first column.
Table 1
PROPOSED LAND USE INTENSITY (LUI) NO.
-VSADJACENT
LAND – EXISTING LAND USE INTENSITY
(LUI)
PROPOSED
LUI NO.
ADJACENT LAND – EXISTING LAND USE
INTENSITY (LUI)
I II III IV V VI
I * A/B C D E E
II A/B */B A/B C D E
III C A/B */A A/B C D
IV D C A/B */A A/B C
V E D C A/B */A A/B
VI F E D C A/B */A
Table 2
ZONING DISTRICT OF ADJACENT VACANT LAND
-VSPROPOSED
LAND USE INTENSITY (LUI) NO.
PROPOSED
LUI NO.
ZONING DISTRICT OF ADJACENT VACANT
LAND
SR RR UR DD GB SB RP FR
I */A */A A/D C/D E F */A */A
II */A A */A C/D D E */A */A
III C C C B/C C D C C
IV D D D A/B B B D D
V E E E */A A A E E
VI F F F C B */A F F
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 10
*No Bufferyard required.: Where two (2) Bufferyards are noted, i.e. A/B or */A, the Zoning
Administrator and/or the Planning Commission shall make the final determination regarding
Required Bufferyards. In instances where an Existing, Proposed, Altered, or Expanded,
Commercial or Industrial Land Use Intensity (LUI) will have frontage on a County Primary or Local
Road, if the area across the adjacent Right-of-Way is residentially zoned, the Required
Bufferyard option shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning
Commission.
F. REQUIRED BUFFERYARD TYPE AND ALTERNATE OPTION
For each type of Required Bufferyard, several Configuration Options are illustrated in
Table III, Required Bufferyard Type, Alternate Options A thru F, and all of the several
options are designed to function as impact mitigators. At the option of the developer, an
alternate approach to fulfill the Bufferyard requirements may be satisfied by compliance
with either Items 1 or 2 of the following requirements:
1. The creation of any one or a combination of the illustrated Required Bufferyard
Type Options, A thru F as outlined in Table III.
2. By preservation of Natural Bufferyards, utilizing the existing on-site, un-disturbed
natural features, topography, woodlands, and native vegetative cover, with
approval contingent upon fulfillment of the following requirements:
a) All areas to be designated as Natural Bufferyards shall be appropriately
located as outlined in Section 19.04 C, of this Article and shall provide the
required width and contain adequate density for screening purposes.
b) Assurance by the developer that adequate screening of any negative
impacts will be mitigated by utilizing the Natural Bufferyard(s).
c) Written approval for any Natural Bufferyard(s) shall be granted by the
Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning Commission and secured by the
developer as a part of the requirements for Site Plan Review (SPR) as
outlined in Article XVII.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 11
G. TABLE III: REQUIRED BUFFERYARD TYPE ALTERNATE OPTIONS A THRU F
Note: Required Bufferyards, A thru F, are shown in terms of the width of Bufferyard and
number of plant units required per one hundred (100) linear feet of Bufferyard.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 12
Note:
The total Required Bufferyard shall be located on the burdened property unless there is a written
agreement, to the contrary with the adjacent land owner(s) and recorded in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Section 19.04 P., Contractual Reduction.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 13
H. TYPICAL SCREENING OPTIONS
Note
The total Required Bufferyard shall be located on the burdened property unless there is a written
agreement, to the contrary with the adjacent land owner(s) and recorded in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Section 19.04 P., Contractual Reduction.
I. SUGGESTED TREES, PLANT MATERIAL AND STRUCTURE TYPES
1. Deciduous trees, (eight to ten feet (8' - 10') high and one and one-half (1 - ½")
caliper minimum.
2. Evergreen trees four to five feet (4' - 5') high.
3. Shrubs three to four feet (3' - 4') high and branched minimum.
4. Related considerations:
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 14
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
a) Hardy Trees for Zones 2 & 3
Small to Medium (15' to 35') Large (35' to 60')
Hedge Maple Sugar Maple varieties
Amur Maple Red Maple varieties
Black Cherry Norway Maple varieties
Dolgo Crabapple Amur Cork Tree
Siberian Crabapple American Yellowwood
Cockspur Hawthorn Bicolor Oak
Blackhaw Viburnum Swamp White Oak
Nannyberry Viburnum Little-Leaf Linden
Russian Olive Ohio Buckeye
Evergreen Trees (Large)
American Arbor-vitae White Pine
Canadian Hemlock Black Hills Spruce
Eastern Red Cedar Colorado Green Spruce
European Larch Englemans Spruce
Scotch Pine Norway Spruce
b) Marginal Trees - Zone 4
Amur Cork Tree Austrian Pine
Ginkgo Red Pine
River Birch White Fir
Red Oak Sweetgum
Pin Oak Tulip Tree
c) Hardy Shrubs - Zone 2 & 3
Arrowwood Viburnum Common Juniper
Wayfaring Tree Creeping Juniper
Nannyberry Bush Cinquefoil
European Cranberry Canada Yew
American Cranberry Amur Privet
Burning Bush Tatarian Honeysuckle
Redosier Dogwood Mugo Pine
Siberian Dogwood American Elder
Fragrant Sumac Winterberry
Staghorm Sumac
d) Invasive Plants & Plants Prohibited
Box Elder Ash (all varieties)
Tree of Heaven Poplars
Silver Maple Aspen
Jack Pine Horse Chestnut
American Elm Honeysuckle
Catalpa Multiflora Rose
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 15
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
e) Wetland Invasive Plants Prohibited
Phragmites
Purple Loosestrife
f) Suggested Salt Tolerant Plants
1) Good Salt Tolerance 2) Moderate Salt Tolerance
Honerlocust Arborvitae
Russian Olive Juniper Species
Hawthorn Species Eastern Red Cedar
Red Oak Siberian Crabapple
Austrian Pine Poplar Species
Norway Maple Scotch Pine
Sweetgum White Fir
Mugho Pine Red Pine
Redosier Dogwood Tatarian Honeysuckle
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 16
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
J. TRANSITIONAL LAND USE INTENSITY (LUI) GRADIENT SCHEMATIC
Note
The total Required Bufferyard shall be located on the burdened property unless there is a written
agreement, to the contrary with the adjacent land owner(s) and recorded in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Section 19.04, P. Contractual Reduction.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 17
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
K. USE
To provide flexibility, a larger Bufferyard may be used for passive recreation and may
contain pedestrian, bike, or equestrian trails, provided however, that no plant material is
eliminated, the total width of the Required Bufferyard is maintained, and all other
requirements of this Ordinance are accommodated. The following are examples of
recreational uses which shall not be permitted within Bufferyards:
1) Play Fields
2) Ski Hills
3) Stables
4) Swimming Pools
5) Tennis Courts
6) Trails for Motorized Vehicles
7) Ice Skating Rinks
L. INCREASE OF LAND USE INTENSITY
If an Existing Land Use is Altered or Expanded, increasing the intensity from the Existing
Land Use Intensity (LUI) Number to a Higher LUI Number, the Zoning Administrator and/or
the Planning Commission, during Site Plan Review (SPR) and/or the zoning compliance
review process, shall determine if additional Bufferyard is required and of what type and
to what extent.
M. OWNERSHIP OPTIONS
Required Bufferyards may remain in the ownership of the original developer, ownership
may be specified within the deed restrictions and subsequently conveyed, or ownership
may be transferred to any consenting grantees, such as adjacent landowners, a park
authority, forest preserve district or similar entity, the Charter Township of Marquette, or
an open-space or conservation group, provided that any such conveyance shall guarantee
the protection and continued maintenance of the Required Bufferyards.
N. RESPONSIBILITY
When a Proposed Land Use is the First to develop on a Vacant Parcel, the owner of the
Proposed Land Use shall provide all necessary Bufferyard(s) in accordance with the
requirements set forth in this ordinance and as specified in Table II, Adjacent Vacant Land -
vs- Existing Zoning District. Since the adjacent vacant land may not be developed for some
time after the First Land Use Intensity (LUI) is established, this provision is intended to
address the uncertainty regarding the specific responsibility for Bufferyards which would
ultimately be required. (See also Item P., Contractual Reduction).
O. EXCESS BUFFERYARD
If the Required Bufferyard to be located between the Proposed Land Use Intensity (LUI)
and the Adjacent Vacant Land is Greater than that required between the Proposed Land
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 18
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
Use Intensity (LUI) and the subsequent Land Use Intensity (LUI) of the adjacent vacant land,
owners may pursue one of the following options:
1. The subsequent Land Use Intensity (LUI), proposed on the Adjacent Vacant Land may
provide one-half (½) of the Bufferyard required by this Section. The First Proposed
Land Use Intensity (LUI), may then expand its use into the original Bufferyard,
provided that the resulting, total Bufferyard Required, and located between the
two Land Use Intensities (LUI), also meets the requirements of this Section.
2. The owner initiating the First Proposed Land Use may enter into agreement with the
Adjacent Landowner(s) to utilize the existing Bufferyard(s) to accommodate the
requirements for Bufferyard Type for both Land Uses. (See also Item P., Contractual
Reduction).
P. CONTRACTUAL REDUCTION
When an Existing Land Use is located Adjacent with Vacant Land, the owners of the
affected properties may submit a contractual agreement whereby the Required
Bufferyard(s) for the Existing Land Use is reduced or waived, provided that the owner of
the subsequent Proposed Land Use, to be located on the Vacant Land sometime into the
future, agrees to develop at no greater Land Use Intensity (LUI) than a specified Land Use
Intensity (LUI) Number. If additional Bufferyard is required in the future, it shall be
provided on the Adjacent Vacant Land by the existing or future owners of such land, and
shall not be less than what was reduced or waived under the contractual agreement. The
contractual agreement is intended to provide a procedural method which avoids the
possibility of reserving larger than Required Bufferyards in areas where the owners of
Adjacent Vacant Land have proposed plans for the ultimate use of their land, which do not
include a Land Use Intensity (LUI) requiring a larger Bufferyard. The contract agreement
shall be recorded with the Marquette County Register of Deeds Office and a copy of the
recorded document shall be filed with the Township Zoning Administrator.
Q. MAINTENANCE
In the event that the owner of a Required Bufferyard fails to maintain the Required
Bufferyard in accordance with the standards of this ordinance, the Charter Township of
Marquette, after reasonable notice and demand that the deficiencies be corrected in
accordance with the approved site plan or other Township directives, may enter upon the
Bufferyard and/or Open Space and perform the necessary maintenance. The cost of such
maintenance shall be charged directly to the owner(s) of the Bufferyard and/or open
space. Dead or damaged planting(s) shall be replaced with acceptable materials as soon
as possible barring weather related conditions.
R. ADDITIONAL ON-SITE OPEN SPACE
The more stringent of the Bufferyard requirements for Parking Lot Screening or Open
Space Requirements as noted within Article XX - Off-Street Parking Requirements, Section
20.06: Design Standards, of this ordinance shall apply. Additional On-Site Open Space
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 19
SECTION 19.04: BUFFERYARDS – (Cont.)
shall be required, if application of any Required Open Space Ratio results in a greater
amount of Open Space than that required by the more stringent of Bufferyard
requirements for Parking Lot Planting Strips or Open Space requirements.
SECTION 19.05: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
A. USE
Required open space, including any required bufferyard and parking lot open spaces,
may be used as either a site amenity, or for recreation, agriculture, resource protection
and other purposes specified in this section. All developments which are required by this
Ordinance to provide open space shall meet the following requirements:
1. Land Designated as Open Space: Shall be maintained as open space and may not be
separately sold, subdivided, or developed except as provided by this Ordinance.
2. Required Open Space: Shall be designated on the site plan or plot plan and shall:
a. Indicate the location of all areas to be reserved as open space. The specific
design of open space areas shall be sensitive to the physical constraints and
design characteristics of the site.
b. Designate the type of open space which will be provided.
c. Specify the manner in which the open space shall be perpetuated, maintained, and
administered.
3. Types of Open Space: Which may be provided to satisfy the requirements of this
Ordinance, together with continued maintenance required for each type, are as
follows:
a. Natural Areas: Are areas of undisturbed vegetation or areas replanted with
vegetation after construction. Woodlands, woodland swamps, prairies, and
wetlands are specific types of natural areas. Required maintenance shall include
removal of litter, dead tree and plant materials, and brush. Natural watercourses
are to be maintained as free-flowing streams devoid of debris. Stream channels
shall be maintained so as not to alter floodplain levels.
b. Agricultural Uses: No specific maintenance is required for agricultural uses.
c. Garden Plots: Are the division of open space into plots for cultivation as gardens
by residents. Required maintenance shall include weeding, fallowing, and/or
tilling.
d. Common Open Space: Is land within or related to a development, not individually
owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 20
SECTION 19.05: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE – (Cont.)
common use or enjoyment of the residents of a development and may include such
complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate.
e. Greenways: Are linear green belts linking residential areas with other open
space areas. Greenways may contain bicycle, bridle, or footpaths. Connecting
greenways between residences and recreational areas are encouraged.
Required maintenance shall include a minimum removal and avoidance of
hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions.
f. Lawns and Planting Areas: Consist of grass with or without trees, and shrubs and
other low to medium height plantings. Required maintenance shall include
mowing.
4. Impervious Surfaces: In required open space areas shall be limited and supplemental.
In Rural Residential Districts, impervious surfaces in common open space areas shall be
limited to pedestrian, bicycle, cross-country skiing and snowshoe trails or paths.
5. The Minimum Dimensions: For open space shall be ten (10) feet, and the minimum
areas shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
6. Common Open Space Land: Shall be freely accessible to all residents of a
development with the exception that agricultural land uses may restrict access. This
exception applies only to land actively used for agricultural purposes.
B. PERPETUATION OF REQUIRED COMMON OPEN SPACE
Open space areas shall be reserved and maintained so that their use and enjoyment as
open space shall not be diminished or destroyed. Open space areas may be owned,
preserved, and maintained as required by this Section utilizing the following vehicles or
combinations thereof to accommodate the requirements of this Ordinance.
1. Dedication of open space to the Charter Township of Marquette or an appropriate
public agency, provided that the Township or a public agency is willing to accept the
dedication.
2. Common ownership of the open space by a homeowner’s association which assumes
full responsibility for its maintenance.
3. Dedication of development rights of open space may be made to an appropriate
public agency with ownership remaining with the developer or homeowner’s
association. Maintenance responsibility shall remain with the property owner.
4. Deed restricted private ownership which shall prevent development and/or subsequent
subdivision of the open space land and provide for the maintenance responsibility.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 21
SECTION 19.05: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE – (Cont.)
5. In the event that the owner of the required open space fails to maintain the open
space areas in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance, the Charter Township
of Marquette, shall, after reasonable notice and demand that deficiency of
maintenance be corrected in accordance with the site plan, enter upon the open space
and perform necessary maintenance. The cost of such maintenance shall be charged
directly to the owners of the open space.
SECTION 19.06: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DETACHED SINGLEFAMILY
AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
Every detached single and two-family dwelling, excluding seasonal dwellings in the UR, SR, RR &
RP districts, shall have a floor area of not less than 1,000 and 1,600 square feet respectively,
exclusive of unfinished basements, garages, porches and breezeways. A single-family dwelling,
including mobile homes and manufactured housing, shall have a minimum exterior
breadth/caliper/width of twenty (20) feet in the RR, SR, UR and DD districts (This is to imply that
the minimum dimension between any two opposing exterior walls, measured at any point on the
horizontal, shall be at least twenty (20) feet). Breezeways, garages, porches, and other
appurtenances shall not be considered part of the required 20 feet. (The minimum floor area and
minimum exterior breadth/caliper/width dimensions provided in Section19.06, shall not apply to Tiny
Home(s), as defined in Article 2.)
SECTION 19.07: SPECIAL HOUSING TYPE DEFINITIONS
A. LOT LINE HOUSE
A dwelling type consisting of a detached single family residence, located on an individual
lot. The dwelling may be situated on a side lot line and a minimum five (5) foot wide
maintenance easement shall be provided for the property owner. Exterior windows are
prohibited for that portion of the structure which abuts the lot line. The side yard
requirements apply to the remaining undeveloped side lot area. Placement of the garage
or other non-living space abutting the side lot line is encouraged.
B. TWIN HOUSE
A dwelling type consisting of an attached single family residence located on an individual
lot. The dwelling is attached to another single family dwelling at a side lot line through
the use of one (1) or more of the following alternatives.
1. A common party wall through the garage portion of adjacent structure.
2. An architectural wall detail which does not form interior room space between any two
(2) units.
3. A common party wall that meets all fire resistance and sound transmission
requirements of the building codes. The side yard requirement applies to the
remaining undeveloped side lot area. The attached dwellings shall by typified insofar
as possible by characteristics commonly associated with single family dwellings in the
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 22
Township, including the expression of individuality of each dwelling unit, privacy, and
a sense of spaciousness.
SECTION 19.08: TWO-FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS
In addition to meeting the other performance criteria for two-family or multi-family uses in a
specific zoning district, the following standards shall also apply:
A. Multiple family buildings designed, erected, or used for ten (10) or more families shall not
be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any Rural Residential Zoning District Boundary. If
the Planning Commission determines that the adjoining property will eventually assume
similar development, they may waive the fifty (50) foot minimum setback requirements.
B. A single building or connected buildings shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet in any
zoned district except the Development District with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator. All buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle access
as specified in Article 21, Section 21.07.
C. The distance of separation between grouped buildings shall be minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet.
D. Entrances to a multiple family structure shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25)
feet from any street intersection.
E. The provision of required open space area shall be based upon the Schedule of District
Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards, Section 19.13 through 19.19, of this
Article. Fifty (50) percent of the common open space area as defined in Section 19.06,
Required Open Space, Item A, 3d, shall include such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate and shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator or, where allowable as a special use, by the Planning Commission.
F. A two-family dwelling building shall have a minimum exterior breadth/caliper/width of
twenty (20) feet in any district in which such structures are permitted (This is to imply that
the minimum dimension between any two opposing exterior walls, measured at any point
on the horizontal, shall be at least twenty (20) feet). Breezeways, garages, porches, and
other appurtenances shall not be considered part of the required 20 feet.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 23
SECTION 19.09: INSTITUTIONAL (PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC) USES OR
STRUCTURES ALLOWABLE IN RURAL RESIDENTIAL AND URBAN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A. Institutional uses (schools, public buildings and similar non-residential uses, etc.) allowable
in residential districts may have an adverse effect on residential properties if not properly
located and designed. Therefore, the following performance standards shall be
accommodated prior to the development of Institutional (public or quasi-public) Land Uses
or structures in Rural Residential and Urban Residential Districts:
1. Hazardous areas, including public utility substations, must be adequately fenced and
screened to avoid accidents and obscure and buffer the proposed use.
2. All allowable institutional land uses shall front on a state trunkline or county primary
road (arterial or collector) unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator, or
for uses under its jurisdiction, by the Planning Commission.
3. Primary vehicular access shall be from a state trunkline or county primary road, to
eliminate or minimize the impact of traffic generated by the institutional use upon the
residential area.
4. Proposed institutional sites shall be chosen which offer natural or man-made barriers
that could lessen the effect of the intrusion of an institutional use into an established
residential area.
5. Institutional uses shall not be located so as to cause costly public improvements.
6. Institutional structures shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to adjacent
property lines of lots located in Rural Residential or Urban Residential districts.
SECTION 19.10: OFFICE, PUBLIC SERVICE, COMMERCIAL AND ENTERTAINMENT AND
INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES OR USES
A. In addition to accommodating the performance criteria for office, public service,
commercial and entertainment and industrial structures or uses, the following standards
shall be fulfilled prior to development of such uses:
1. Where one (1) or more lot lines abut an existing legally conforming single family
residential use, an elevation drawing of the proposed structure shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission for review and approval. The Planning Commission may
require that office and/or commercial structures be constructed with a residential
facade and be designed at a residential scale (mass) and character. The proposed
structure shall not be closer to such lot line(s) than the proposed building height, as
measured in feet.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 24
SECTION 19.11: STANDARDS OF OPERATION
A. In addition to meeting the other performance criteria for each type of land use, the
following standards of operation shall also be accommodated:
1. Vibration. All machinery shall be so mounted and operated as to prevent transmission
of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of 0.003 of one (1) inch, as measured
at the property line.
2. Odor. The emission of noxious odors or matter in quantities that are readily
detectable at any point along lot lines when diluted in the ratio of one (1) volume of
odorous air to four (4) or more volumes of clean air so as to produce a public nuisance
or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited.
3. Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is injurious, destructive, or explosive
shall be unlawful and shall be abated.
4. Glare and Heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed
within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct
view from any point along the lot line, except during the period of construction of the
facilities to be used and occupied.
5. Light. Exterior lighting shall be installed so that the surface of the source of light shall
reflect light away from any residential use. No more than one (1) foot-candle power
of light shall cross a lot line five (5) feet above the ground in a Rural Residential or
Urban Residential district.
6. Drifted and Blown Materials. The drifting or airborne transmission to areas beyond the
lot line of dust, particles, or debris from any open stockpile shall be unlawful and shall
be abated.
7. Sewage Wastes. All sewage discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to the
Marquette Township Ordinance for Wastewater and Wastewater Collection as
amended, and Department of Natural Resources Standards and Limitations or criteria
set forth therein.
8. Outdoor Storage. The open storage of any viewable equipment, vehicles and all
viewable materials including wastes, shall be screened from public view, from public
streets and from adjoining non-forested properties by an enclosure consisting of a wall
or an obscuring fence of a height of not less than six (6) feet to obscure stored
materials.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 25
SECTION 19.12: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
A. INTRODUCTION.
The following tables set forth the various requirements applicable to each of the listed
generalized land use categories, grouped by their respective land use intensities (L.U.I.’s I
through VI). See Section 15.04, Table 15, for a detailed listing of specified principal uses
allowed by zoning districts, and grouped under each of the generalized land use
categories shown in the following tables. For applicable additional regulations, also see:
Article 16 Article 17 Article 18 Article 19 Article 20 Article 21 Article 22
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 26
Section 19.13:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Scenic Residential
District [SR]
Plan
Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum Requirements
for Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial Guarantee
[Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific principal
use and whether it is allowed by
Right [Y] or Special Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
c. Accessory Struct.
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
IV Real Estate Office R R R R R R 35’ A R 10 Acre 250’ 4:1 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
I Forestry Non-Commercial R R R R 35’ A R 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Ice Skating Rinks (Outdoor) R R
III Indoor Recreation (<5,000 s.f.) R R R R R R 35’ A R 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
I Nature Areas/Open Space R
II Park, Public/Private R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Playground R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Pool, Public (Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 20’ A R 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25 25’
III Ski Areas R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Tennis Courts R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Trails, Non-Motorized R
I Residential Rental Dwelling R R R R R R 35’ 400a A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Campgrounds R R R R R R 35’ 1,000 A A 2 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
I
Season Residential Dwelling
(cabin, camp, cottage)
R R R R R R 35’ 400a A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
II Single Family Attached R R R R R R 35’ 800a A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
I Single Family Detached R R R R R R 35’ 800a A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Emergency Service Center R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
II Adult Foster Care Home R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
II Adult Foster Care Large Home R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
II Adult Foster Care Small Home R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Bed and Breakfast - Large R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
II Bed and Breakfast - Large R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Church/Worship Center R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
IV Community Center - Public R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Convent/Monastery R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
IV Schools – Public/Private R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
a. 400 sq ft cabin, camp, cottage (seasonal) or caretaker dwelling unit, 800 sq ft/duplex dwelling unit, 1,000 sq ft/single family detached dwelling unit, except
600 sq ft/single family detached dwelling converted from a pre-existing dwelling.
b. On county primary road, minimum parcel; size may be reduced to 1 acre minimum, width of 150’ (with maximum gross density of 0.92 DU/AC).
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 27
Section 19.14:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Rural Residential
District [RR]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 17.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
e. Accessory Struct.
Minimum Floor Area
[sq. ft./unit] g.
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks f.
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
I Agriculture R R R R R R 30’ A R 10 Acres 150’ 4:1 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
I Forestry Non-Commercial R R R R 20’ A R 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
I Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 20’ A R 40,000 150’ 4:1 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
I Residential Dwelling R R R a R b R 30’ 1,000 c R 40,000 150’ 4:1 1.09 .80 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
II Residential Dwelling R R R R R R 30’ 1,000 c R 20,000 120’ 4:1 2.18 .80 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
II Public Service R R R R A R 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
II Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 20’ A R 40,000 150’ 4:1 .80 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
II
Special Residential &
Institutional
R R R a R b R A R 40,000 150’ 4:1 .80 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
III Public Service R R R a R g R R 30’ A R 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
III Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R a R b R R 30’ A R 40,000 150’ 4:1 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
III
Special Residential &
Institutional
R R R a R b R R 30’ A R 40,000 150’ 4:1 .40 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
IV Residential Dwelling R R R a R b R R 30’ 1,000 c B 20,000 d 120’ d 4:1 .80 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
[Model Home/Unit]
V Recreation/Commercial R R R a R b R R 30’ A R 40,000 150’ 4:1 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
VI Public Service R R R R 30’ A R 40,000 150’ 4:1 .80 35’ 25’ 10’ 25’
For ALTERNATIVE ENERGY District Regulations and Performance Standards See Section 19.20.
a. Except sewer where available.
b. Except water where available.
c. 1000 sf/single family detached dwelling, except 600 sf/single family detached dwelling converted from a pre-existing seasonal dwelling; and except 400 sf/caretaker dwelling
unit.
d. 20,000 sf & 120’ with water & sewer, 40,000 sf & 150’ without water & sewer.
e. Accessory Buildings / Structures attached to the Principal Structure shall not exceed the maximum height of the Principal Structure. The maximum height of all Detached
Accessory Buildings/ Structures shall not be greater than Eighteen (18) feet , as defined in Article II, Definitions, Section 2.02: Building Height. (Amend. 08-02-10)
f. An Accessory Building / Structure, unless attached and structurally made a part of the Principal Building/Structure, shall not be closer than Ten (10) feet to any other
Building/ Structure located on the lot or parcel.
g. The total area of all Accessory Buildings/ Structures shall not exceed Sixteen Hundred (1600) sq. ft. On parcels of Three (3) acres or more, the total area of all Accessory
Buildings/ Structures shall not exceed Twenty-five Hundred (2500) sq. ft. The combined area of all Accessory Buildings / Structures shall not be larger than the square
footage of the Principal Structure.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 28
Section 19.15:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Urban Residential
District [UR]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
f. Accessory Struct.
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit] h.
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks g.
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
I Forestry Non-Commercial R R R R 20’ A 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
I Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 20’ A 120’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
I Residential Dwelling R R i. R R R 30’ f. 1,000 a. R 40,000 i. 150’ i. 4:1 .70 25’ 25’ 7’ 14’
II Public Service R R R R A R 25’ 25’ 7’ 14’
II Residential Dwelling R a. & b. R R R R R 30’ f. 1,000 a. A 8,000 b. 60’ 4:1 5.45 .50 25’ 25’ 7’ 14’
II
Special Residential &
Institutional
R R A R 12,000 90’ 4:1 .50 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
II Performance Subdivision R R R R R R 35’ 800 6,000 60’ 4:1 .30 20’ 15’ 5’ 15’
III Public Service R R R R R R 30’ A 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
III Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 35’ A 120’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
III Residential Dwelling R R d. R R R R 35’ 1,000 a. A R 16,000 c. 120’ 4:1 10.89 .30 25’ 25’ 7’ 14’
III
Special Residential &
Institutional
R R d. R R R R 35’ A 16,000 120’ 4:1 .30 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 29
SECTION 19.15 URBAN RESIDENTIAL (UR) DISTRICT – (Cont.)
Section 19.15:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Urban Residential
District [UR]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
f. Accessory Struct.
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit] h.
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks g.
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
IV
Special Residential &
Institutional
R R d. R R R R A R 16,000 120’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
IV Residential Dwelling R R R R R R 35’ 1,000 c. B R 8,000 60’ 4:1 .30 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
[Model Home/Unit]
IV Commercial Office R R e. R R 30’ 16,000 120’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
IV Commercial & Entertainment R R e. R R R R 30’ A R 16,000 120’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
V
Fast Food, Road Service,
Vehicle Sales & Service
R R e. R R R R 30’ A R 16,000 60’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
V Commercial & Entertainment R R e. R R R R 30’ A R 16,000 120’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
VI Public Service R R R R 30’ A R 16,000 120’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
For ALTERNATIVE ENERGY District Regulations and Performance Standards See Section 18.20. (Amend. 08-02-10)
a. 1,000 sq. ft./single family detached dwelling, except 600 sq. ft./single family detached dwelling converted from a pre-existing seasonal dwelling; 400 sq. ft./caretaker unit; 800
sq. ft./duplex and single attached dwelling unit (LUI II); in multi-family dwellings, 350 sq. ft. efficiency or studio unit; 600 sq. ft./1 bedroom unit, 800 sq. ft./2 bedroom unit
and 1,000 sq. ft./3 bedroom unit (LUI III); 200 sq. ft. rooming unit.
b. 8,000 sq. ft./single family detached dwelling; 12,000 sq. ft. duplex or 2 unit single family attached dwelling (7.26 max. DU’s/ac.).
c. 16,000 sq. ft./multi-family dwelling of 3 to 4 dwelling units (10.89 max. DU’s/ac.) additional lot area required for additional dwelling units as follows: 4000 sq. ft./3 br DU;
3200 sq. ft./2 br DU; 2400 sq. ft./1 br DU; 1600 sq. ft./eff or studio DU (gross max DU density will vary according to number and mix of dwelling unit type).
d. Werner St. West of Ontario and North Side of Bancroft St., West of Woodridge, for those specific uses asterisked in Section 14.05, Table XIV, the Use vs. District
Nomograph.
e. West side of Ontario St. between Fair & Beaudoin, for those specific uses so asterisked in Section 14.05, Table XIV, the Use vs. District Nomograph.
f. Accessory Structures attached to the Principal Structure shall not exceed the maximum height of the Principal Structure. The maximum height of Detached Accessory
Buildings/ Structures shall not be greater than Eighteen (18) feet , as defined in Article II, Definitions, Section 2.02: Building Height.
g. An Accessory Building, unless attached and structurally made a part of the Principal Building/Structure, shall not be closer than Ten (10) feet to any other Building/ Structure
on the lot or parcel.
h. The total square foot area of all Accessory Buildings/ Structures located on a lot or parcel within a UR District, including an Attached or Detached Garage, shall not exceed
1000 sq. ft.
i. Minimum Lot Size: 90’x135’ = 12,150 sq. ft; required with public water and on-site sewer. Alternate septic drain field also required with approval from the MCHD. (Amend.
08-02-10)
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 30
Section 19.16:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Development District
[DD]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access e.
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 17.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
I Forestry Non-Commercial R R R R 20’ A R 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
I Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 20’ A R 20,000 100’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
I Residential Dwelling R R R R R R 30’ 1,000 c. 40,000 f. 100’ 4:1 2.18 .70 25’ 25’ 10’ 20’
II Public Service R R R R 25’ B R 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
II Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 30’ B R 20,000 100’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
II Residential Dwelling R R R R R R 30’ 1,000 d. R 8,000 g. 60’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
II Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 30’ B R 20,000 100’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
II Commercial Entertainment R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
II Commercial Office R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Public Service R R R R R R 40’ C R 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Recreation Commercial R R R R 40’ D 20,000 100’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 40’ C R 20,000 h. 200’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Recreation Rental Dwelling R R R R R R 40’ 400 C R 20,000 200’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
III Residential Dwelling R R R R R R 40’ 1,000 f. C 16,000 h. 120’ 4:1 10.89 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
III Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 40’ C R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 31
SECTION 19.16 DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD) – (Cont.)
Section 19.16:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Development District
[DD]
Plan
Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access e.
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial Guarantee
[Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific principal
use and whether it is allowed by
Right [Y] or Special Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
IV Agricultural Support R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Commercial Office R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Light Industry R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Public Service R R R R R R 40’ D R 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Recreation & Commercial R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 200’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Residential Dwelling Model Home/Unit R R R R R R R 40’ 1,000 h. C R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 40’ C R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Agricultural Support R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Heavy Industry R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 200’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Light Industry & Public Service R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 200’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Recreation/Commercial R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Regional/Other Shopping R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 220’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V
Fast Food, Road Service, Vehicle Sales
& Service
R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
VI Heavy Industry R R R R R R 40’ E R 20,000 220’ 4:1 .05’ 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
VI Light Industry R R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 200’ 4:1 .05’ 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
VI Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
VI Public Service () R R R R 40’ D R 20,000 200’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 32
SECTION 19.16 DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (DD) – (Cont.)
For ALTERNATIVE ENERGY District Regulations and Performance Standards See Section 19.20.
a. Except well where water is unavailable.
b. Except septic where sewer is unavailable.
c. 1,000 sf/single family detached dwelling; 400sf/caretaker dwelling unit.
d. 1,000 sf/single family detached dwellings; 800 sf/duplex or single family attached dwelling unit.
e. Access onto, or opposite to, any residentially zoned segment of a county local road is prohibited
for any commercial or industrial non-residential unless a Special Use Permit is acquired. (Applies
only to passenger vehicles.)
f. In multifamily dwellings, 350 sf/efficiency or studio, 600 sf/1 br unit, 800 sf/2 br unit,
and 1,000 sf/3 br unit; in rooming houses, 200 sf/rooming unit.
g. 8,000 sf/single family detached dwelling; 12,000 or 2 unit single family attached dwelling
(7.26 max DU’s/ac.)
h. 16,000 sf/multi-family dwelling of 3 to 4 dwelling units (10.89 max. DU’s/ac.) additional
lot area required for additional dwelling units as follows; 4,000 sf/3 br DU; 3,200 sf/2 br
DU; 2,4000 sf/1 br. DU; 1,600 sf/eff. or studio DU (gross max. DU) density will vary
according to number and mix of dwelling unit types.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 33
Section 19.17:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
General Business
District [GB]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access c.
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
I Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 20’ A 60’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
I Residential Dwelling R R R R R 30’ R 8,000 60’ 4:1 5.45 .20 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
II Public Service R R R R B R 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
II Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 30’ B R 20,000 100’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 10’ 20’
III Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 50’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Commercial Office R R R R R R 50’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Public Service R R R R R R 40’ C R 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 40’ C R 20,000 100’ 4:1 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
III Residential Dwelling R R R R R R 50’ 1000 a. C R 16,000 b. 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
III Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 50’ C R 16,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 15’
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 34
SECTION 19.17 GENERAL BUSINESS (GB) DISTRICT – (Cont.)
Section 19.17:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
General Business
District [GB]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access c.
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 17.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
IV Agricultural Support R R R R R R 50’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Commercial Office R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Light Industry R R R R R R 50’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Public Service R R R R R R 50’ D R 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Recreation/Commercial R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 50’ D R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
IV Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 50’ D R 16,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Agricultural Support R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Public Service R R R R R R 50’ E R 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Light Industry R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Recreation/Commercial R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Regional/Other Shopping Center R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Special Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .10 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
V Fast Food, Road Service R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
Vehicle Sales & Service R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
VI Heavy Industry R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
VI Light Industry R R R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
VI Public Service R R R R 50’ E R 20,000 100’ 4:1 .05 25’ 25’ 5’ 10’
For ALTERNATIVE ENERGY District Regulations and Performance Standards See Section 19.20.
a. In multi-family dwellings, 350 sq ft/efficiency or studio unit, 600 sq ft/1 bedroom, 800 sq ft/2 bedroom, 1000 sq ft/3 bedroom unit; in rooming houses, 200 sq ft/unit.
b. 16,000 sq ft/multi-family dwelling of 3 to 4 dwelling units [10.89 max. DU’s/AC] additional lot area required for additional dwelling units as follows:
4,000 sq ft/3 br DU; 3200 sq ft/2 br DU; 2400 sq ft/1 br DU; 1600 sq ft/eff or studio DU [gross max DU density will vary according to number and mix of dwelling unit type].
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 35
c. Access onto, or opposite to, any residentially zoned segment of a county local road is prohibited for any commercial or industrial non-residential unless a Special Use Permit is
acquired. (Applies only to passenger vehicles.)
Section 19.18:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Segregated Business
District [SB]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
I Residential Dwelling R R R R R 30’ 400 A 40,000 150’ 4:1 .70 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
I Forestry Non-Commercial R R R R 20’ A R 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
II Public Service R R R R R R 40’ B R 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
III Public Service R R R R R R 40’ C R 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
III Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 40’ C R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
IV Agricultural Support R R R R R R 40’ D R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
IV Commercial Office R R R R R R 40’ D R 40,000 150’ 4:1 .10 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
IV Public Service R R R R R R 40’ D R .10 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
IV
Light Industry
(Amend. 03-18-97)
R R R R R R 40’ D R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
V Agricultural Support R R R R R 1 40’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
V Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 40’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 .10 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
V Heavy Industry R R R R R R 40’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
V Public Service R R R R R R 40’ E R 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
V Light Industry R R R R R R 40’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
V
Recreation/Commercial
(Amend. 02-19-02)
R R R R R 40’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
VI Heavy Industry R R R R R R 50’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
VI Light Industry R R R R R R 50’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
VI Public Service R R R R 50’ E R 40,000 150’ 4:1 30’ 25’ 10’ 20’
For ALTERNATIVE ENERGY District Regulations and Performance Standards See Section 19.20.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 36
Section 19.19
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Resource Production
District [RP]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
I Agriculture R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
I Forestry Commercial R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
I Forestry Non-Commercial R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
I Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
1 Recreational Rental Dwelling R R R R R R 30’ 400 A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
1 Residential Dwelling R R R R R R 30’ 400 a. R R 40 Acres 600 4:1 0.02 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
II Public Service R R R R 30’ A R 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
II Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R 20’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
II Residential & Institutional R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
III Public Service R R R R R R 30’ A R 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
III Recreation/Commercial R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
III Recreation Indoor/Outdoor R R R R R R 30’ A R 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
III Recreational Rental Dwelling R R R R R R 30’ 400 A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
III
Special Residential &
Institutional
R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 37
Section 19.19 RESOURCE PRODUCTION (RP) DISTRICT – (Cont.)
Section 19.19
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Resource Production
District [RP]
Plan Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial
Guarantee [Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific
principal use and whether it is
allowed by Right [Y] or Special
Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 17.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
IV Agricultural Support R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
IV Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
IV Light Industry R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
IV Recreation/Commercial R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
IV
Special Residential &
Institutional
R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
V Agricultural Support R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
V Commercial & Entertainment R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
V Recreation & Commercial R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
V
Road Service, Vehicle Sales &
Service and Fast Food
R R R R R R 30’ A R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
V Public Service R R R R R R 30’ B R 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
V Light Industry R R R R R R 30’ B R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
VI Heavy Industry R R R R R R 40’ B R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
VI Light Industry R R R R R R 40’ B R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
VI Public Service R R R R 40’ B R 40 Acres 50’ 25’ 15’ 30’
For ALTERNATIVE ENERGY District Regulations and Performance Standards See Section 19.20.
a. 400 sf/cabin, camp cottage (seasonal), mobile home or caretaker dwelling unit; 1000 sf/single family detached dwelling, except 600 sf/single family detached dwelling converted from a pre-existing,
seasonal dwelling.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 38
Section 19.20:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Forest Recreation
District [FR]
Plan
Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum Requirements
for Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial Guarantee
[Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific principal
use and whether it is allowed by
Right [Y] or Special Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilities
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
c. Accessory Struct.
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic System
Water Well
Soil Erosion
Surf. Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
II Fish Hatchery R R R R R R 35’ A R 5 Acre 250’ 4:1 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
I Forestry - Commercial R R
I Forestry – Non-Commercial R R R R 35” 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
IV Saw Mill R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
IV Firewood Sales R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V
Logging, Contractor Operations,
equipment sheds, outdoor
storage, office, yard, decking area
R R R R R R 30’ A A 5 acres 250’ 4:1 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Scientific Research Facilities R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Veterinary Clinic R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Emergency Service Center R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Carnival/Circus R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
IV Tennis Courts, Outdoor, private R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Trails - ATV - private R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Trails - Snowmobile- private R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Arboretums R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Boat Launching Facilities R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Ice Skating Rinks, Outdoor R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Indoor Recreation (>5,000 s.f.) R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
I Nature Areas/Open Space R
II Park, (Public/Private) R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Playground R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Ski Areas R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Tennis Courts – Public, outdoor R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Trails, Non-Motorized R
III Campgrounds R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Amphitheaters R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 39
Section 19.20:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Forest Recreation
District [FR]
Plan
Review
Req’d
[Art. 18]
Minimum
Requirements for
Public Road Access
Public Utilities On Site
Facilities Required Permits
Structural
Standards
Site Plan Financial Guarantee
[Sec. 18.10]
Detailed Use Regulations Area & Open Space Requirements
[See Sec. 19.04, 19.05 & 19.06]
General L.U.I.
[Sec. 15.02]
Generalized Land Use
Category and Intensity
See Table 15 to determine the
intensity of the specific principal use
and whether it is allowed by Right
[Y] or Special Use [S]
Site/Plot Plan
[Sec. 18.03]
State Trunkline
Co. Primary Road
Local
Seasonal
Public
Utilitie
s
On-Site Permits
Max. Building Height
c. Accessory Struct.
Minimum Floor Area
[sq.ft./unit]
Signs Table 22
Minimum Lot
Size
Maximum
Depth : Width
Maximum Gross
Density (DU/AC)
Min. Open Space
Ratio [O.S.R.]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Water
Sewer
Septic
System
Water Well
Soil
Erosion
Surf.
Drainage
AREA
sq ft. or
Acres
Width
Front
Rear
Sides
One
Total of
Two
V Sporting Goods Sales, Rental R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
VI Extraction of Earth Products R R R R R R 30’ A A 5 acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Emergency Services Center R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Park and Ride R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
II Utility Facilities, (Local or Minor) R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Utility Facilities, (Regional or Major) R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
IV Utility Service Centers R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
IV Wireless Communication Facility R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Archery Range, Indoor R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Archery Range, Outdoor R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Concerts, Outdoor R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Fairground R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Firearm Shooting Range (indoor) R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III State or County Recreation Bldg R
V Firearm Shooting Range (outdoor) R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Horse Stable (Recreation) R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Gold Course, Disc Course R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Pool, Public (Indoor, Outdoor) R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
I Cabin, Camp, Cottage (Seasonal) R R
IV Camp, Day or Youth R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V Cultural and Education Center R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III Solar Energy System R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III (SWES) Small Wind Energy System R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
V
(MWES) Medium Wind Energy
System
R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
VI (LWES) Large Wind Energy System R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
III (MET) Meteorological Towner R R R R R R 35’ A A 5 Acres b. 250’ 4:1 0.20 0.80 50’ 50’ 25’ 25’
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 40
Section 19.21:
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND
MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Alternative Energy Covers SR, RR, UR, DD,
GB, SB & RP Zoning Districts
Plan
Review
Req'd
(Art.
XVII)
Public Road
Access
On Site Required
Permits
Max. Tower Height
Site Plan Financial Guarantee
(Sec. 17.10)
Minimum Setbacks
(Front, Rear, & Sideyards)
General L.U.I
Sec. 14.02)
Generalized Land Use Category and
Intensity
Site / Plot Plan
(Sec 17.03)
Local
Seasonal
Soil Erosion
Surface Drainage
See Table XIV, Page 20, to determine
the intensity of the specific use and
whether it is allowed by Special Use (S)
or at all.
III MET Tower a. R R c. e.
III Solar Energy R R d. f.
III Small WES g. R R
Less than
100' e.
V Medium WES g. R R R R
Less than
164' R e.
VI Large WES g. R R R R
More
than 164' R g.
As a matter of Public Safety, no variances are permitted to reduce any yard setbacks, in feet, from a minimum of 1.1 multiplied by the total
extended height of the proposed WES.
a. MET (Meteorological) Tower.
b. WES - Wind Energy System.
c. Height is not to exceed the tower height of the proposed WES.
d. Solar height is not to exceed the maximum building height of a Residential Dwelling, L.U.I I, located in the zoning district of the
application.
e. Setback for all yards, in feet, is a minimum of 1.1 multiplied by the total extended height of the proposed WES.
f. Setbacks are a minimum of the front, rear, or sideyard setbacks of a Residential Dwelling, L.U.I. I, located in the zoning district of the
application.
g. Reference is made to situation specific setbacks specified in Article 16, Section 16.10 Alternative Energy D. (LWES) (1)( c ).
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 41
SECTION 19.22: OUTDOOR LIGHTING
A. PURPOSE
This section of the ordinance is intended to:
1) Promote energy-efficient and sustainable lighting practices and luminaries;
2) Protect residents and the surrounding environment from the adverse effects of light
pollution;
3) Minimize adverse off-site impacts from new and existing lighting installations;
4) Permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for safety, security, productivity,
commerce and enjoyment;
5) Protect the existing, unique qualities of Marquette Charter Township’s dark sky for
astronomy and enjoyment purposes and to continue to attract tourism and
commerce.
6) Pertains to commercial, multi-family, subdivision and street lighting only.
7) Comply with the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, as amended.
B. APPLICABILITY
Exterior lighting shall be installed in such a manner that the light source will be sufficiently
obscured to prevent glare on public roads, and light trespass in commercial or residential
areas. Exterior lighting shall be comprised of a light source and reflector so that, acting
together, the light beam is controlled, directed downward, not aimed up or across a
property line and is compatible with the surrounding environment. Sodium vapor lighting
shall not be permitted.
1) New Installations. All exterior lighting installed after the effective date of this
ordinance shall conform to the standards set forth herein.
2) Existing Installations. All outdoor lighting installed prior to the effective date of
this ordinance shall be considered grand-fathered. All exterior light fixtures must
be replaced or retrofitted to bring it into compliance with the applicable
standards of this ordinance upon the application of zoning compliance or a
building permit for any modification, repair, improvement and/or alteration to a
structure, fixture, building, property and/or use.
a) When more than 50% of existing, on-site lamp fixtures are to be replaced,
repaired or modified; all existing, on-site lamp fixtures shall result in fullcompliance
of this ordinance.
b) Any fixture which provides a mean of aiming or glare control shall be reaimed
or retrofitted to bring it into compliance immediately.
c) Owners of grand-fathered fixtures and installations may be asked to bring
said fixtures and installations into compliance at any time if subject fixture is
deemed to be a nuisance.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 42
C. GENERAL STANDARDS
With the exception of a residential dwelling used exclusively for single-family occupancy,
all new, retrofitted and/or modified outdoor lighting that is installed in Marquette
Township shall be the minimum necessary, in both number of luminaries and intensity of
light, to achieve the intended purpose of the lighting, and shall meet the following
standards, as relevant:
1) All exterior lights and sign illumination shall be designed, located, installed and
directed in such a manner as to:
a) Prevent glare or light trespass; and
b) Be shielded to the extent possible so as to confine the light within the target
area.
2) In all areas adjacent to residential property, no externally mounted, direct light
source shall cause light trespass (as defined in Section C) at the property line.
3) To reduce off-site glare, lighting fixtures for all parking and pedestrian areas shall
be:
a) Full cut-off type fixtures, or
b) Fully shielded/recessed fixtures where the lens is recessed or flush with the
bottom surface.
4) Lighting fixtures for building security or aesthetics and any display
purposes shall be:
a) Top downward (not upward or sideways), and
b) Full cut off or fully shielded/recessed.
5) Lighting for site security shall be configured for motion or infrared sensor
operation, except in the case of lighting required by state or federal safety
standards.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 43
6) Where outdoor playing fields or other special outdoor activity areas are
to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be specified, mounted and aimed
so that:
a) The lighting fixture's beams fall within the primary playing area, immediate
surroundings, or other site amenities.
7) The height of luminaries, except streetlights in public rights-of-way, shall be the
minimum necessary to provide adequate illumination. Luminaries attached to the
building shall be limited to the height necessary for illumination of entrances or
locations not served by pole lighting.
8) All non-security exterior lighting shall be controlled by either a timer or
photoelectric switch to be turned off during hours when a business is unoccupied.
D. WATERFRONT LIGHTING
Outdoor lighting in and around the ponds, lakes, rivers, and other waters of Marquette
Township, with the exception of lighting located below the mean high water mark of
coastal areas, shall not be installed or maintained so as to create a hazard or nuisance to
other property owners and shall comply with the following:
1) Lights on docks shall be no more than three (3) feet above the dock, shall be
directed downward and be full cut off fixtures.
2) Lights illuminating paths, stairs, decks, etc. shall not be directed towards the water
and shall not direct light upwards.
3) All exterior lighting shall be located, mounted and shielded, so that direct
illumination is not focused towards the water surface more than twenty (20) feet
from shore.
E. ARCHITECTURAL & LANDSCAPE LIGHTING
1) All fixtures shall be aimed and/or shielded to illuminate only the target
area such that no stray light from the luminaire passes above the horizontal
plane.
2) Upward aimed facade and building lighting shall be fully shielded and
fully confined from projecting into the sky by the building eaves, roofs,
overhangs or structures and shall be mounted as flush with the illuminated
wall as possible.
3) All lighting not required for safety or by the Marquette County Building Code shall
be controlled by either a timer or photoelectric switch to be turned off during the
hours when a business is unoccupied.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 44
F. CANOPY & SERVICE LIGHTING
Outdoor sales and gas station service canopy lighting shall be aimed downward and
installed such that the center of the fixture's luminous opening is flush with or recessed into
the canopy ceiling. All lighting from the canopy must be substantially confined to the
ground area directly beneath the perimeter of the canopy. All exterior lighting for
canopies and/or service areas shall be of an indirect nature, emanating only from fixtures
located under canopies, under eaves on the principal building or at ground level in the
landscaping. Exterior lighting shall be arranged and shielded so there shall be no glare or
reflections onto adjacent properties or street rights-of-way.
G. SIGNAGE LIGHTING
In addition to the requirements of this ordinance, all signs shall also comply with the
provisions of Article XXI of the Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. The Zoning Administrator
or designated official shall determine compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
1) Lighting used for sign illumination may be mounted at any height to a maximum of
fifteen (15) feet.
2) Illuminated signs shall not cause glare distracting to drivers, nor shall they be in such
a position or such color as will hamper the readability of traffic lights or traffic signs.
3) Signs may be illuminated externally by a downward-directed stationary light. Sign
lighting shall not be directed upwards unless the sign is affixed to the side of the
building and is fully shielded and fully confined from projecting into the sky.
4) The requirements of this section are for the lighting of signs only. Article XXI of the
Marquette Township Zoning Ordinance regulates signs and should be used in
conjunction with this section.
H. FLAGPOLE LIGHTING
Flagpole lighting may be utilized as up-lighting but shall be shielded.
I. PUBLIC ROAD & SUBDIVISION LIGHTING
Marquette Township shall ensure that the installation, operation and maintenance of public
road and subdivision lighting within the municipal boundaries of the Township occur in the
following manner, or as determined by the Zoning Administrator. (Note: Annually, the
Township Board will review and approve a street lighting plan as part of the Marquette
Township Capital Improvement Plan.)
1) Public Road Lighting
a) At the intersection of two or more public roads, and at the entrance to a
public cul-de-sac from a public road.
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 45
b) At the apex or apogee of any curve on a public road estimated to be
greater than forty (40) degrees. This requirement may be waived by the
Township if the curve is within two hundred (200) feet of a lighted
intersection.
c) At hills or short-sight distances and near land forms on a public road that
may limit vision, as may be determined by the Township.
d) Half way between platted blocks or as close to half way, as determined
by the Marquette Board of Light & Power and/or Zoning Administrator;
regarding the utilization of existing utility poles. At no time shall a light
fixture be installed in the platted area with a distance greater than 300
feet between fixtures.
e) At the terminus of dead-end streets.
f) The final location of the public road light will be determined by the
Township in conjunction with the supplying power utility, the County Road
Commission and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation in regards
to the availability of service and set-back requirements, respectively.
2) Standard Lamp and Fixture
a) Each designated public local road light location shall have a downcast,
shielded LED fixture on a pole.
b) The light fixture shall be a shielded, LED style unit with the optics flush to
the fixture, as provided by the Marquette Board of Light and Power or
other designated lighting contractor. At an intersection, the arm fixture
shall be aimed towards that intersection point.
3) Existing Public Road Lights
a) Existing street lights operated by the Township that do not meet the
standards as set forth within this document will be “grand-fathered” into
the requirements provided herein and may be replaced by shielded,
downcast LED fixtures at such time as may be determined by the Township.
4) Subdivision Street Lighting
a) The proprietor-developer of a subdivision shall, at the time of submitting
the final plat to the Township Board for approval, submit a street lighting
plan and cost estimate prepared by a professional engineer for the area
proposed to be subdivided. The street lighting plan shall have the minimum
lighting requirements as set forth by the Township for public streets,
including the same standards for lamps, fixtures, attachments, poles and
their placement.
b) The proprietor/developer shall deposit with the Township, at the time the
final plat is submitted, a cash or other security acceptable to the Township
in an amount equal to the estimated cost of construction of such street
lighting plan. Costs shall be obtained from the Board of Light and Power
or other approved lighting contractor or supplier.
c) Upon completion of the street lighting by the proprietor/developer, in
accordance with the plan submitted as approved by the Township, and
ARTICLE 19 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 19 Page 46
upon the assignment of such lighting to the Township, the cash deposit or
other security shall be refunded to the proprietor/developer.
J. ENFORCEMENT
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Marquette Township Zoning Administrator or
designated official, per the provisions in Article XXV – Administration & Enforcement of
this Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator or designated official shall investigate
suspected violations and issue notices of violation requiring corrective action, and shall
have the ability to assign penalties for non-compliance. The Zoning Administrator or
designated official shall also have the ability to use the services of an outside expert or
lighting consultant to determine if a light fixture or lighting array is in compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance; in the event of a violation of the ordinance, the cost of the
expert who undertook the lighting evaluation shall be passed onto the owner of the
property determined to be in violation.
K. ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION & APPEALS
An individual aggrieved by an action of the Zoning Administrator may appeal any
interpretations of this Ordinance to the Township Zoning Board of Appeals for their review
and final determination. The factual basis for the appeal must be specific, in writing and
filed with the Township Clerk within seven (7) days after the date of the decision of the
Zoning Administrator. An appeal shall stay action on the issue in question.
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
20.01: INTENT 3
20.02: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 3
20.03: ADEQUATE ACCESS-LOTS OF RECORD 3
20.04: BUILDING SITE GRADES 3
20.05: POTABLE WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION FACILITIES 3
20.06: RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 4
20.07: PRIOR BUILDING PERMITS 4
20.08: CLEAR VISION AREAS, FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENS 4
20.09: AREA AND WIDTH AND SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS
FOR LOTS OF RECORD 6
20.10: YARD ENCROACHMENTS PERMITTED 6
20.11: FRONT SETBACK REDUCTIONS 6
20.12: REAR SETBACK REDUCTIONS 6
20.13: REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER FRONTAGE LOTS AND PARCELS 6
20.14: LIMITATION OF FUNNEL DEVELOPMENT 7
20.15: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL LOTS ADJACENT TO ROAD
RIGHT-OF-WAYS 7
20.16: ACCESS THROUGH YARDS 7
20.17: HEIGHT REQUIREMENT EXCEPTIONS 7
20.18: USE OF TEMPORARY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 8
20.19: SUBDIVISION OF LAND 9
20.20: DIVISION OF LOTS OR PARCELS 9
20.21: MISCELLANEOUS OUTDOOR STRUCTURES 9
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 2
SECTION TITLE PAGE
20.22: CAMPSITES 9
20.23: DUMPING OF TRANSPORTED SNOW 9
20.24: DUMPING OF PARKING LOT DEBRIS 9
20.25: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR HOUSING 10
20.26: GRADING 11
20.27: OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION 12
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 3
ARTICLE 20: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 20.01: INTENT
The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations controlling miscellaneous items which have not
been specifically addressed within other parts of this Ordinance, but yet are applicable to all
zoning districts within the Township.
SECTION 20.02: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Nothing in this Ordinance shall preclude compliance with an official order issued by the Zoning
Administrator or other appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe
condition any building, structure, or any part thereof declared to be unsafe.
SECTION 20.03: ADEQUATE ACCESS-LOTS OF RECORD
Any one (1) lot of record created before the effective date of this Ordinance, and not having
frontage on a public street or right-of-way, shall not be occupied without provision for adequate
access to a public right-of-way or street. Minimum adequate access may be provided by an
easement or other right-of-way not less than twenty (20) feet wide, connecting the parcel with the
public street or right-of-way. Specific access situations may require review by the Planning
Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals if a variance is required.
SECTION 20.04: BUILDING SITE GRADES
The finished grade adjacent to the outside walls of any new building constructed or altered shall
be designed to direct surface drainage away from the building walls and to direct surface flow
into proper swales, inlets, or basins. Land balance and site drainage plans shall be in accordance
with all requirements set forth in Ordinances, rules, regulations or procedures established by the
Marquette County Drain Commissioner.
SECTION 20.05: POTABLE WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION FACILITIES
After the effective date of this Ordinance, all buildings and structures erected for human
occupancy, to be utilized for a dwelling unit, business, industrial use, or for recreational purposes
shall be provided with a safe, sanitary, potable water supply along with a safe, and effective
system for the collection, treatment, and disposal of human, commercial, or industrial waste.
Installation of these systems shall comply with all relative statutory requirements of the State of
Michigan and the Marquette County Health Department Sanitary Code.
If the Marquette County Health Department does not require well and septic permits, then the
building or use is exempt from the requirements in Sections 19.14-19.20 which would otherwise
require such permits. A copy of any required well, septic or other Marquette County Health
Department permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to approval of the Zoning
Compliance Certificate.
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 4
SECTION 20.06: RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Existing buildings or structures within or outside of the Charter Township of Marquette shall not be
relocated or moved onto any site, lot, or parcel of land within the Township unless the building
design and construction are deemed to be safe by the County Building Inspector and the class of
any such residential building, be not less than the typical classes of houses within the
neighborhood to which such building is to be relocated, as documented in the Township Assessor’s
public records, which records reference the commonly accepted classes of single family detached
houses officially designated by the Michigan State Tax Commission’s “Assessor’s Manual,” as
amended. The building or structure shall be located upon the proposed site in accordance with all
state, county, and township requirements and shall comply with the criteria outlined in Article 19,
Performance Requirements. All appeals by aggrieved parties shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in writing within fifteen (15) days of the written decision of the Zoning Administrator
regarding compatibility. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the Zoning Board of Appeals and
forward all relative information for their review and subsequent decision in accordance with
Article 24, Zoning Board of Appeals, Section 24.07, Appeals. A written authorization or moving
permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator for the placement of an existing building or
structure upon a lot or parcel only upon evidence of full compliance with all requirements noted in
this Ordinance.
SECTION 20.07: PRIOR BUILDING PERMITS
Any building permit issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be valid even though
not conforming to the provisions of this Ordinance, provided that construction is commenced within
ninety (90) days after the adoption date of this Ordinance and carried on diligently without
interruption, as weather permits, for a continued period until completed.
SECTION 20.08: CLEAR VISION AREAS, FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENS
In order to provide a clear view of intersecting roadways to the motorist, there shall be triangular
areas of clear vision at the intersection of any public and/or private roadway formed by the
right-of-way lines of the two (2) intersecting roadways and a line connecting the point on each
right-of-way line thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. No building,
fence, wall, sign, screen or planting shall be located or maintained in any way which could
obstruct vision or interfere with traffic visibility between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) and
ten (10) feet, within the triangular area described, nor shall it obstruct vision at any curve or
intersection roadway entrance.
The determination of vision obstruction at curves and driveway entrances shall be made by the
Zoning Administrator. Fences located along a rear or side lot line may be a maximum of six (6)
feet high except within the required front yard setback. Fences located within the required front
yard shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. Fences greater than six (6) feet in height shall
conform to the minimum side yard and setback requirements as noted in Article 19, Performance
Requirements, Sections 19.13 through 19.19, Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards. Retaining walls greater than four (4) feet in height shall conform with the
minimum side yard and setbacks as required in Article 19, Performance Requirements, as noted in
the Section. This requirement does not pertain to bufferyard structures.
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 5
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 6
SECTION 20.09: AREA AND WIDTH AND SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR LOTS
OF RECORD
Any lot or parcel of record created and evidenced by deed or legal documentation of record in
the office of the Marquette County Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, may be used for any allowable use in the district within which it is zoned even though
the lot area and/or the dimensions are less than those required for the district in which the lot is
located provided, that the minimum setback and side yard dimensions and other requirements of
the district, not involving lot area or width, are met (See also Section 20.03, Adequate Access –
Lots of Record). Also, any lot or parcel of record created and evidenced by deed or legal
documentation of record in the office of the Marquette County Register of Deeds prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, may be used for a single family detached residence and this
principal use and only this principal use shall not be required to connect to the sanitary sewer in
the Urban Residential District (UR) as specified in Section 19.15: Schedule of District Regulations
and Minimum Performance Standards.
SECTION 20.10: YARD ENCROACHMENTS PERMITTED
A. The following elements of a building or structure may extend or project into a required
yard area:
1. By no more than three (3) feet: certain architectural features such as cornices, eaves,
gutters, chimneys bay, windows, balconies and similar features, unenclosed porches,
patios, paved terraces, and decks less than thirty (30) inches above finished grade
provided that their size and location does not constitute a traffic hazard.
2. By no more than four (4) feet: fire escapes, open steps, or stairways, wells,
underground utilities, planting boxes, recreational equipment except swimming pools,
yard and service lighting fixtures, poles, and flag poles.
SECTION 20.11: FRONT SETBACK REDUCTIONS
Any front setback area in any district may be reduced below the minimum requirements when the
average front setbacks of existing principal buildings within two hundred (200) feet of a
proposed principal building location are less than the minimum required. The required minimum
front setback shall then be based on the established average setback. Where the established
setback is greater than the required minimum setback, the required setback for the proposed
principal building shall be the average setback of the existing principal buildings unless otherwise
authorized by the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 20.12: REAR SETBACK REDUCTIONS
When a lot of record has a depth of less than the minimum required within the respective zoning
district prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, then the rear setback area shall not be less
than twenty (20) feet. If a rear lot line abuts an existing or proposed street or right-of-way line,
the Zoning Administrator may establish the required minimum rear setback, based upon the
setback averaging procedure set forth in Section 19.11, Front Setback Reductions.
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 7
SECTION 20.13: REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER FRONTAGE LOTS AND PARCELS
All buildings and structures located on lots or parcels abutting any body of water shall be
established in accordance with the requirements of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act (PA 451 of 1994). Lots or parcels of land having water frontage shall maintain a
minimum setback of seventy-five (75) feet from the beach as defined in Section 2.02, Definitions,
for all buildings and structures except piers, boat houses and boat hoists. A minimum twenty-five
(25) foot natural vegetation buffer shall be maintained along water frontage lots, and maximum
of twenty-five (25) feet in one hundred (100) feet may be selectively cleared to afford a view of
the water body. Where lots of record exist along water bodies, the petitioner shall provide the
Zoning Administrator with a plot plan of the site as detailed in Article 18: Site Plan Review,
Section 18.03, Required Plan Approvals. The location of all proposed buildings and structures on
lots of record shall be reviewed individually on a case by case basis by the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 20.14: LIMITATION OF FUNNEL DEVELOPMENT
Any development in any zoning district which shares a common lakefront or stream area may not
permit more than one (1) single family home, cottage, condominium or apartment unit to the use of
each one hundred (100) feet of lake or stream frontage in such common lakefront or stream area
as measured along the water’s edge of normal high water mark of the lake or stream. This
restriction is intended to limit the number of users of the lake or stream frontage to preserve the
quality of the waters, avoid congestion, and to preserve the quality of recreational use of all
waters and recreational lands within the Township. This restriction shall apply to any parcel
regardless of whether access to the water shall be gained by easement, common fee ownership,
single fee ownership or lease.
EXCEPTION: This restriction shall not apply to an official public access site.
SECTION 20.15: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL LOTS ADJACENT TO ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAYS
Any lot having yard space adjacent to any public or private road right-of-way line shall provide
the minimum required front yard setback for its respective zoning district from all such right-ofway
lines.
SECTION 20.16: ACCESS THROUGH YARDS
Access drives may be placed within the required front, side yard, and bufferyard to provide
access to the rear yard and/or accessory building or structure or to a garage, parking or
unloading areas, except as prohibited by footnote “e” at the bottom of the table in Section 19.16
and by footnote “c” at the bottom of Section 19.17. Any walk or other pavement serving a like
function shall be permitted within any required yard or bufferyard.
SECTION 20.17: HEIGHT REQUIREMENT EXCEPTIONS
A. The following are exempted from the height limit requirements, provided that no portion
of the excepted building or structure is used for human occupancy:
1. Extensions purely ornamental in purpose such as church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes,
ornamental towers, flagpoles, and monuments.
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 8
2. Necessary appurtenances to mechanical or structural functions, such as chimneys and
smokestacks, water tanks, elevator and stairwell penthouses, ventilators, bulkheads,
radio towers, masts and aerials, television antennas, fire and hose towers, electric
transmission structures, cooling towers, or other structures where manufacturing
processes require greater height.
3. Structural extensions deemed necessary to accommodate the building design such as
cornices or parapet walls may extend a maximum of five (5) feet above height
limitations and shall have no window openings.
4. Public and private utility structures.
5. Agriculture-related structures, such as bars, silos, elevators, and similar exceptions.
6. The Tower height of a Small, Medium, or Large WES, permitted as a Special Use, shall
not exceed the limits of Article 16 Section 16.10 C. DEFINITIONS.
SECTION 20.18: USE OF TEMPORARY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
A. Temporary buildings and structures other than those stipulated in Article 16, Detailed Use
Regulations, Section 16.06, Specific Temporary Uses Permitted, Item I, Tent Theater, may be
placed on a lot or parcel of record and occupied only under the following conditions:
1. During renovation of a permanent building damaged by fire. The temporary building
or structure shall be removed when repair of the fire damage is complete. The
temporary building or structure shall not remain on the lot or parcel for more than a
total of ninety (90) days.
2. Temporary buildings and structures incidental to construction work shall be removed
within fifteen (15) days after construction is complete.
3. Temporary building incidental to a church or school, provided that all wiring,
plumbing, fire protection, and exits are approved by the Township Fire Chief, County
Building Inspector, and by all required state or local agencies.
SECTION 20.19: SUBDIVISION OF LAND
All proposed subdivision of land located within the Charter Township of Marquette shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the Land Division Act, P.A. 288 of 1967, as amended, the
Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended, and the Charter Township of Marquette Access
Control and Land Development Ordinance and the requirements as set forth in this Zoning
Ordinance.
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 9
SECTION 20.20: DIVISION OF LOTS OR PARCELS
The division of all lots, outlots, or other parcels of land within a recorded plat, or the division of
any unplatted parcels of land shall be in accordance with the Charter Township of Marquette
Access Control and Land Development Ordinance.
SECTION 20.21: MISCELLANEOUS OUTDOOR STRUCTURES
Bleachers, movie screens, permanent rides, outdoor seating areas, etc., shall be at least twentyfive
(25) feet from any lot line exclusive of bufferyards.
SECTION 20.22: CAMPSITES
All recreational vehicle sites and campsites shall be subject to building setback regulations as
required in The Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum Performance Standards for specific
zoning districts as detailed in Article 19, Section 19.14 through Section 19.20.
SECTION 20.23: DUMPING OF TRANSPORTED SNOW
No snow may be placed on a parcel from which it was not removed unless expressly authorized
in writing by the property owner and the Zoning Administrator. Snow Plowing and removal must
comply with Michigan State Law (Michigan Compiled Law, Act No. 300 of the Public Act of 1949,
as Amended in 1970, Sec. 677a).
SECTION 20.24: DUMPING OF PARKING LOT DEBRIS
No debris, sweepings, or other material collected from parking lots may be dumped on any
parcel. Such materials shall be properly disposed of in waste containers and disposed of in
accordance with laws applicable to solid waste.
SECTION 20.25: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR HOUSING
All duplexes, single family attached dwellings, and single family detached dwellings shall comply
with the following standards:
A. It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with
the Michigan State Construction Code as promulgated by the Michigan State Construction
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 10
Code Commission under the provisions of 1972, PA 230, as amended, and shall have a
wall constructed on the site of the same perimeter dimensions as that of the dwelling and
constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building codes for
such dwelling. In the event that the dwelling is a mobile home or manufactured housing as
defined in Article II, such dwelling shall be installed pursuant to the manufacture’s set up
instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device
complying with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Manufactured Housing
Commission and shall have a perimeter wall as required above.
B. In the event that a dwelling is a mobile or manufactured home as defined in Article II, it
shall be installed with wheels removed. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed
towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis.
C. The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities
as approved by the County Health Department.
D. The dwelling contains a storage capability area in a basement located under the
dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard
construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area
shall be equal to a minimum of ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or one
hundred square feet, whichever shall be less.
E. The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences
in the vicinity, with either a roof over-hang of not less than six inches on all sides, or
alternatively with window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at
collection points along the sides of the dwelling; has not less than two exterior doors with
the second one being in either the rear or the side of the dwelling; and contains steps
connected to said exterior door areas or to porches connected to said door areas where
a difference in elevation requires the same; the exterior walls, which are three feet or
more above the grade, shall be covered with a commercial finished siding, wood, brick,
stone, decorative block, stucco or similar quality finish. The compatibility of design and
appearance shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator upon review of the plans
submitted for a Zoning Compliance Certificate. This determination of compatibility shall
be based upon the standards set forth in this Section 20.25 as well as the character,
design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile
parks and within two thousand feet of the subject dwelling where such area is developed
with dwellings to the extent of not less than twenty percent of the lots situated within said
area; or, where said area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance
of one or more residential dwellings located outside mobile home parks throughout the
township. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts
involving such matter as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the common
or standard designed home.
F. The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or other area which are not constructed with
similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to
the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required herein.
G. The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile
or manufactured home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 11
insulation within and connected to said mobile or manufactured home shall be of a type
and quality conforming to the “Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards” as
promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development being
24 CFR 3280, with particular attention to the Thermal Protection Sections 280.501 through
280.511, and as from time to time, such standards may be amended. Additionally, all
dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements.
H. The foregoing standards, other than the required Zoning Compliance Certificate, shall not
apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park, except to the extent
required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in any Ordinance of
the Township pertaining to such parks.
SECTION 20.26: GRADING
A. GRADING PERMITS.
No grading, including any act by which soil, rock, earth or mineral matter is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated, including the removal of
vegetative cover or overburden, excavation, and land balancing, shall be undertaken
without first obtaining a grading permit from the Zoning Administrator except as otherwise
provided herein. No grading shall begin until payment of the fee established by the
Township Board and a performance bond or other security in the amount necessary to
insure compliance with the requirements of the Ordinance is obtained.
No grading permit shall be required for agricultural, horticultural, forestry activities,
driveway construction, the usual and customary graveling or grading of a road or
driveway, or projects that do not involve, in any one calendar year, an area exceeding
one acre, or more than 1,000 cubic yards of grading material, or the construction or
maintenance of a septic tank and associated drain field.
When grading changes are proposed, reviewed and approved in conjunction with a site
or plot plan, or a tentatively approved subdivision under the Marquette Township
Subdivision Control Ordinance, a separate grading permit is not required. A grading
permit is, however, required for any grading change prior to subdivision, site or plot plan
approval regardless of whether such grading changes are part of any anticipated
subdivision, site or plot plan review and approval. When a Mineral Extraction Permit is
required and obtained, a grading permit is not required. Any grading done within the
Township, either with or without a grading permit, shall comply with the grading
requirements specified in Section B. Grading permits shall be issued for one year only
and do not authorize grading work exceeding the life of the permit. Renewal permits
may be applied for and issued on an annual basis.
B. GRADING REQUIREMENTS.
Anyone engaged in grading shall at all times take all appropriate and reasonable steps
to prevent erosion including the construction of silt traps, the mulching and temporary or
permanent planting of all areas exposed by grading, the construction of diversions,
channel linings, grade stabilization structures, and bank protection structures, and shall
limit, insofar as is practical, the area of land exposed to erosion resulting from grading at
any one time and length of time that any area is exposed, and shall, upon completion of
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 12
operations, leave the area in a condition such that further erosion will not take place and
the land is at least as suitable for uses permitted under this Ordinance as when grading
operations commenced. The proposed grading shall be in compliance with the Marquette
County Drain Commissioner's regulations and procedures for storm water management.
Grading and all other associated activity shall comply with the Noise Ordinance of the
Charter Township of Marquette, all applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and
any other local, state or federal statutes or ordinances.
C. APPLICATIONS FOR GRADING PERMITS.
An application for a grading permit must contain sufficient information to enable the
Zoning Administrator to determine that the applicant proposes to take such measures as
are necessary to meet the requirements of the preceding section. Where necessary, the
Zoning Administrator shall require the submission of topographic maps, soil boring reports,
or other necessary technical information on a site or plot plan in accordance with Article
18 SITE PLAN REVIEW. The Zoning Administrator may allow a plot plan for minor
projects, in lieu of a site plan. All existing and proposed topography shall be shown such
that appropriate storm water conveyance can be determined. Such site plan or plot plan
shall be sent to the Marquette County Drain Commissioner to determine compliance with
established Marquette County Drain Commission rules and storm water management.
Upon receiving an application meeting the requirements set forth in this section, and the
required fee, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a grading permit to the applicant in the
form of a Zoning Compliance Certificate in conformity with Article 26 ADMINISTRATION
AND ENFORCEMENT. A grading permit authorizes only the work described in the
application. The Zoning Administrator shall impose such conditions or requirements in
granting the permit as may be necessary to insure compliance with the requirements of the
preceding section and shall impose such limits on working hours and time limits for
completion of operations and the various stages thereof as may be necessary to minimize
incompatibility with nearby land uses. The failure of applicant to take any action or
refrain from any action specified either in the application or on the face of the permit
shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 20.27: OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
Regardless of zoning district, land zoned for residential development may be developed at the
option of the landowner, with the same number of dwelling units on a portion of the land as would
be allowed for the buildable portion of the entire parcel. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of
the buildable land shall be allowed for development. Unbuildable areas, such as wetlands,
areas within the 100-year floodplain, or slopes greater than twenty-five percent (25%) shall not
count toward the fifty percent (50%) open space minimum, as provided below. If a development
is a subdivision, such must meet the requirements of the Marquette Township Subdivision Control
Ordinance. Land may be developed for residential use under the open space preservation
SECTION 20.27: OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION – (Cont.)
option following the provisions of Article 17 Special Land Uses and Article 18 Site Plan Review
and if all of the following apply:
The land is zoned at a density equivalent to two (2) or fewer dwelling units per acre, or, if the
land is served by a public sewer system, three (3) or fewer dwelling units per acre. A percentage
ARTICLE 20 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 20 Page 13
of the buildable land area, but not less than fifty percent (50%), will remain perpetually in an
undeveloped state by means of a conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or
other legal means that runs with the land. The development does not depend upon the extension
of a public sewer or public water supply system, unless development of the land under
conventional zoning would also depend upon such an extension.
In cases where extension of public sewer or public water are necessary, the developer shall bear
the costs associated with the extension. The option provided by this section has not previously
been exercised with respect to that land.
Minimum yard setbacks, lot size and lot width requirements may be reduced accordingly to
accommodate the number of dwellings allowed. However, the lot width to depth ratio of 1:4
requirement shall not be changed to allow narrower lots.
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 21
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
21.01: PURPOSE 2
21.02: PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY 2
21.03: GENERAL PROVISIONS 2
21.04: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 5
21.05: TABLE XX: USE VS PARKING NOMOGRAPH 6
21.06: DESIGN STANDARDS 10
21.07: EMERGENCY VEHICLE ACCESS 13
21.08: OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREA REQUIREMENTS 15
21.09: OFF-STREET STACKING REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVE-THROUGH
FACILITIES 15
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 2
ARTICLE 21: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 21.01: PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this Article to control off-street parking, the loading and unloading of motor
vehicles and to provide for adequate maintenance of all off-street parking facilities within
designated zoning districts. The requirements specified are intended to accommodate the
temporary, on-site storage of transient motor vehicles utilized by employees, patrons, or
occupants of buildings or structures constructed or remodeled under the provisions and
requirements of this Ordinance. Furthermore, it is the Township’s belief that excessive parking and
loading areas are inefficient uses of resources and increase the potential for stormwater
drainage issues.
SECTION 21.02: PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY
Required off-street parking and loading shall be shown as integral parts of plot plans and site
plans, and are thus subject to the review authority and procedure as set forth in Article 18, Site
Plan Review, Sections 18.03, 18.04 and 18.05.
SECTION 21.03: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Property owners are entitled to reasonable access to their respective properties for
optimal use in accordance with the individual requirements of the specific zoning district
classification where located and in conformance with the minimum standards as set forth in
this Ordinance. The best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare are served by
requiring strict adherence to certain minimum standards based upon detailed engineering
design criteria for all proposed off-street parking plans or activities. The Township
encourages the petitioner to utilize innovative methods in the creation of plan documents
and to thoroughly explore methods and alternative approaches, integrating the concepts
of land use activities with transportation planning, in providing access to respective
properties. The use of service drives, combined access points, and coordinated parking
systems physically compatible with adjacent areas are therefore encouraged. It is the
intent of this Ordinance that coordinated access systems be implemented for all types of
proposed land uses and activities. Therefore, the site plan and traffic engineering
standards shall dictate driveway location and spacing and not the specified lot width
minimums. The following general provisions are applicable to proposed off-street parking
plans submitted as integral elements of site plans required under Article 18, Site Plan
Review, Section 18.06: Required Information.
1. All vehicular access drives, easements, and access points proposed along all highway
and major traffic arteries shall be located in accordance with the Charter Township of
Marquette Comprehensive Development Plan and Article 19, Performance Requirements,
Section 19.13 through 19.19, the Schedule of District Regulations and Minimum
Performance Standards. Complete plans and specifications shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review at the time of application.
2. The proposed off-street parking plan shall incorporate various design alternatives in
accommodating the dictates of the physical site constraints and characteristics.
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 3
SECTION 21.03: GENERAL PROVISIONS – (Cont.)
3. The proposed off-street parking plan shall be developed in accordance with the
required minimum and maximum standards as to the number of parking spaces for
specified types of land uses or activities within individual zoning district classifications.
In the event of unusual circumstances, the petitioner shall substantiate any request for a
variance from the suggested minimum standards so that the variance, if granted, will
not result in a situation detrimental to the proposed land use or activity planned for
the site.
4. The proposed off-street parking plan shall not adversely impact adjacent or
surrounding areas. The control of potential nuisances, including noise, odor, smoke,
dust, vibration, glare, fugitive sand or blowing and drifting snow shall be addressed
on all site plans. The utilization of innovative design techniques, incorporating effective
landscaping and screening within buffer strips, islands, or green belts, is encouraged.
5. The existing natural features of the site shall be protected and preserved in their
original state insofar as practical and utilized to enhance the site wherever possible.
6. The proposed off-street parking plan shall reflect a proper relationship between
vehicular storage areas and the land uses or activities which they are intended to
service. Proposed plans for pedestrian access to common use areas through parking
lots shall be designed with safety and circulation as a major priority.
7. Emergency vehicle ingress and egress as well as unrestricted circulation throughout the
proposed site, as noted herein and in Section 21.07, Emergency Vehicle Access, shall
be provided during the design phase and on the site plans. Fire and emergency
vehicle lanes shall be clearly marked and identified on the plans and subsequently on
the site utilizing acceptable signing procedures.
8. A compatible physical relationship shall be developed between the existing and
adjacent land uses and activities, and the proposed plan for off-street parking.
Physical improvements to the site, including, but not limited to, utilities, land balance,
erosion control, grading, paving, and storm drainage shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with the requirements of federal, state, county, or township’s
standards and specifications and shall be integrated with the adjacent areas to create
an orderly and workable improvement.
9. A stormwater management plan shall be developed in accordance with the Marquette
County Drain Commission Rules, Regulations and Procedures for Internal and External
Drainage addressing on-site surface water runoff problems and their disposition. A
general drainage scheme for the area shall also be developed to assure against any
adverse effects to neighboring or downstream, off-site property owners. This
provision may require stormwater retention or detention ponds where appropriate.
10. On-site traffic shall be controlled utilizing effective design techniques which may
include signing, speed and directional controls, line painting, diverters, chatter ridges
or speed bumps, and various methods of channelization which promote safety
conscious design alternatives. Parking lot aisles shall not exceed 400 feet in length
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 4
SECTION 21.03: GENERAL PROVISIONS – (Cont.)
before another intersecting aisle or driveway shall be provided. In determining this
aisle length, all landscaped islands shall be included in the measurement. This
maximum aisle length shall not apply to aisles where there is no opportunity for
vehicles to drive through adjacent unoccupied parking spaces because the parking
spaces are adjacent to features such as a building, side lot line, curbed sidewalk, or
landscaping. Parking lot aisles and driveways shall intersect at 90° angles. This may
be slightly less or greater than 90° angles when the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission when under its jurisdiction determines that safe and efficient circulation for
pedestrians and vehicles will still be provided.
11. Provision shall be made by the petitioner for continuing maintenance and upkeep of
the proposed off-site parking and unloading facilities to assure an acceptable and
continued land use or activity and to relieve the Township of any responsibility to
maintain the proposed facility. Timely cleaning, sweeping, and flushing of the surface
areas as well as continued care and maintenance of all landscaped areas, signs,
lighting fixtures, and the like shall be provided by the owner on a regular basis. Snow
plowing and the storage of snow on the site shall not obstruct clear view nor create
visibility problems for drivers or pedestrians utilizing the facility or on adjacent or
surrounding areas. Snow storage areas should generally be in distinct and separate
locations from trees, shrubs and bufferyards. All site plans must show all locations of
snow storage areas. If all snow is to be removed from the site, then a statement to
such must be placed on the site plan by its petitioner. Snow shall be removed from the
site by the owner in accordance with requirements set forth in this Ordinance or any
other state, county, or local regulations which may apply.
12. No commercial repair work, servicing, or selling of any kind shall be conducted on any
parking area except that which may be permitted under the provision of Article 16,
Detailed Use Regulations, or within designated districts by the Zoning Administrator.
13. Where the owners of two (2) buildings, or uses, desire to utilize common off-street
parking facilities, the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may grant
approval if it is determined that all other necessary parking requirements as
stipulated in this Ordinance have been met.
14. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result
in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half
(1/2) shall be discarded and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one (1)
parking space.
15. Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be either on the same lot or
within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from
the building entrance to the nearest point of the parking lot.
16. No parking area which exists at the time this ordinance becomes effective and
complies with its provisions shall be relinquished or reduced to less than the minimum
requirements established herein.
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 5
SECTION 21.03: GENERAL PROVISIONS – (Cont.)
17. In the instance of dual function off-street parking spaces, where operating hours of
buildings do not conflict, the Zoning Board of Appeals, after detailed review, may
consider granting a variance to accommodate specific concerns.
18. For land uses not specifically indicated, the requirements for off-street parking
facilities shall be in accordance with a use which the Zoning Board of Appeals
considers as being similar in type.
19. Off-street parking does not include any spaces within a public road right-of-way.
SECTION 21.04: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. GENERAL CRITERIA
The Off-Street Parking Requirements, as noted in Section 21.05, Table A: Minimum ADA
Parking Spaces, Table B, Use vs. Parking Nomograph, are based upon the following
criteria:
1. The number of required spaces per employee is based upon the maximum number of
employees on the largest work shift.
2. The number of required spaces per square feet of Gross Floor Area (GFA), is based
upon the number of square feet of gross leasable area (GLA), and is defined as the
total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements,
mezzanines, and upper floors expressed in square feet and measured from the
centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces.
3. The number of required spaces per square foot of Usable Floor Are (UFA), shall be
defined as the GFA less the floor areas taken up by lobbies, enclosed machinery
rooms on the roof, stairs and escalators, mechanical and electrical services, lifts,
columns, toilet areas, ducts and risers.
4. Every off-street parking area available to the public shall have parking spaces
reserved for the use of physically disabled persons as specified in Table XX: Minimum
ADA Parking Spaces (as required by ASA Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and
Facilities, Chapter 4.1.2(5)(a), published in the Federal Register, Volume 56, No. 144,
dated July 26, 1991)
5. Except for residential uses, in no case shall any individual, non-related and
separately operated use provide less than four (4) parking spaces.
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 6
TABLE A: MINIMUM ADA PARKING SPACES
TOTAL PARKING SPACES REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF RESERVED SPACES
1 – 25 1
26 – 50 2
51 – 75 3
76 – 100 4
101 – 150 5
151 – 200 6
201 – 300 7
301 – 400 8
401 – 500 9
501 – 1000 Two percent (2%) of the total number of spaces
1001 and over
Twenty (20), plus one (1) for each one hundred
(100) spaces over one thousand (100)
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 7
SECTION 21.05: TABLE B: USE VS PARKING NOMOGRAPH
USE
Number of Parking Spaces Required Per Unit of
Measure
Amusement Centers, Skating Rinks, Pools,
Galleries
One (1) parking space per one-hundred (100) square
feet of Useable Floor Area
Assembly Facilities without fixed seats,
including but not limited to; Martial Arts
Schools, Aerobic and Exercise Centers, and
Similar Studios or Centers.
One (1) parking space per every twenty-five (25) square
feet of Useable Floor Area
Automobile, Motorcycle, Truck, Bus, RV and
Boat Sales
Four (4) parking spaces for the first one thousand (1,000)
square feet of Useable Floor Area. Then one (1) parking
space per three-hundred (300) square feet of Useable
Floor Area in excess of one-thousand (1000) square feet,
plus one (1) parking space per two-thousand (2000)
square feet of outdoor display/sales area
Automotive repair or service facility
Five (5) parking spaces per one-thousand (1000) square
feet of Gross Floor Area devoted to retail sales of
automotive supplies or parts, plus one (1) parking spaces
per service bay (a service bay shall not be considered a
parking space)
Bar, Tavern, Nightclub, Cabaret, and other
establishments for the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises
One (1) parking space for every three (3) persons based
upon the maximum number of persons that can be
accommodated at the same time in accordance with
design capacity and Fire Marshal
Barber Shop / Beauty Shop / Hair Salon
/ Manicure Shop / Tanning Salon
Two and one-half (2.5) times the number of seats or
service stations
Boarding Houses
One (1) parking space per two (2) guest rooms plus one
(1) parking space for owner or manager
Bowling Alleys
Five (5) parking spaces per alley. If, in addition, there
are other uses or accessory uses located within or
operated in conjunction with the bowling alley, such
restaurants, bars, taverns, nightclubs, and the like,
additional parking spaces, calculated based upon the
parking requirements for that specific use, shall be
provided (calculation shall be based upon the total
square feet of Useable Floor Area for such uses located
within or operated in conjunction with the bowling alley)
Broadcasting, Movie or Video producing
or Recording studios
One (1) parking space per two-hundred (200) square
feet of Gross Floor Area
Bus Passenger or Railroad Stations or
Heliports
One (1) parking space per every fifty (50) square feet of
Gross Floor Area
Car Washes
Stacking spaces per wash bay as required for a drivethrough
facility, plus three and one-half (3.5) parking
spaces per one-thousand (1,000) square feet of Useable
Floor Area devoted to office or retail sales
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 8
Casinos, Hotels or buildings wherein
gambling games are conducted
One (1) parking space for every two (2) employees on
the busiest shift plus one (1) parking space per each three
(3) persons based upon the maximum number of persons
that can be accommodated at the same time in
accordance with the Fire Marshal’s maximum occupancy
calculation
Commercial, Trade or Business Schools
Forty (40) parking spaces per each one-thousand (1,000)
square feet of classrooms
Child Care Centers
One (1) parking space per employee plus three (3)
additional parking spaces
Emergency Services (i.e. Police, Fire, EMS /
Ambulance Garage)
One (1) parking space per vehicle plus one (1) parking
space per on-duty employee
Financial Institutions / Banks
One (1) parking space per two-hundred (200) square
feet of Gross Floor Area, plus parking spaces as required
for each walk-up, drive-through, or freestanding bank
machine (ATM)
Financial Institutions / Banks –
Freestanding Bank Machines, Walk-up or
Drive-through
One (1) parking space for each walk-up, drive-through or
freestanding bank machine, plus stacking spaces as
required for a drive-through facility for any drivethrough
or freestanding bank machine accessible from as
automobile
Funeral Homes, Mortuaries and
Crematoriums
One (1) parking space per every fifty (50) square feet of
Useable Floor Area
Gasoline Stations and Public Garages,
including Gasoline Stations with
Convenience Stores
One (1) parking space per each employee, plus two (2)
parking spaces for each service bay. If Convenience
Store is include there will be One (1) parking space for
every three-hundred (300) square feet of Useable Floor
Area
Gun Clubs, Skeet, Target or Archery
Ranges
One (1) parking space per employee, plus two (2)
parking spaces per shooting position
Hardware / Paint / Home Improvement
Store
Five (5) parking spaces per one-thousand (1,000) square
feet of Gross Floor Area
Hospitals, Sanitariums, Rehabilitation
Centers and Emergency Medical Care
Service Centers
One (1) parking space per every four (4) patient beds,
plus one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per every two
employees including staff Doctors.
Hotels and Motels
One (1) parking space per guest room, plus two (2)
parking spaces at office or registration area. If in
addition to guest rooms, there are other uses or accessory
uses located within or operated in conjunction with the
hotel or motel, such as ballrooms, meeting rooms, dining
areas, retail stores, auditoriums, bars, restaurants,
taverns, nightclubs, and the like, additional parking
spaces, calculated based upon the parking requirements
for each specific use, shall be provided (calculation shall
be based upon the total square feet of Useable Floor
Area for each additional use located within or operated
in conjunction with the hotel or motel)
Laundromats
One (1) parking space per fifty (50) square feet of
Useable Floor Area
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 9
Libraries, Museums and Art Galleries
Ten (10) parking spaces, plus one (1) parking space per
every three-hundred (300) square feet of Useable Floor
Area over two-thousand (2000) square feet
Industrial: Assembly or Manufacturing
One (1) parking space for each one-thousand (1,000)
square feet of Gross Floor Area devoted to such use. If, in
addition, there is space devoted to office, retail or other
uses specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, parking
required for such additional use shall also be provided
Industrial: Warehouse or Distribution
One (1) parking space for each three-thousand (3,000)
square feet of Gross Floor Area. If, in addition, there is
space devoted to office, retail or other uses specified
elsewhere in this Ordinance, parking required for such
additional use shall also be provided
Medical and Dental Clinics
Five (5) parking spaces per each doctor, including nurse
practitioners, physicians assistants, and similar.
Nursing, Convalescent, Rest Homes,
Residential Facilities for the
Developmentally Disabled and other
Health Homes and Institutions
One (1) parking space per every four (4) beds plus one
and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per every three (3)
employees of any description
Offices and Office Buildings
Three and one-half (3.5) parking spaces per onethousand
(1,000) square feet of Gross Floor Area
Publishing Establishments, Newspaper or
Printing Shops
Two (2) parking spaces per one-thousand (1,000) square
feet of Gross Floor Area, plus three and one-half (3.5)
parking spaces per one-thousand (1000) square feet
devoted to office or related retail activities
Refuse Dumps or Landfills One (1) parking space per employee
Religious Uses – Churches or Temples One quarter (.25) times the maximum seating capacity
Residential: Single Family and Duplex Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit
Residential: Multifamily, including
Apartment Houses, Town Houses and
Condominiums
Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit plus an
additional two (2) parking spaces for every three (3)
dwelling units over seventy-five (75)
Restaurants: Family Restaurant, Family
Restaurant with Lounge or Fast Food
One (1) space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of
Useable Floor Area, including exterior seating area, plus
one (1) for every two (2) employees on the largest
working shift
Restaurants: Drive-In Restaurants
One (1) parking space per customer service unit, plus ten
(10) parking spaces per one-thousand (1,000) square
feet of Gross Floor Area (minimum of four (4) additional
parking spaces required)
Restaurants: Drive-Through only (no
seating)
One (1) parking space per employee (minimum of five (5)
parking spaces required), plus stacking space as required
by this ordinance
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 10
Retail – Single Use Sites
< 100,000 square feet – Three and one-half (3.5)
parking spaces per one-thousand (1,000) square feet of
Gross Floor Area, provided that in no case shall any
individual use provide less than a total of ten 5 (5)
parking spaces
100,000 square feet and Over – Two and one half (2.5)
parking spaces per one-thousand (1,000) square feet of
Gross Floor Area
Retail – Integrated Centers
< 400,000 square feet – If the total Gross Floor Area of
an integrated center is less than 400,000 square feet,
four (4) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of Gross Floor Area shall be required
400,000 – 600,000 square feet – If the total Gross Floor
Area of an integrated center is greater than 400,000
square feet, but less than 600,000 square feet, four and
one-half (4.5) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of Gross Floor Area shall be required
Retail – Integrated Centers (cont.)
> 600,000 square feet – If the total Gross Floor Area of
an integrated center is greater than 600,00 square feet,
five (5) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of Gross Floor Area shall be required
Provided, however:
1. In no case shall any integrated center provide less
than five (5) parking spaces: and,
2. The following individual uses: grocery store,
hardware / paint / home improvement store;
theaters; bowling alley; bar; tavern; nightclub;
cabarets; or other establishments for the sale of
beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises, shall provide parking spaces as
required for the individual use by this Section and
such calculation shall be separate from the
calculation of the Gross Floor Area calculation of
the integrated center.
Schools: Nursery, Elementary and Junior
High Schools
One (1) parking space per classroom and office or one
(1) parking space per every ten (10) seats in an
auditorium, whichever is greater
Schools: Senior High Schools
One (1) parking space per every ten (10) classroom
seats, plus one (1) parking space per every two (2) staff
members
Service or Repair Establishments
Three and one-half (3.5) parking spaces per every onethousand
(1,000) square feet of Gross Floor Area
Theatres, Auditoriums, Gymnasiums,
Stadiums, Arenas, Convention Halls, and
places of Assembly with Fixed Seats
One (1) parking space for every four seats, plus one (1)
space per every two (2) employees on the largest
working shift
Veterinary Hospitals, Animals Kennels and
Pounds
One (1) parking space per every four-hundred (400)
square feet of Gross Floor Area
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 11
SECTION 21.06: DESIGN STANDARDS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
Landscaping of parking lots along with an alternative landscaping option provides a
desirable and effective method to screen parking lots from adjacent areas and to break
up the wide expanse of open paved areas. It also enhances community appearance,
stabilizes property values, separates pedestrian and vehicular traffic and better defines
parking areas and access aisles. Alternative landscaping locations, adjacent with existing
and/or proposed buildings and along road right-of-way lines, are very desirable and
are also encouraged. Careful design of landscaped areas also compliments on-site storm
water management concerns. Whenever Off-Street Parking Requirements, as outlined in
Section 21.05, Table B, Use vs Parking Nomograph, require the construction of off-street
parking facilities, all improvements shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the following Design Standards and Regulations:
B. DESIGN STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
1) Plans for all off-street parking lots providing spaces for more than five (5) vehicles
shall be submitted as part of the site plan review process and shall be approved
by the Planning Commission prior to construction.
2) A minimum access drive of twenty (20) feet in width, located appropriately to
optimize development of the individual property shall be provided unless the
access drive is shared with adjacent property. To limit the number of access points,
shared access drives, service drives and parking lot connectors shall be utilized
whenever possible. Driveway permits shall be obtained from the Michigan
Department of Transportation, Marquette County Road Commission or the
appropriate jurisdictional agency. Where a turning radius is necessary, it shall be
of an arc that reasonably allows an unobstructed flow for all types of vehicles
expected to utilize or patronize the facility.
3) Each off-street parking lot plan for vehicles shall be prepared in accordance with
requirements set forth in Table XX-A, Parking Lot Design Standards.
4) Each space shall be clearly marked and reserved for off-street parking purposes.
5) Each individual off-street parking space for vehicles shall not be less than the
width and the length of the parking space indicated in the following Table C,
Parking Lot Design Standards. Parking aisles shall be of sufficient width to allow a
minimum turning movement into and out of parking spaces. The minimum width of
all aisles shall be in accordance with the required Design Standards as set forth in
Table XX-A.
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 12
SECTION 21.06: DESIGN STANDARDS – (Cont.)
Table C: Parking Lot Design Standards
*Where off-street parking for residential developments are to be accommodated by utilizing
underground and/or tuck-under type garages, or where car ports and/or other sheltered off-street
parking is proposed, the Planning Commission may approve a smaller parking stall width, provided
that the smaller width will not be detrimental to safe and efficient traffic flow nor jeopardize the
public health, safety, or welfare of the motorists or pedestrians.
6) All off-street parking areas shall be drained to eliminate surface water ponding
and prevent drainage onto abutting properties. This provision may require on-site,
storm water detention or retention ponds where appropriate. With the exception
of landscaped areas, the surface of the parking lot, including drives and aisles
located within the DD (Development District), or the GB (General Business District),
shall be paved.
7) Lighting fixtures used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be designed to
reflect light downward and away from adjoining residential properties,
institutional premises, or streets and highways, and the lighting shall be installed in
such manner as to allow for the reduction of the intensity of light after normal
parking hours.
8) Where a parking area with a capacity of five (5) or more vehicles adjoins a
residential use, Bufferyards shall be provided between the parking lot area and
the adjoining property in accordance with Article 19, Performance Requirements,
Section 19.04, Bufferyards.
9) Where a parking lot area with a capacity of five (5) or more vehicles adjoins a
public street, a buffer-strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided between
the parking lot areas and the adjacent street right-of-way line. Plantings or a
berm shall be provided to screen the parking lot areas from view along the entire
length of the buffer-strip. Plantings within the buffer-strip area shall be maintained
in a healthy condition. No more than two (2) driveway approaches may be
permitted to break the buffer-strip from a major street, and no more than one (1)
driveway from a minor street. When parking lots are larger than fifty (50)
vehicles, the required buffer-strip shall be twenty (20) feet wide between parking
lot area and the adjacent public street right-of-way line.
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 13
SECTION 21.06: DESIGN STANDARDS – (Cont.)
C. LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
In addition to the landscaping requirements set forth in accordance with Section 21.06, for
a particular zoning district, all parking lot areas designed to accommodate a capacity of
ten (10) or more vehicles shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall be accomplished
throughout, including the interior of the parking lot area, on the basis of two hundred
(200) square feet of grass and planted area, including trees, for each ten (10) parking
spaces. Landscaped end islands shall be provided at the end of every parking aisle.
Landscaped end islands, in any single island, shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in any
dimension excluding curb and gutter. All landscaping shall be surrounded by a nonmountable
curb or otherwise be protected when adjacent with any vehicular use area. All
landscaped areas shall be adequately maintained in a healthy condition. The Planning
Commission may approve alternative landscaping locations that are not within the parking
lot area provided the following criteria are met:
1) The alternative landscaping is not proposed for a location where other types of
landscaping are already required.
2) The proposed alternative landscaped locations are highly visible to the public.
3) The alternative landscape locations do not jeopardize the public health, safety or
welfare of the motorists or pedestrians.
4) The total area of the alternative landscape locations is not more than fifty percent
(50%) of the total square footage required for parking lot landscaping in
accordance with Section 21.06.
5) The alternative landscape locations will not be detrimental to safe and efficient
traffic flow to or through the parking lot area, and will not create an unreasonable
burden for continual maintenance, especially snow plowing, temporary storage
and/or removal.
6) A concentrated effort to utilize creative landscape design, within the optional
alternative landscaped locations, to enhance existing and/or proposed on-site
buildings and to adequately buffer and screen adjacent road right-of-ways.
SECTION 21.07: EMERGENCY VEHICLE ACCESS
The purpose of this Section is to identify the minimum requirements to facilitate rapid and
effective extinguishment of fires ensuring that all future sites where the Charter Township of
Marquette Fire Department may be dispatched are readily accessible for emergency vehicle
operations.
A. Every non-residential use permitted by this Ordinance shall provide access for emergency
vehicles from a public roadway or right-of-way as follows:
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 14
1. A dead-end access exceeding three hundred (300) feet in length shall be provided
with a minimum turnaround area ninety (90) feet in diameter at the closed end.
2. A fire lane shall be required providing access to any portion of a structure which is:
a) More than one hundred-fifty (150) feet from the nearest street right-of-way line
when the structure is thirty (30) feet or less in height;
b) More than fifty (50) feet from the nearest street right-of-way line when the
structure exceeds thirty (30) feet in height.
3. When emergency vehicles are provided access to three (3) sides of a structure that is
more than the distance from a street right-of-way line than specified in Subsection 2.b.
above, by means of either a buffer strip or adjoining property, the requirements of
Subsection 2.b. shall not apply.
4. A fire lane to provide access to any part of a building may also be required if the
Township Fire Chief determines that the distance to a structure on a site, or other
special characteristics of the site, inhibit rapid, effective fire extinguishment.
5. The Township Fire Chief may determine that the public health, safety and welfare
require fire lanes in addition to private fire protection facilities required by the BOCA
Code (Building Officials and Code Administrators basic building code) for any structure
classified as a high hazard use. Structures to be utilized for uses which involve
extreme risk of fire, smoke, explosion, toxic gas, or structures to be used as places of
assembly for large congregations of people susceptible to panic shall also require
special attention.
6. Fire Lane Standards – A fire lane shall comply with the following standards:
a) The fire lane shall provide clear, unobstructed access for emergency vehicles and
apparatus at all times.
b) Signs prohibiting the parking or standing of motor vehicles shall be required.
c) Fire lanes shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet in width.
d. The fire lane surface shall be paved.
7. An alley may contribute all or part of a required fire lane if it meets all other
requirements of this Section.
8. A developer may substitute alternative means of ensuring the access necessary for
effective fire and emergency operations. However, the alternative means shall
meet the requirements of this Section and also be approved by the Zoning
Administrator and the Township Fire Chief.
B. Residential uses permitted by this Ordinance shall be arranged to permit access by
emergency vehicles and apparatus to three (3) sides of a building or as otherwise may be
allowed by the Township Fire Chief. Unless accessible through a parking lot or other
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 15
trafficable areas, the principal building of a lot shall be accessible by a driveway not
longer than 100 feet from the front lot line, unless such driveway and associated shoulder
areas have a minimum cleared width of eighteen (18) feet, and whose curves, if any, have
a minimum turning radius of 42 feet along the outside driveway edge to assure adequate
access by emergency vehicles.
SECTION 21.08: OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREA REQUIREMENTS
A. On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected and occupied for
manufacturing, storage, warehousing, goods display, department store, wholesale store,
market, laundry, dry cleaning, or other similar uses involving the receipt of materials or
merchandise and utilizing a distribution of vehicles, adequate space for standing, loading
and unloading activities shall be provided and maintained on the lot to avoid interference
with the public use of streets, alleys, or access aisles.
B. Loading and unloading space, unless adequately provided for within a building, shall
require an area ten (10) feet by forty (40) feet, with a fifteen (15) foot height clearance,
and shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
GFA (SQ. FT.) NO. OF SPACES/SQ. FT. GFA
0 – 1,400 None
1,401 – 20,000 One (1) space
20,001 – 100,000 One (1) space plus one (1) space for
each additional 20,000 sq. ft.
100,001 and over Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for
each additional 40,000 sq. ft.
The location and design of loading and unloading areas shall be reviewed at the time of
Site Plan submission to ensure that adequate consideration is afforded adjacent districts,
especially residential districts, to assure protection from inherent nuisance impacts and
other disruptive elements normally associated with this type of activity.
SECTION 21.09: OFF-STREET STACKING REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVETHROUGH
FACILITIES
A. All businesses, which provide drive-through facilities for serving customers in their vehicles,
shall provide adequate off-street stacking space and lanes, which meet the following
requirements:
1. Each stacking space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet
in length. Each stacking lane shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width.
ARTICLE 21 – OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 21 Page 16
2. Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and parking lot
shall be provided through signage and/or pavement markings. Drive-through
facilities shall be designed to promote pedestrian and vehicular safety.
3. For drive-through facilities having a single stacking lane, an escape lane shall be
provided which allows vehicles to pass those waiting to be served.
4. The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for the following
use. When the use is not specifically mentioned, the requirement for off-street stacking
space for a similar use shall apply.
USE STACKING SPACES/SERVICE UNIT
Bank/Financial Institution 5/service window
Photo Service 4/service window
Dry Cleaning 4/service window
Fast-Food Restaurant 9/service window
Auto Wash (Self Service) 5/wash stall and 2 drying spaces/wash stall
Auto Wash (Full Service) 10/wash stall
Day Care Facility 10/facility
Pharmacy/Drug Store 4/service window
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 22
SIGNS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
22.01: SHORT TITLE 3
22.02: PURPOSE 3
22.03: SCOPE 3
22.04: HIERARCHY OF REGULATIONS 3
22.05: SEVERABILITY 4
22.06: AUTHORITY 4
22.07: DEFINITIONS 4
22.08: TYPICAL ON-PREMISE SIGN TYPES 13
22.09: SIGN AREA COMPUTATIONAL METHODOLOGY / GROUND SIGNS 16
22.10: EXEMPTIONS 17
22.11: PROHIBITIONS 18
22.12: GENERAL RULES FOR READING & APPLYING ORDINANCE LANGUAGE 19
22.13: TERMS 19
22.14: SIGN FACE AREA 20
22.15 HEIGHT OF SIGNS 21
22.16 STANDARDS IN RURAL RESIDENTIAL & URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 22
22.17 STANDARDS IN GENERAL BUSINESS AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 23
22.18 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS IN ALL DISTRICTS 30
22.19 ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS 30
22.20 SIGN ILLUMINATION STANDARDS 31
22.21 NONCONFORMING SIGNS 31
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 2
22.22 ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL PERMENENT & TEMPORARY
ON-PREMISE SIGNS 32
22.23 CONSTRUCTION & STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS 32
22.24 MAINTENANCE REQUREMENTS 33
22.25 PERMITS 34
22.26 ENFORCEMENT & VIOLATIONS 34
22.27 FEES 35
22.28 APPEALS 35
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 3
ARTICLE 22: SIGNS
SECTION 22.01: SHORT TITLE
The On-Premise Sign Ordinance of the Marquette Charter Township.
SECTION 22.02: PURPOSE
These regulations balance the need to protect the public safety and welfare, the need for a well
maintained and attractive community, and the need for adequate identification, communication
and advertising. The regulations for signs have the following specific objectives:
A. To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and maintained according to
minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare;
B. To allow and promote positive conditions for sign communication;
C. To reflect and support the desired ambience and development patterns of the various
zoning districts, overlay districts, and plan districts and promote an attractive environment;
D. To allow for adequate and effective signs whose dimensional characteristics further the
interests of public safety and the needs of the motorist, where signs are viewed from a
street or roadway;
E. To ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free expression is protected
F. To ensure that all signs are professionally designed and installed.
SECTION 22.03: SCOPE
A. General. The requirements of this Code apply to all signs, sign structures, awnings, and
other types of sign devices located within the Charter Township of Marquette, except as
specified in Subsection B, below;
B. Signs and sign structure located in Charter Township of Marquette that cannot be seen
from a public roadway are not subject to the size, height, location and number regulations
listed herein. These signs must however comply with safety and construction Building Code
provisions set by the Marquette County Building Codes Department.
SECTION 22.04: HIERARCHY OF REGULATIONS
A. Where there is a conflict between specific sign regulations and the base or general sign
regulations of this Ordinance, the specific sign regulations supersede the base sign
regulations.
B. Other conflicts. Where there is a conflict between a land use regulation and a structural
regulation, or other conflicts not otherwise addressed by this section, the most restrictive
applies.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 4
SECTION 22.05: SEVERABILITY
If any word, sentence, section, chapter or any other provision or portion of this Ordinance or rules
adopted hereunder is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining words,
sentences, sections, chapters, provisions, or portions will not be affected and will continue in full
force and effect.
SECTION 22.06: AUTHORITY
A. Administration and Enforcement. The Marquette Township Zoning Administrator will
administer and enforce the ordinance as set forth herein. The Zoning Administrator may
implement procedures, forms, and written policies for administering the provisions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 22.07: DEFINITIONS
Abandoned Sign – A sign that no longer identifies or advertises an ongoing business, product,
location, service, idea or activity conducted on the premises on which the sign is located after a
period of six (6) months.
Alteration – A change in the size or shape of an existing sign. Copy or color change of an
existing sign is not an alteration. Changing or replacing a sign face or panel is not an alteration.
Animated Sign – A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion, or light and/or color
changes achieved though mechanical, electrical or electronic means. Animated signs, which are
differentiated from changeable signs as defined and regulated by this Ordinance, include the
following types:
1) Environmentally Activated: Animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal changes or
other natural environmental input. Includes but not limited to spinners, pinwheels, pennant
strings, and/or other devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external
motivation.
2) Mechanically Activated: Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or rotation
activated by mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced
means.
3) Electrically Activated: Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of
electronic, electrical or electromechanical input and/or illumination capable of simulating
movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted
below:
a. Flashing: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is
characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the
same as or less than the period of non-illumination. For the purposes of this ordinance,
flashing will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases
of illumination exceeds three (3) seconds.
b. Patterned Illusionary Movement : Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized of various illuminated elements for the purpose of
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 5
producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of constant
motion.
Architectural Projection – Any projection from a building that is decorative and/or functional and
not intended for occupancy and that extends beyond the face or an exterior wall of a building
but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also: Awning; Back-lit Awning; and Canopy,
Attached and Freestanding.
Awning – An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior
wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a
supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable.
Awning Sign – A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces or an
awning. See also: Wall or Fascia Sign. An awning that contains a “sign” section of copy area shall
comply with the applicable sign area requirements for parallel signs (see Table 22.08, Page 13)
contained in this Ordinance. Only the sign or copy area displayed on an awning shall be used to
determine the permitted sign area – the entire awning shall not be included in a Sign Area
calculation. Refer also to Section 22.09 (see Page 14) for visual reference example.
Back Lit Awning – An awning comprised of covering material exhibiting the characteristic of
luminosity obtained by means of a source of illumination contained within its framework.
Banner – A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
Banner Sign – A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
Bench Sign – A sign applied or affixed to the seat or back of a bench.
Billboard – See Off-Premise Sign and Commercial Outdoor Advertising Sign.
Building Facade – That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending vertically from
grade to the top of a parapet wall or eaves and horizontally across the entire width of the
building elevation
Building Sign – A sign that is applied or affixed to a building.
Candela – The basic unit of measurement of light in SI (metric) units.
Candela per square meter (cd/m²) – The SI (metric) unit used to describe the luminance of a light
source or of an illuminated surface that reflects light. Also referred to as Nits.
Candle or Candlepower – Synonymous with Candela, but in English, not SI, terms.
Canopy (Attached) – A multi-sided overhead structure or architectural projection supported by
attachment to a building on one or more sides and either cantilevered from such building or also
supported by columns at additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy
may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. Similar to a Marquee.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 6
Canopy (Freestanding) – A multi-sided overhead structure supported by columns, but not
enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and/or soffit of a freestanding canopy may be illuminated by
means of internal or external sources of light.
Canopy Sign – A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or freestanding canopy.
May be internally or externally illuminated. Similar to a Marquee Sign. Refer also to Section
22.09 (see Page 14) herein for visual reference example.
Changeable Sign – A sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or remote
input includes the following types:
1) Manually Activated: Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed
manually on a display surface.
2) Electrically Activated: Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed
by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or
pictographic components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to
the components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may
be from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component
display. See also Electronic Message Center.
Channel Letter (open faces) – A dimensional letter with a back and sides but no face at the front
of the letter. Open Faced Channel Letters may be non-lit, externally illuminated, or illuminated by
a light source contained inside the open channel of the letter itself, such as a neon tube.
Channel Letter (internally illuminated) – A dimensional letter with a back, sides and a
translucent front face capable of transmitting light from an internal light source within the letter.
Channel Letter (reverse) – A dimensional letter with a face and sides but no back, opposite to an
Open Faced Channel Letter. A Reverse Channel Letter has an open channel facing the wall or
building to which it is affixed. A Reverse Channel Letter may contain a source of illumination
designed to project lighting against the surface behind the letter, commonly referred to as a
Backlit Channel Letter; also referenced as a halo or silhouette lighted channel letter. The face of a
Reverse Channel Letter does not illuminate.
Cladding – A non-structural covering designed to conceal the actual structural supports of a sign.
See also pole or pylon cover.
Clearview Zone – The area of a corner lot closest to the intersection which is kept free of visual
impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Clear view zones shall be
established in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article 20, Miscellaneous Provisions,
Section 20.08, Clear Vision Areas, Fences, Walls, and Screens. No sign in excess of two and onehalf
(2-1/2) feet above curb grade nor support pole larger than twelve (12) inches in diameter
may be installed in this area. Freestanding signs must have at least ten (10) feet clearance to
grade.
Commercial Outdoor Advertising Sign – A permanent off-premise sign erected, maintained or
used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of providing copy area for commercial or
noncommercial messages.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 7
Conforming Sign – A sign that is legally installed in conformance with all prevailing jurisdictional
laws and ordinances.
Construction Sign – A temporary sign indentifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or
material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located, erected
after site plan approval and removed not later than two (2) business days after issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
Copy – The graphic content or message of a sign.
Copy Area of Sign – The actual area of the sign copy as applied to any background. Canopy
area on any individual background may be expressed as the sum of the geometrically computed
shape or shapes encompassing separate individual letters, words or graphic elements on the
background. See Section 22.14 (see Pages 20-21) for computational methodology.
Dimensional Letter, Symbol or Graphic – A letter, symbol or graphic that is three dimensional in
character, containing height, width and depth.
Directional Sign – Any sign that is designated and erected for the purpose of providing direction
and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Display Time – The amount of time a message and/or graphic is displayed on an Electronic
Message Sign.
Dissolve – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by varying
the light intensity or pattern, in which the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose
legibility with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
Double-Faced Sign – A sign with two faces, back-to-back.
Dynamic Frame Effect – An Electronic Message Sign frame effect in which the illusion of motion
and/or animation is used.
Electric Awning Sign – (See also “Back Lit Awning”) An internally illuminated fixed space-frame
structure with translucent, flexible reinforced covering designed in awning form and with graphics
or copy applied to the visible surface of the awning.
Electric Sign – Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical energy.
Electronic Message Center or Sign (EMC) – An electrically activated changeable sign whose
variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by
computer from a remote location. Also known as an EMC. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes
(LEDs) as a lighting source. (See also following terms principally associated with Electronic
Message Centers: Display Time, Dissolve, Dynamic Frame Effect, Fade, Frame, Frame Effect,
Scroll, Transition, Travel).
Externally Illuminated Sign – See Illuminated Sign.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 8
Exterior Sign – Any sign placed outside a building.
Façade – See Building Façade
Fade –A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by varying the
light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible
and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
Fascia Sign – See Wall Sign
Flashing Sign – See Animated Sign, Electrically Activated.
Font – A set of letters, numerals, symbol, or shapes conforming to a specific set of design criteria.
Foot Candle – An English unit of measurement of the amount of light falling upon a surface
(illuminance). One foot candle is equal to one lumen per square foot. Can be measured by means
of an illuminance meter.
Foot Lambert – An English unit of measurement of the amount of light emitted by or reflecting off
a surface (luminance) equivalent to 3.4262591 candelas per square meter.
Frame – A complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Sign.
Frame Effect – A visual effect on an Electronic Message Sign applied to a single frame. See also
Dynamic frame Effect.
Freestanding Sign – A sign principally supported by one or more columns, poles or braces placed
in or upon the ground. May also be referenced as a Ground or Monument Sign. Refer also to
Section 22.09 (see Page 14) for visual reference examples.
Frontage (Property) – The length of the property line(s) of any single premise along either a
public way or other properties on which it borders.
Frontage (Building) – The length of an exterior building wall or structure of a single premise
along either a public way or other properties that it faces.
Ground Sign – See Freestanding Sign.
Illuminance – The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface, commonly called
“light level” or “illumination”. Measured in foot candles (lumens/square foot) in the English system,
and lux (lumens/square meter) in the SI (metric) system.
Illuminated Sign – A sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projecting through its
surface(s) [Internally or trans-illumination]; or reflecting off its surface(s) [Externally illuminated].
Internally Illuminated Sign – See Illuminated Sign.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 9
Interior Sign – Any sign placed within a building, but not including window signs as defined by
this ordinance. Interior signs, with the exception of window signs as defined, are not regulated by
this ordinance.
Joint Sign – Any Freestanding Sign as defined in this Ordinance which uses multiple subunits to
identify two or more persons, businesses, or organizations operating on one parcel or contiguous
parcels (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may include the logo and/or name
of persons or businesses included but shall carry no other advertising matter.
Joint Sign Determination – means an action by the Plan Commission to provide for the
combination of multiple Freestanding Signs into one multi-part sign structure. Under a Joint Sign
Determination, existing and future freestanding signage on said parcels shall be subject to the
terms of the Determination.
Joint Sign Subunit – means that portion of a larger Joint Sign structure dedicated to an
individual business or parcel.
Listed Sign – A sign manufactured and labeled in accordance with specifications promulgated by
a recognized testing laboratory designed to assure compliance with applicable American
National Standards (ANSI) and/or the National Electric Code (NEC).
Luminance – The light that is emitted by or reflected from a surface. Measured in units of
luminous intensity (candelas) per unit area (square meters in SI measurement units or square feet in
English measurement units.) Expressed in SI units as cd/m², and in English units as foot lamberts.
Sometimes also expressed as “nits”, a colloquial reference to SI units. Can be measured by means
of a luminance meter.
Lux – The SI (metric) unit for illuminance. One lux equals 0.093 foot candles.
Mansard – A roof-like façade comparable to an exterior building wall. See Section 22.09 (see
page 14) for visual reference.
Marquee – See Canopy (Attached).
Marquee Sign – See Canopy Sign.
Multiple-faced Sign – A sign containing three (3) or more faces.
Nit – A photometric unit of measurement referring to luminance. One nit is equal to one cd/m².
Non-Conforming Sign – Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of an ordinance, which
due to an amendment thereto renders such sign nonconforming because it does not conform to all
the standards and regulations of the newly adopted or amended ordinance.
Non-Conforming Use – A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or
amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, revision, or
amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. See Also Article 23:
Nonconformities, Section 23.02, Definitions.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 10
Off-Premise Sign – See Outdoor Advertising Sign. See also, Wayfinding Sign.
On-Premise Sign – A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the
purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the use of products sold on, or the sale or
lease of, the property on which it is displayed.
Outdoor Advertising Sign – A permanent sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or noncommercial messages not
appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed. May also be referenced as an Off-Premise Sign, Billboard, or Commercial Outdoor
Advertising Sign.
Parallel Sign – See Wall Sign
Parapet – The extension of a building façade above the line of the structural roof.
Perpendicular Sign – See also Freestanding Sign; see also Projecting Sign.
Pole Cover or Pylon Cover – An enclosure designed to conceal poles and/or other structural
supports of a sign. See also Cladding.
Political Sign – A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement, cause, or candidate
for office.
Portable Sign – Any cord-connected sign not permanently attached to the ground and can be
removed without the use of tools.
Projecting Sign – A sign other than a Wall Sign that is attached to or projects more than eighteen
(18) inches from a building face or wall or from a structure whose primary purpose is other than
support of a sign. Refer also to Section 22.08 (see Page 13) for visual reference example.
Pylon Sign – See Freestanding Sign
Real Estate Sign – A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the property or
premises upon which it is located.
Revolving Sign – A sign that has the capability to revolve three hundred and sixty degrees
(360º) about an axis. See also: Animated Sign, Mechanically Activated.
Roof Line – The uppermost line of the roof of a building or, in the case of an extended façade or
parapet, the uppermost point of said façade or parapet.
Roof Sign – A sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or on the uppermost edge of a
parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by such building. Signs
mounted on mansard facades, pent eaves and architectural projections such as canopies or
marquees shall not be considered to be roof signs. Refer also to Section 22.09 (see Page 14) for
visual reference example of roof signs, and comparison of differences between roof and fascia
signs.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 11
Scroll – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which the message
appears to move vertically across the display surface.
SI (International System of Units) – The modern metric system of measurement; abbreviated SI
for the French term “Le Systeme International d’Unites.”
Sign – Any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which
is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, produce, service, event, or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Signs do not
include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city, religious, fraternal,
or civic organization; also merchandise and pictures or models of products or services
incorporated in a window display and works of art or scoreboards located on athletic fields
which in no way identify a product.
Sign Area – The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the combination of regular
geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. The area of any double-sided or “V” shaped
sign shall be the area of the largest single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed
as the area of a circle. The area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as fifty (50)
percent of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign. See Section 22.09 (see Pages 14 & 15)
for computational methodology for various sign area configurations.
Sign Copy – The physical sign message including any words, letters, numerals, figures, symbols,
logos and graphic elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of numerals
identifying a street address only.
Sign Face – The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated,
not including structural supports, architectural features of a building or sign structure,
nonstructural thematic or decorative trim, or any areas that are separated from the background
surface upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or
border. Refer to Section 22.14 (see Pages 20 & 21) for sign face computational illustrations.
1. In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the sign face shall include the entire area of the
sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated,
but not open space between separate panels or cabinets.
2. In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letter or graphic elements affixed
to a building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the sum of the geometric figures or
combination of regular geometric figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or
separate graphic elements comprising the sign copy, but not the open space between
separate groupings of sign copy on the same building or structure.
3. In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated border, or displayed on
a background contrasting in color with the color of the building or structure, the sign face
shall comprise the area within the contrasting background, or within the painted or
illuminated border.
Site – Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 12
Special Event Sign – A temporary sign pertaining to any civic, patriotic, or special event of
general public interest.
Temporary Sign – A sign intended to display either commercial or noncommercial messages of
transitory or temporary nature. Portable signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the
ground or not permanently affixed to a building are considered temporary signs.
Trans-Illuminated Sign – See Internally Illuminated Sign
Transition – A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Sign to change from one message to
another.
Travel – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which the message
appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
Under Canopy Sign or Under Marquee Sign – A sign attached to the underside of a canopy or
marquee.
V Sign – A sign containing two faces of equal size, positioned at an interior angle subtending less
than one-hundred seventy-nine degrees (179º) at the point of juncture of the individual faces.
Wall or Fascia Sign – A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or
structure and that projects not more than eighteen (18) inches from the building or structure wall.
Also includes signs affixed to architectural projections that project from a building provided the
copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building façade or to the
face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed. Refer also to Section 22.09 (see
Pages 14 & 15) for visual reference examples, and comparison examples of differences between
wall or fascia signs and roof signs.
Wayfinding Sign – A sign, frequently off-premise, specifically designed to provide directional or
destination information. See also, Off-Premise Sign.
Window Sign – A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message intended to be visible
to the exterior environment.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 13
SECTION 22.08: TYPICAL ON-PREMISE SIGN TYPES
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 14
SECTION 22.09: SIGN AREA COMPUTATION METHODOLOGY / GROUND SIGNS
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 15
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 16
SECTION 22.09: COMPARISON: ROOF AND WALL SIGN DISTINCTIONS
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 17
SECTION 22.10: EXEMPTIONS
The following are exempt from the regulations of this Ordinance and do not require a Sign Permit
Application, but may be subject to other Ordinances enacted by Marquette Charter Township
where applicable:
A. Signs which are not visible from a public roadway; however, these signs must comply with
any building and constructions provisions enacted by Marquette Charter Township or
Marquette County Building Codes;
B. Interior Signs;
C. Signs carved into a building or raised in integral relief on a building;
D. Signs required by federal or state law;
E. Signs required by municipal authority;
F. Flags & individual pennants (not on a string);
G. Painted and/or applied wall accents and decorations;
H. Illuminated building accents and decorations;
I. Public Art, including Permitted Original Art Murals
J. Name and Address – Up to two (2) signs indicating address, number and/or name of
occupants of the premises, that do not exceed two (2) square feet in area per side, and
do not include any commercial advertising or other identification.
K. Decals – Decals and/or logos affixed to windows or door glass panels, such as those
indicating membership in a business group or identifying credit cards accepted at the
establishment.
L. Handicapped Parking Space – Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area reserving
parking for handicapped individuals.
M. Private Drive Signs – On-premise private drive signs are limited to one (1) per driveway
entrance, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
N. Public Signs – Signs erected by government agencies or utilities, including traffic, utility,
safety, railroad crossing and identification signs for public facilities and any signs erected
by the Charter Township of Marquette.
O. Security and Warning Signs – On-premise signs regulating the use of the premises, such as
“no trespassing”, “no hunting” and “no soliciting” signs that do not exceed one (1) sign two
(2) square feet in area in Rural and Urban Residential Districts; and one (1) sign five (5)
square feet in area in all other Zoning Districts. These limitations shall not apply to the
posting of conventional “no trespassing” signs in accordance with state law.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 18
P. Political Signs. (See also Section 22.17 (9), Temporary Signs, of this Article)
Q. Real Estate and/or Construction Signs.
R. Holiday, Special Event, Garage/Rummage Sale Signs.
SECTION 22.11: PROHIBITIONS
The following signs are prohibited:
A. Signs containing strobe lights;
B. Abandoned sign structures, as defined by this Ordinance (see Page 4);
C. Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer parked with the primary purpose
of providing signage not otherwise allowed by the Ordinance; Prohibited is any sign
displayed on a parked trailer or truck or other vehicle where the primary purpose of the
vehicle is to advertise a product, service business, or other activity. This regulation shall
permit the use of business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily and
actively used for business purposes and/or personal transportation.
D. Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic lights, signs or signals or signs that interfere
with the effectiveness of any official traffic light, sign or signal.
E. Mechanically Moving Signs – An environmentally activated sign or other display with
actual mechanical motion powered by natural, manual, mechanical, electrical or other
means, including but not limited to propellers and search lights.
F. Flashing Signs – See Definitions. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a sign that has
changed rate or dwell time of three (3) seconds or longer does not fit within the
prohibition noted herein.
G. Posters and Handbills – Any signs affixed to any structures, trees, or other natural
vegetation, rocks or poles.
H. Roof Signs – Roof signs, except for those permitted by special exceptions in the General
Business and Development Districts. See Section 22.17 (see Page 23)
I. Simulated Traffic Signs and Obstructions – Any sign which may be confused with, or
obstruct the view of, any authorized traffic sign or signal, obstruct the sight-distance
triangle at any road intersection or extend into the public right-of-way.
J. A-framed/Wheeled Signs – Any portable “A” frame or similar portable sign is
prohibited except as described under Temporary Signs. Section 22.17 (see Page 28)
K. Signs Adversely Affecting Safety. Signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any
door, window, fire escape, or that prevent free access from one part of a roof to any
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 19
other part. No sign other than a safety sign shall be attached to a stand-pipe or fire
escape.
L. Sign Emissions – No sign which emits smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound or odor shall
be permitted. Open flames used to attract public attention to place of business or to an
advertising sign shall not be permitted.
M. Mirrors. No mirror device shall be used as part of a sign.
SECTION 22.12: GENERAL RULES FOR READING AND APPLYING THE ORDINANCE
LANGUAGE
A. Reading and applying the Ordinance. Literal reading of the Ordinance language will be
used. Regulations are no more or less strict than as stated. Application of the regulations
that are consistent with the rules of this Ordinance are non-discretionary actions of the
Zoning Administrator to implement the Ordinance. The action of the Zoning Administrator is
final.
B. Situations where the Ordinance is silent. Where the Ordinance is silent, or where the
rules of this Ordinance do not provide a basis for concluding that a sign is allowed, said
sign is therefore prohibited.
SECTION 22.13: TERMS
A. Defining words: Words used in the Ordinance have their dictionary meaning unless they
are listed and described otherwise. Definitions: words listed in the Definitions chapter have
the specific meaning stated, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. The
word “sign” in this Ordinance always refers to an “on-premise” sign.
B. Tenses and usage
1. Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true.
2. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true.
3. The words “shall”, “must,” “will,” and “may not” are mandatory.
4. “May” is permissive.
5. When used with numbers, “Up to x,” “Not more than x” and “a maximum of x” all
include “x”.
C. Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following conjunctions
have the following meanings:
1. “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply;
2. “Or” indicated that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in
combination;
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 20
3. “Either…or” indicates that the connected items or provisions apply singly, but not in
combination.
D. Lists. Lists of items that state “including the following,” “such as,” or similar language are
not limited to just those items. The lists are intended to provide examples, but not to be
exhaustive of all possibilities.
SECTION 22.14: SIGN FACE AREA
A. Sign Cabinets. The area of sign faces enclosed in frames or cabinets is determined based
on the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet
B. Double sided signs. Only one (1) side of a double sided sign is counted in determining
the area of sign faces. Where the two (2) sides are not of equal size, the larger of the
two (2) sides is used for the determination of sign area. The area of multiple-faced signs
in which the interior angle formed by the faces is greater than ninety-one degrees (91º)
shall be expressed as the sum of the areas of all the faces, except for multiple –faced
signs containing faces that are configured back to back, in which case the area of the
faces configured back to back will be calculated according to the rule for double-faced
signs.
C. Round, Oval & Irregularly shaped signs. To be measured based on the appropriate
mathematical formula to obtain the sign area for a circle, an oval or irregularly shaped
sign.
D. Calculating Sign Area
1. Signs containing integral background areas: the area of a sign containing a clearly
defined background area shall be calculated based on the area of the smallest
standard geometric shape or combination of geometric shapes capable of
encompassing the perimeter of the background area of the sign. In the case of signs in
which multiple background areas are separated by open space, sign area shall be
calculated based on the sum of the areas of all separate background areas,
calculated as references above, but without regard for any open space between the
separate background areas.
2. Signs without integral background areas in instances in which a sign consists of
individual elements such as letters, symbols, or other graphic objects or representations
that are painted, attached to, or otherwise affixed to a surface such as a wall,
window, canopy, awning, architectural projection, or to any surface not specifically
designed to serve as a sign background, the sign area shall be based on the sum of
the individual areas of the smallest geometric shape or combination of geometric
shapes capable of encompassing the perimeters of the individual elements comprising
the sign.
E. Awnings and Marquees. When graphics or sign copy is incorporated into an awning, the
sign area is determined by computing the area of a standard imaginary geometric shape
or combination of shapes drawn around the sign copy area or graphics. When the ends of
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 21
awnings or marquees are parallel and contain graphics or sign copy, only one side is
counted in addition to the sign face area on the front.
SECTION 22.15: HEIGHT OF SIGNS
A. The overall height of a freestanding sign or sign structure is measured from the lowest
point of the ground directly below the sign to the highest point of the freestanding sign or
sign structure.
B. Exception: Where a freestanding sign or sign structure is mounted along a roadway that
has a higher grade level as compared to the grade level directly below the freestanding
sign or sign structure, then the freestanding sign or structure’s height will be measured from
the roadway grade level to the highest point of the freestanding sign or sign structure.
See Figure A.
Figure A
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 22
SECTION 22.16: STANDARDS IN RURAL RESIDENTIAL & URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A. General standards: standards for permanent on-premise signs in the Rural Residential and
Urban Residential Zoning Districts are described below and on Table 1 (see Page 22).
B. Residential properties – all single family residential properties that are located in Rural
Residential and Urban Residential Zoning Districts are permitted signs not to exceed eight
(8) square feet in total sign area per road frontage. Corner lots and lots with frontage on
more than one street are entitled to eight (8) square feet per frontage. This sign area
allowance covers but is not limited to: address signs, home occupations signs, lawn signs,
real estate signs, contractor signs, and political signs. Signs may be free standing, mounted
to a permanent building structure or displayed in a window. Trees, rocks, or other
naturally occurring landscape features shall not be used to support a residential sign.
C. Subdivisions, apartment, multi-family dwellings and condominium complexes are permitted
a freestanding sign not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet, and further provided that
one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each separate street and or separate building
frontage occupied by the subdivision, apartment, or condominium complex and/or for
each means of entrance to or exit from the subdivision, apartment, or condominium
complex. Wall signs are also permitted not to exceed five (5) percent of the area of the
façade in elevation view upon which they are placed.
D. For properties located in the Rural Residential and/or Urban Residential Zoning Districts
as described in subsection C above, other directional, incidental and/or accessory signs
shall not exceed six (6) square feet in sign area and eight (8) feet in height (if
freestanding).
E. Other permitted non-residential uses in a Rural and Urban Residential Zoning Districts are
permitted a freestanding sign not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. Wall signs are
also permitted not to exceed five (5) percent of the area of the façade in elevation view
upon which they are placed.
F. Animated signs: as defined by this Ordinance, animated signs are prohibited in Rural and
Urban Residential Zoning Districts.
G. Roof Signs: as defined by this Ordinance, Roof signs are prohibited in Rural and Urban
Residential Zoning Districts.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 23
Table 1 – Signs in Residential Districts
Types of Signs
Allowed
Number of
Signs Allowed
Permitted Sign
Area
Maximum
Height (if
Applicable)
Rural & Urban
Residential:
Including
Single Family
Attached,
Detached
Freestanding or
Wall
Any number so
long as the
total sq. ft. of
all signs does
not exceed 8
sq. ft. per
frontage
8 sq. ft 6’-0”
Rural & Urban
Residential:
Subdivisions,
Apartment
Complexes,
Multi-Family
Dwellings,
Duplexes,
Town Homes,
Condominiums
Freestanding
One Per
Frontage
64 sq. ft.
15’-0”
Wall
One Per
Façade
5% of Façade -------------
Incidental or
Directional
Unlimited 6 sq. ft. 8’-0”
Rural / Urban
Residential:
Permitted Non-
Residential
Uses in
Freestanding
One Per
Frontage
48 sq. ft.
15’-0”
Wall
One Per
Façade
5% of Façade -------------
Incidental or
Directional
Unlimited 6 sq. ft. 8’-0”
SECTION 22.17: STANDARDS IN GENERAL BUSINESS AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
General standards and sign features: The standards for permanent signs in the General Business
and Development Districts. All such signs must conform to the regulations of this Section.
A. Any signs permitted in a Rural or Urban Residential Districts are permitted in General
Business and Development Districts.
B. Signs for an office, office development, professional building or multitenant commercial
establishment, including a directory of tenants engaged in professional and/or commercial
activity on the premises. The area of any such sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square
feet and not more than two (2) such signs shall be permitted on premises held in single and
separate ownership unless such premises fronts on more than one (1) street in which case
two (1) such sign shall be permitted on each separate street frontage.
C. Signs on properties located in the General Business or Development Districts are regulated
by reference to types noted in the following:
1. Freestanding Signs:
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 24
a) Freestanding signs shall be limited to one (1) per property held in single
and separate ownership except for a property that has frontage on more
than one (1) street, in which case one (1) such sign shall be permitted for
each separate street frontage. If a property has frontage that exceeds
three hundred (300) lineal feet on any given roadway, one (1) additional
such sign on such frontage shall be permitted; and for each multiple of
three hundred (300) lineal feet of frontage thereafter, one (1) additional
such sign shall be permitted for each separate street frontage.
Unless otherwise regulated by specific reference herein, the area and
height above grade of any freestanding sign shall not exceed the amounts
specified in Table 2. See Page 25
b) In the case of property designated as a shopping center or planned
industrial park, additional freestanding signs shall be permitted for each
vehicular entrance to the property. Permitted sign area for these
additional freestanding signs shall be sixty (60) percent of the sign area
permitted by Table 2 for Signs in General Business and Development
Districts. Sign height shall be in conformance with Table 2. See Below.
c) Freestanding signs may not extend into the right-of-way.
Table 2 – Freestanding Signs in GB, DD, SR, & RP Values indicated are maximum
limits on sign size and height
A= Sign Area in Square Feet / H= Sign Height in Lineal Feet
Zoning
District ?
GB, DD, SR, RP
Speed
Limit ?
A H
25 64 24
30 92 28
35 125 30
40 164 38
45 208 43
50 256 47
55 312 51
2. Building Signs:
a) Building signs include wall or fascia signs, roof signs, and signs otherwise
permanently applied to walls or other building surfaces.
b) The total area of all parallel wall signs applied to any given façade shall
not exceed the area computed as a percentage of the building façade in
elevation view, including window and door areas and cornices to which
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 25
they are affixed or applied in accordance with Table 3 (See Page 25) for
Parallel Signs in General Business and Development Districts.
c) In the case of a shopping center or a group of stores or other business uses
on a lot held in single and separate ownership, the provisions of this section
relating to the total area of signs permitted on premises shall apply with
respect to each building, separate store, separate storefront, or separate
use. Only wall signs shall be permitted for individual establishments in a
Shopping Center or on a property with more than one use, entity or
business (multi-use or multi-tenant properties; these properties may also
have one (1) freestanding sign per street frontage).
d) Fascia or wall signs may not extend above the top of the building wall
upon which they are mounted.
e) Fascia or wall signs may not extend more than eighteen (18) inches out
from the wall or structure to which they are attached.
Table 3 - Parallel Signs
Distance of sign from road
Percentage of building elevation
façade permitted for sign area
0 to 100 feet
Fifteen (15%)
101 to 300 feet
Twenty (20%)
Over 301 feet
Twenty-Five (25%)
3. Roof Signs, Special Considerations:
a) Roof signs are permitted by Special Exception in the General Business and
Development Districts and are in lieu of a building or wall sign. For
permitted roof sign area, see Table 3 (above) for parallel signs in General
Business and Development District. The height of any roof sign above the
highest architectural point of the building to which it is mounted shall not
exceed the percentage of the vertical dimension of the building façade
parallel to the sign in accord with subsection (1) Page 25. Measurements
shall be computed from the highest building point to the top of the sign.
(1) General Business and Development District – Twenty-five (25) percent
b) The area calculation for any roof sign whose orientation on a roof may be
other than parallel to an individual building façade shall be computed with
reference to the building façade that most closely parallels the orientation
of such sign.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 26
c) A pitched roof sign may not extend above the roofline.
d) Pitched roof signs must be parallel to the building face. They may not
extend beyond the building wall. See illustrations in Section 22.09 (See
Page 14)
e) Support structures must be designed so that there is no visible support
structure above the sign.
4. Canopy Signs (also Marquee Signs and Signs on Architectural Projections): Special
Considerations
a) Canopy Signs, Marquee Signs and Signs on Architectural Projections are
signs that are mounted to either structures that project off the face of the
building more than eighteen (18) inches or signs that are mounted to a
freestanding structure not attached to a building that creates a canopy or
covering over an area below.
b) Signs affixed or applied in an essentially flat plane to the face of a
building or freestanding canopy, marquee, or architectural projection
provided that the copy area of any such sign, as defined herein, does not
exceed an area equal to forty (40) percent of the product of the height
and length of the face area of the canopy, marquee, or architectural
projection to which such sign is affixed or applied, or fifteen (15) percent
of the building façade to which it is attached, whichever is greater.
c) Graphic treatment in the form of striping or patterns shall be permitted on
the face of any building or freestanding canopy, marquee, or architectural
projection without restriction, and the area of any such graphic treatment
shall not be calculated as a component of permitted copy area.
5. Awning Signs
a) Graphics affixed or applied to the face or side surfaces of an awning or
backlit awning are permitted provided that the copy area of any such
sign copy or graphic, as defined herein, does not exceed an area in
accordance with Table 3 for parallel signs, to which the awning is
attached.
b) Graphic treatment and/or embellishment in the form of striping, patterns,
or valances shall be permitted on the face or side surfaces of any
awning or backlit awning without restriction, and the area of any such
graphic treatment and/or embellishment shall not be calculated as a
component of permitted copy area.
6. Projecting Signs:
a) Projecting signs shall be limited to one (1) per building façade on which
any such sign is mounted except for a use that fronts on more than one
(1) street, in which case, one (1) such sign shall be permitted per façade
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 27
for each separate street frontage. In the case of a building in which any
individual façade exceeds two hundred (200) lineal feet, one (1) such
sign shall be permitted for each two hundred (200) lineal feet of such
façade or multiple thereof on each separate street on which such façade
fronts.
b) The area of any projecting sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per
every two (2) lineal feet of the building façade on which such sign is
mounted, except that no such sign shall be larger in area than one
hundred (100) square feet.
c) No projecting sign shall extend in vertical dimension above the highest
architectural point of the façade to which it is mounted in excess of
twenty five (25) percent of the vertical dimension of the façade itself. No
projecting sign’s height from highest grade below the sign to the lowest
point of the projecting sign or sign structure shall be less than ten (10)
feet.
d) Projecting signs extending over a public sidewalk shall be limited to a
projection distance not to exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the width of the
sidewalk.
e) Projecting signs shall not be permitted in addition to any permitted
freestanding signs on any given property frontage, except that, in the
case in which a premises is permitted either freestanding or projecting
signs on any one (1) frontage, projecting signs may be substituted for
any of the permitted freestanding signs on such frontage, provided that
the requirements herein specifically relating to size, height, and extension
of projecting signs are met.
f) Projecting signs are not allowed on rooftops or on pitched roofs.
7. Directional Signs
a) General standards: Directional signs that meet the standards of this
subsection are allowed in all districts and are not counted in the total
square footage of permanent signage allowed on any property or site.
b) Size: Freestanding directional signs may be up to six (6) square feet in
area and ninety-six (96) inches in height. Fascia directional signs may be
up to sixteen (16) square feet in area.
c) Directional signs in any district may have internal or external illumination.
8. Permanent Banners
a) General: Banners used as permanent signs are allowed in all Commercial
and Industrial districts and will be included in the total square footage of
permanent signage allowed on the site. If a banner is used as a
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 28
permanent sign it must be placed in a frame. Any banner not in a frame
will be considered a temporary banner. Temporary banners are
regulated under Section 22.17 Subsection 9.c. (See Page 28)
b) Standards: Permanent banners are subject to the standards for either
fascia signs or projecting signs depending on how the banner is
supported or anchored.
9. Temporary Signs
a) Signs that meet the standards of this subsection are exempt from the
standards for permanent signs and are not counted in the total square
footage of signage allowed on any particular property or site. Signs that
do not meet the standards of this subsection are subject to the standards
for permanent signs.
b) Temporary signs may have external or internal illumination.
c) Temporary Signs also include inflatable signs and objects. Signs and
other objects which are inflated, including but not limited to, balloons.
Balloons may be permitted in temporary non-commercial situations; for
instance: they are permitted for special occasions at a residence.
d) Temporary banners: Temporary banners are subject to the following
regulations:
1) In Rural and Urban Residential Districts, temporary banners are not
permitted on sites with houses, duplexes, and attached houses.
Exception: banners for holidays, religious commemoration, and
special family events.
2) In the General Business and Development Districts, one banner no
larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size is permitted per
property or, on a multi-use property, per storefront. One (1) of these
banners may be hung on each building wall or on each separate
structure.
i. In no case may a storefront have more than one (1)
temporary banner.
ii. A temporary banner may be displayed no longer than ninety
(90) days per calendar year, and for no more than 30 days
at a time.
iii. Any additional banners, or banners larger than thirty-two
(32) square feet in size, must meet the standards for
permanent signs in this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 29
10. Political Signs.
a) Temporary signs advertising political parties or candidates for
elections may be erected or displayed without permit or fee provided
that:
1.) The size of the sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
2.) The sign(s) shall be removed not later than ten (10) days after the
election to which they pertain.
11. Joint Signs.
a) The Planning Commission shall review permit applications for a Joint Sign
or Area Identification Sign, which the Planning Commission may approve
pursuant to review criteria and this Subparagraph, and thereafter the
Zoning Administrator may issue a permit for said sign.
b) Joint Signs and Area Identification Signs shall comply with both general
and district-specific sign requirements for construction, setbacks, and height.
Approval of the Joint Sign area and design shall be based on the
following criteria:
1.) The number and type of parcels, organizations, and structures
served by the sign;
2.) Consistency with other provisions and conditions of any Site Plan
Approval, Conditional Use Permit or related permit;
3.) Compatibility with adjacent development, including but not limited
to the size and design of Freestanding Signs in the vicinity;
4.) Consistency with the intent of the sign provisions of this
Ordinance, including district-specific sign regulations, and;
5.) Compliance with other applicable laws.
c) After the initial approval of a Joint Sign structure, each subsequent Joint
Sign Subunit to be included in the Joint Sign shall obtain a sign permit
directly from the Zoning Administrator. After initial construction of the Joint
Sign structure and Joint Sign Subunits, any alterations to the structure of
said signs shall require a sign permit from the Zoning Administrator.
d) Easements. A sign easement shall be required for all Joint Signs approved
by Planning Commission. The easement shall reflect the right of all affected
parcels to access and maintain the signage.
e) Sign Use and Maintenance Agreements. Parcels affected by a Joint Sign
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 30
Determination shall - in addition to the easement requirements of
subparagraph (a) above - be party to a sign-usage-and-maintenance
agreement for the Joint Sign.
Said agreement shall, at a minimum, establish terms for shared
maintenance and landscaping of the overall sign structure and sign
subunits; establish each parcel’s share of area in the Joint Sign; set any
requirements for the temporary disposition of sign subunits in the event of
business vacancies; and any other limitations on sign design, appearance,
or refurbishment. Said agreement shall be subject to prior review and
approval by the Planning Commission.
f) Recordation. All easements and agreements described in subparagraphs
(a) and (b) above shall be recorded with the Marquette County Register of
Deeds.
SECTION 22.18: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS IN ALL DISTRICTS
A. Where these regulations apply. These regulations apply to all signs regulated by this
Ordinance.
B. Sign placement. All signs and sign structures must be erected and attached totally on or
within the site or property to which they refer, behind any applicable legal right-of-way.
C. Removal of signs. The Michigan Department of Transportation, Marquette Charter
Township, or the Marquette County Road Commission may require a sign extending into
the right-of-way to be modified or moved if streets are widened or other improvements
made in the right-of-way, which result in the creation of unsafe conditions. The
modification or moving will be at the owner’s expense. If a nonconforming sign is moved
under this requirement, it may be re-erected on the site without being brought into
conformance.
D. Design continuity. All signs and sign structures must be professionally designed by a
licensed and insured sign contractor.
SECTION 22.19: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS
A. In the General Business and Development Districts, Electronic Message Centers (EMCs) are
permitted to be sixty percent (60%) of the allowable sign areas in accordance with the
sign areas noted in Table 2 (see Page 24) or Table 3 (see Page 25) respectively.
B. Additional general EMC regulations:
1. All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by photocell
(hardwired) or via software settings, in order to bring the EMC lighting level at
night into compliance with Section 22.21 of this Ordinance “Sign Illumination
Standards”.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 31
2. In General Business and Development District, EMC signs must maintain a minimum
transition time between messages and/or message frames of three (3) seconds
and these transitions may employ fade, dissolve, and or other transition effects.
3. All EMC display features and functions are permitted, with the exception of (a)
flashing, which is prohibited, and (b) full motion video or film display via an
electronic file imported into the EMC software or streamed in real time into the
EMC.
SECTION 22.20: SIGN ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
Signs may be illuminated consistent with the following standards:
A. A sign in any district may be illuminated at night. Signs that are illuminated at night may
not exceed a maximum luminance level of seven hundred fifty (750) cd/m² or Nits,
regardless of the method of illumination.
B. Signs that have external illumination, whether the lighting is mounted above or below the
sign face or panel, shall have lighting fixtures or luminaries that are fully shielded.
C. All illuminated signs must comply with the maximum luminance level of seven hundred fifty
(750) cd/m² or Nits at least one-half hour before Apparent Sunset, as determined by the
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), US Department of Commerce, for
the specific geographic location and date. All illuminated signs must comply with this
maximum luminance level throughout the night, if the sign is energized, until Apparent
Sunrise, as determined by the NOAA, at which time the sign may resume luminance levels
appropriate for daylight conditions, when required or appropriate.
D. On-premise signs do not constitute a form of outdoor lighting at night, but they shall not be
exempt from outdoor lighting regulations that the Charter Township of Marquette has
adopted, or may adopt in the future.
SECTION 22.21: NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. Nonconforming permanent signs may continue to exist after passage of this Code.
Nonconforming signs will be removed and changed in accordance with the provisions of
this Code.
B. Permanent signs and sign structures that are moved, removed, replaced, or structurally
altered must be brought into conformance with the sign regulations. However,
nonconforming signs required to be moved because of public right-of-way improvements
may be re-established. Removable faces or sign panel inserts in cabinet style sign may
also be changed by right, and such change does not constitute a structural alteration nor
trigger loss of nonconforming status.
C. All nonconforming signs and sign structures must continue to be maintained in accordance
with all applicable sections of this Ordinance as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 32
D. Nonconforming temporary signs must be removed within two (2) months of the passage of
this Ordinance.
E. Ownership. The status of a nonconforming sign is not affected by changes in ownership.
F. Once a sign is altered to conform or is replaced with a conforming sign, the nonconforming
rights for that sign are lost and a nonconforming sign may not be re-established.
G. Loss of a nonconforming sign status.
1. Discontinuance. See definition of Abandoned Sign.
2. Destruction. When a sign or sign structure is removed or intentionally destroyed,
replacement signs and sign structures must comply with the current standards. However:
a) Unintentional destruction. When a sign or sign structure that has nonconforming
elements is partially or totally damaged by fire or other causes beyond the
control of the owner, the sign and sign structure may be rebuilt to the same size
and height using the same materials.
SECTION 22.22: ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL PERMAMNENT AND
TEMPORARY ON-PREMISE SIGNS
All on-premise electrical signs outline lighting systems and skeleton neon lighting systems and all
other Electrical Regulations shall fall under the regulations of the Marquette County Building
Codes Department.
SECTION 22.23: CONSTRUCTION AND STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Structural Standards
1. Signs, sign structures, sign foundations and methods to attach and anchor signs must
be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Marquette County Building Codes Department.
2. The supports and foundations used in construction for all signs and sign structures
must be located outside any rights-of-way.
3. Welds of sign structures & sections of sign structures must be welded in accordance
with the Marquette County Building Codes Department.
B. Clearances
1. Vision clearance areas: Vision clearance areas are triangular-shaped areas
located at the intersection of any combination of rights-of-way, alleys or
driveways. The sides of the triangle extend thirty (30) feet from the intersection o
the right-of-way, alley or driveway in either/each direction. (See Section 14.03
Fig. 14-1) No sign may be installed within this clear sight triangle.
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 33
2. Vehicle area clearances: In areas outside of rights-of-way, when a sign or awning
extends over an area in which vehicles travel or are parked, the bottom of the
structure must be at least fourteen (14) feet above the ground. Vehicle areas
include driveways, alleys, parking areas, and loading and maneuvering areas.
3. Pedestrian area clearances: When a sign or awning extends more than twelve
(12) inches over a sidewalk, walkway, or other space used by pedestrians, the
bottom of the structure must be at least ten (10) feet above the ground.
4. Clearances from fire escapes, means of egress or standpipes: Signs, sign structures
and awnings are prohibited from being erected in any manner that interferes in
any way with the free use of any fire escape, means of egress or standpipe.
Attaching signs, sign structures or awnings to a fire escape is prohibited.
5. Obstruction of windows and ventilation: Signs, sign structures and awnings are
prohibited from being installed in any way that obstructs any building openings to
such an extent that light, ventilation or exhaust are reduced to a level below that
required by either the Marquette County Building Codes Department, The
Marquette County Health Department or the Marquette Township Fire Department.
SECTION 21.24: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
A. Signs, sign structures and awnings, together with their supports, braces, guys, anchors and
electrical components must be maintained in a proper state of repair. The Zoning
Administrator may at his/her discretion order any sign or sign structures or awnings to be
removed if not maintained in accordance to this Ordinance.
B. Dangerous Structures and Equipment
1. Signs, sign structures or awnings that are dangerous must be taken down and
removed or made safe as the Zoning Administrator deems necessary. Signs may
be deemed dangerous for one or more of the following reasons:
a) Whenever a sign structure or its foundation, a sign’s attachments to a building,
or a building to which a sign is attached is damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength
or stability is materially less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than
the minimum requirements of the Ordinance;
b) Whenever any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or awning is likely to
fail, or become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or property;
c) Whenever any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or awning is likely to
partially or completely collapse as a result of any cause, including
dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction or wiring; or removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground or building necessary for
supporting such structure;
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 34
d) Whenever a sign, structure or awning is structurally or electrically unsafe or
otherwise hazardous to human life or safety by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or
abandonment;
2. All signs, sign structures and awnings determined after inspection by the Zoning
Administrator to be dangerous must be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal.
SECTION 22.25: PERMITS
A. Permit
A Sign Permit Application shall be required for all sign except for those denoted in
Section 23.10 of this Article and shall be fully completed before submitting to the Zoning
Department.
B. Review of Applications and Issuance of Permits
The Zoning Department has ten (10) business days to review completed permits. Any
missing information may cause the review to be extended a reasonable amount of time.
Once the Zoning Department has completed their review of the Permit Application a
Permit will be issued at which time all applicable fees will need to be paid.
C. Life of Permit and Registration Limited
Once a permit is granted the individual erecting the sign has one (1) year to complete the
work as designated on the issued permit. Should the work not take place within one year
the Zoning Department will need to again review the permit application before any work
may commence.
SECTION 22.26: ENFORCEMENT & VIOLATIONS
A. The Zoning Administrator is empowered under this Article and in accordance with Article
26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.10, Zoning Administrator Duties and Power,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter a premise located within the Charter
Township of Marquette, for the purpose of inspection of a sign.
B. Penalties
If any sign is installed or placed on any property prior to receipt of a permit, the
specified permit fee shall be doubled. However, payment of the doubled fee shall not
relieve any person of any other requirements or penalties prescribed in this Ordinance.
C. Violations
When, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, a violation of the Ordinance exists, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a written order to the alleged violator. The order shall
specify those sections of the Ordinance which the individual may be in violation of and
shall state that the individual has thirty (30) days from the date of the order in which to
correct the alleged violation or to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. If, upon
inspection, the Zoning Administrator finds that a sign is abandoned or in any way
endangers the public health, safety or welfare, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a
ARTICLE 22 – SIGNS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 22 Page 35
written order to the owner of the sign and occupant of the premises stating the nature of
the violation and requiring them to repair or remove the sign within thirty (30) days of the
date of the order. In cases of emergency, the Zoning Administrator may cause the
immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. Signs removed in this
manner must present a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare as defined in the
local building or traffic codes.
SECTION 22.27: FEES
A. No permit will be issued by the Zoning Administrator until all applicable fees have been
paid as required by the Township Board.
SECTION 22.28: APPEALS
An individual aggrieved by a decision rendered by the Zoning Administrator in denying a permit
or in alleging a violation of this Article may appeal in writing to the Zoning Board of Appeals
within ten (10) days of receipt of the Zoning Administrator’s written decision. The action being
appealed shall be held in abeyance pending the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE 23 – NONCONFORMITIES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 23 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 23
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION TITLE PAGE
23.01: PURPOSE 2
23.02: DEFINITIONS 2
A. Legal Nonconformity 2
B. Nonconforming Use 2
C. Nonconforming Structure 3
D. Nonconforming Lot of Record 3
E. Nonconforming Sign 3
23.03: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMITIES 3
23.04: MAJOR NONCONFORMITIES 4
23.05: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES 4
23.06: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES-STRUCTURES 5
23.07: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES-USES OF STRUCTURE AND LAND 5
23.08: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD 6
23.09: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE 7
23.10: PRIOR CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL 7
23.11: CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP 7
23.12: ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMITIES USE OR STRUCTURE 7
ARTICLE 23 – NONCONFORMITIES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 23 Page 2
ARTICLE 23: NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION 23.01: PURPOSE
It is purpose of this Article to provide for the regulation of legally nonconforming structures, lots of
record, and uses, and also to specify circumstances and conditions under which nonconformities
shall be permitted to continue. It is necessary and consistent with the regulations prescribed by
this Ordinance that nonconformities, which adversely affect orderly development and the value of
nearby property, not be permitted to continue without restriction. The zoning regulations
established by this Ordinance are designed to guide the future use of land located in the Charter
Township of Marquette by encouraging appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses
and to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The continued
existence of nonconformities is frequently inconsistent with the purposes for which regulations are
established; therefore, the gradual elimination of nonconformities is generally desirable. The
regulations of this Article permit nonconformities to continue, but are intended to restrict further
investments which would make them more permanent. This Article distinguishes major
nonconforming uses, minor nonconforming uses, major nonconforming structures, minor
nonconforming structures, and nonconforming lots of records. The degree of restriction made
applicable to each separate category is a function of the degree to which that category of
nonconformity is a nuisance or incompatible with the purposes and regulations of this Ordinance.
SECTION 23.02: DEFINITIONS
A. A legal nonconformity is any land use, structure, lot of record, or sign (See Article 22, Signs
for Details on Nonconforming Signs) legally established prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance or subsequent amendment to it which would not be permitted by, or be in full
compliance with, the regulations of this Ordinance.
B. A nonconforming use is an activity using land, buildings, signs, and/or structures for
purposes which were legally established prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or
subsequent amendment to it and which would not be permitted to be established as a new
use in a zoning district in which it is located by the regulations of this Ordinance.
1. A major nonconforming use is any principal use not permitted by right (Y), or by a
Special Use Permit (S), as designated in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts,
Section 15.05, Table XIV, Use vs. District Nomograph.
2. A minor nonconforming use is any existing nonconforming use which is not classified as
a major nonconforming use. If an existing nonconforming use is designated as
requiring a Special Use Permit (S) in Article 15, Principal Uses Permitted in Districts,
Section 15.05, Table XIV, Use vs. District Nomograph, then the existing nonconforming
use is considered to be a minor nonconforming use.
ARTICLE 23 – NONCONFORMITIES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 23 Page 3
SECTION 23.02: DEFINITIONS – (Cont.)
C. A nonconforming structure is any building or structure, other than a sign, legally established
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment, which does not
fully comply with the standards set forth in this Ordinance.
1. A major nonconforming structure is any nonresidential building or structure located on a
parcel which at any point borders a residential use and which exceeds either the
maximum building height for the district in which it is located or which does not fully
comply with the bufferyard requirements of this Ordinance.
2. A minor nonconforming structure is any nonconforming building or structure which is not
classified as a major nonconforming building or structure.
D. A nonconforming lot of record is any validly recorded lot which at the time it was recorded
fully complied with all applicable laws and ordinances but which does not fully comply
with the lot requirements of this Ordinance concerning minimum area or minimum lot width.
E. A nonconforming sign is any sign legally established prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance or subsequent amendment to it which is not in full compliance with the
regulations of this Ordinance.
SECTION 23.03: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMITIES
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any nonconforming lot, use, sign, or structure
lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment thereto
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful. All nonconformities shall be
encouraged to convert to conformity wherever possible and shall be required to convert to
conforming status as required by this Article.
B. A nonconformity shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, including extension
of hours of operation, unless the alteration is in compliance with all requirements of this
Ordinance. Normal maintenance and incidental repair of a legal nonconformity shall be
permitted, provided that this does not violate any other section of this Article.
1. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a
safe condition of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official who is
charged with protecting the public safety and who declares the structure to be unsafe
and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided that the restoration is not
otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Section prohibiting the repair or
restoration of partially damaged or destroyed structures or signs.
2. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent an extension for the exclusive
purpose of providing required off-street parking or loading spaces, and involving no
structural alteration or enlargement of such structure, subject to the restrictions of
Article 21, Off Street Parking Requirements.
ARTICLE 23 – NONCONFORMITIES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 23 Page 4
SECTION 23.03: CONTINUITY OF NONCONFORMITIES – (Cont.)
C. A nonconformity shall not be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to
any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated.
D. No use, structure, or sign which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure
shall continue after the principal use or structure has ceased or terminated, unless it shall
thereafter conform to all regulations of this Ordinance.
E. The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is a legal nonconformity as defined by
this Article shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the
Township.
SECTION 23.04: MAJOR NONCONFORMITIES
A. A major nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in
the zoning district in which it is located.
B. Major nonconforming uses or structures shall not be re-established in their nonconforming
conditions in any zoning district after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of
reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised replacement cost of the
structure or use.
C. If a major nonconforming use ceases for any reason for a period of more than twelve (12)
consecutive months, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an
intention to abandon the existing nonconforming use. At the end of the three hundred
sixty-five (365) day period, the nonconforming use shall not be re-established and any
future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 23.05: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES
A. On the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, where a lawful use of
land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or
amended, the use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
1. A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance.
2. A nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the
lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 23 – NONCONFORMITIES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 23 Page 5
SECTION 23.05: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES – (Cont.)
3. If a nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than three
hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days, such discontinuance shall be considered
conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the existing nonconforming use. The
time limit on discontinuance may be extended beyond the three hundred sixty-five
(365) days, for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year upon proper application
to the Zoning Board of Appeals within the three hundred sixty-five (365) day period
and upon presentation of evidence that a practical difficulty would exist should the
three hundred sixty-five (365) day limitation be strictly enforced. At the end of the
three hundred sixty-five (365) day period of abandonment, the nonconforming use
shall not be re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this Ordinance. Seasonal nonconforming uses, currently found in the Township which
by their nature operate habitually for less than eleven (11) months out of a year or
customarily during a limited period of the year, shall be exempted from this
requirement.
4. A nonconforming use shall not be extended to displace a permitted or conforming use.
SECTION 23.06: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES - STRUCTURES
A. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or
its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. Nonconforming structures shall not be altered or expanded without the prior approval
of the Zoning Board of Appeals, with the exception of structural alterations which do
not increase the bulk of the structure or the intensity of use of the structure.
2. Nonconforming buildings or structures may be structurally altered so as to prolong the
life of the building or structure.
3. Nonconforming structures may be re-established in their nonconforming condition in
any zoning district after damage or destruction of the nonconforming structure, only if
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SECTION 23.07: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES – USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND
A. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, that would not be allowed in the
zoning district under the terms of this Ordinance, the use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
ARTICLE 23 – NONCONFORMITIES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 23 Page 6
SECTION 23.07: MINOR NONCONFORMITIES-USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND – (Cont.)
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in
which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the
district in which it is located.
2. A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was
arranged or designed for that use, and which existed at the time of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, but the use shall not be extended to occupy any land
outside the building.
3. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use
is superseded or changed to a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the zoning district in which the structure is located and shall not revert
back to a nonconforming use.
4. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is
discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, the discontinuance shall be considered
conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the existing nonconforming use.
The time limit of discontinuance may be extended beyond the twelve (12) months for a
period of time not to exceed one (1) year upon proper application to the Zoning
Board of Appeals within the twelve (12) month period and upon presentation of
evidence that a practical difficulty would exist should the twelve (12) month limitation
be strictly enforced. At the end of this period of abandonment, the structure, or
structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in
conformance with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. Seasonal
nonconforming uses of a structure, or structures and premises, currently found in the
Township, which by their nature operate habitually for less than eleven (11) months out
of a year or customarily during a limited period of the year, shall be exempted from
this requirement.
SECTION 23.08: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
A nonconforming lot of record is any validly recorded lot which at the time it was recorded fully
complied with all applicable laws and ordinances but which does not fully comply with the lot
requirements of this Ordinance concerning minimum area or minimum lot dimensions. A
nonconforming lot of record may be used for any principal use permitted in the zoning district in
which the lot is located, provided that for any use which is to be served by an individual potable
water well and sanitary septic system, the nonconforming lot shall be of a size and design to meet
the minimum requirements of the Marquette County Health Department (See also Article 20,
Miscellaneous Provisions, Section 20.09, Area and Width Requirement for Lots of Record).
ARTICLE 23 – NONCONFORMITIES
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 23 Page 7
SECTION 23.09: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
Repairs and maintenance may be performed on any building devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use; including ordinary repairs or repair or replacement of nonbearing walls,
fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the market value of
the building during any period of twelve (12) consecutive months. However, the cubic content of
the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be
increased. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by order of any official
charged with protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
SECTION 23.10: PRIOR CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL
Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the completion of construction and use of a nonconforming
building for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
provided that construction is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of the
permit, that construction is carried on diligently without interruption, as weather permits, for a
continuous period; and that the entire building shall have been completed according to the plans
filed with the permit application within two (2) years after the issuance of the building permit. To
avoid practical difficulties, nothing in this Article shall be deemed to require a change in the
plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article, and upon which actual
construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except where
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to
rebuilding. The demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that
work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
SECTION 23.11: CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming
uses of land, structures, and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of
the nonconforming uses.
SECTION 23.12: ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMITIES USE OR STRUCTURE
The Township Board may acquire private property or an interest in private property for the
removal of any nonconforming use or structure by purchase, condemnation, or other means. The
cost, expense, or a portion thereof may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special
district in accordance with applicable statutory provisions.
ARTICLE 24 – ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 24 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 24
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
24.01: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP 2
24.02: PROCEDURES 2
24.03: DUTIES AND AUTHORITY 3
24.04: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW 3
24.05: VARIANCES 4
24.06: VARIANCE STANDARDS 5
24.07: APPEALS 5
24.08: DUTIES ON MATTERS OF APPEAL 6
24.09: DECISION RECORD 6
ARTICLE 24 – ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 24 Page 2
ARTICLE 24: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION 24.01: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with Act 110 of the Public Acts
of 2006, as amended (Michigan Zoning Enabling Act). The Board shall consist of five (5) members,
the first member shall be a member of the Planning Commission and the remaining members shall
be selected from the electors residing in the Charter Township of Marquette. One member may
be a member of the Township Board, however, an elected officer of the Township shall not serve
as chairperson, and an employee or a contractor of the Township Board may not serve as a
member of the Board of Appeals. The term of office shall be for three (3) years, whose terms
shall be limited to their official terms as commissioner and/or board members respectively or to
such lesser periods as determined by resolution of the Township Board. Members of the Zoning
Board of Appeals may be removed from office in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. If the Planning Commission member is removed or unable to serve,
a replacement shall be appointed by the Planning Commission. Other vacancies shall be filled by
appointment of the Township Board not more than one (1) month after the term of the preceding
member has expired. Persons serving on the Zoning Board of Appeals may be reappointed.
SECTION 24.02: PROCEDURES
The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt rules and regulations to govern its procedures and shall
appoint one of its members as chairperson. The concurring vote of a majority of the appointed
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to revise any order, requirement,
decision or interpretation of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of an applicant any
matter upon which they are required to pass under this Ordinance or to effect any variation in this
Ordinance.
A. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and
at such times as its rules of procedure may specify. Minutes shall be kept of each meeting
and the board shall record into the minutes all findings, conditions, facts, and other
relevant factors, including the vote of each member upon any questions or if absent or
failing to vote indicating such fact, and all of its official actions. All meetings and records
shall be open to the public and the minutes shall be filed in the office of the Township
Clerk.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and date for the hearing of an
appeal. The Township Clerk shall publish one (1) notice of public hearing, not less than
fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing and shall notify by regular mail or personal
delivery the parties of interest and all property owners and occupants of all structures
within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the subject property. In situations
where a single structure contains four (4) or more dwelling units, businesses, or
organizations, notice must be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be
requested to post notice at the primary entrance of the structure.
ARTICLE 24 – ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 24 Page 3
SECTION 24.02: PROCEDURES – (Cont.)
The notice shall describe the special nature of the land use request; the legal description,
and a location map of the property; specify the date, time, and place of the hearing;
indicated when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
SECTION 24.03: DUTIES AND AUTHORITY
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall perform its duties and exercise its powers in
accordance with the Provisions of the Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended
(Michigan Zoning Enabling Act) so that the objectives of this Ordinance shall be attained,
the public health, safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hear and decide only those matters which it is specifically
authorized to hear and decide as provided herein relative to administrative review,
interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance including the zoning maps and the granting of
variances.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power nor authority to alter or change
the zoning district classification of any property, nor make any change in the terms or
intent of this Ordinance, but does have authority to act on matters specifically provided
for in this Ordinance regarding administrative review, interpretation, variance or
exception.
C. Except as provided in Article 18, Site Plan Review, Section 18.13, Ordinance Interpretation
and Appeals, and Section 18.14, Zoning Board of Appeals Procedure, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have no authority to review decisions of the Planning Commission and shall
have no authority to review decisions of the Township Board.
D. The Township Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the
appointed members of the board are present and vote to approve a proper motion. A
member shall disqualify himself/herself from a vote in which there may be a conflict of
interest.
SECTION 24.04: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirements, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator.
B. When the Zoning Administrator has a question or determines that there is ambiguity
regarding the application of this Ordinance to a specific application or issue, the Zoning
Administrator may file an application for interpretation which shall outline sufficient
information for the Zoning Board of Appeals to make a decision.
ARTICLE 24 – ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 24 Page 4
SECTION 24.04: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW – (Cont.)
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to:
1. Interpret, upon request, the provisions of this Ordinance in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of this Ordinance;
2. Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts when
there is dissatisfaction with a decision made by the Zoning Administrator;
3. Determine the off-street parking requirements for any proposed land use not
specifically mentioned either by classifying it with one of the groups listed in Article
21, Off Street Parking Requirements, Section 21.05, Table XX; Use vs. Parking
Nomograph, or by an analysis of the specific needs.
SECTION 24.05: VARIANCES
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority and duty to authorize, upon appeal
in specific cases such variance from the provisions of this Ordinance as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Ordinance would result in practical difficulties.
B. Any nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings shall not be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make findings that the requirements of this Article have
been met by the applicant.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that the reasons set forth in the application justify
the granting of a variance, and that it is the minimum variance that will make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
E. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that the granting of a variance will be in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public interest.
F. In granting any variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards. Violations of conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the variance is granted shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance.
G. Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use
not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved, or allow any use
expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 24 – ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 24 Page 5
SECTION 24.05: VARIANCES – (Cont.)
In exercising their authority, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, so long as such action is in
conformity with the terms of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirements, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have the authority of the public official from whom the appeal was taken.
H. Each variance granted under the provisions of this Ordinance shall become null and void
unless the occupancy of land or buildings, or the construction authorized by such variance
has commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after the granting of the variance.
SECTION 24.06: VARIANCE STANDARDS
A. Prior to the authorization and granting of any variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine that the following standards have been satisfied:
Practical Difficulty or Dimensional Variance Standards:
The applicant must show practical difficulty by demonstrating:
a. That strict compliance with area, setback, frontage, height, bulk or density would
unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose,
or would render conformity unnecessarily burdensome.
b. That a variance would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other
property owners in the district, or that a lesser relaxation would give substantial
relief and be more consistent with justice to others.
c. That the variance would not alter the essential character of the area.
d. That the appeal of the owner is due to unique circumstances of the property and
not to general neighborhood conditions.
e. That the problem is not self-created.
NOTE: In the granting of any variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall ensure that the spirit
of the Ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
SECTION 24.07: APPEALS
A. Appeals concerning interpretation or the administration of this Ordinance shall be made in
accordance with Article 18, Site Plan Review, Section 18.13, Ordinance Interpretation and
Appeals, Section 18.14, Zoning Board of Appeals Procedure, or for other contested actions
by filing a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof with the Zoning Administrator
within thirty (30) days from the date of the contested decision.
ARTICLE 24 – ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 24 Page 6
SECTION 24.07: APPEALS – (Cont.)
The Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals copies of all the
information constituting the record upon which the action being appealed was based.
B. The appeal fee, established by the Township Board in accordance with Article 26,
Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.13, Fees, shall be paid to the Township at the
time of filing the notice of appeal.
C. Any party or parties may appear at the hearing in person or may be represented by an
agent or an attorney.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide upon all matters within a reasonable time. The
decision of the board shall be in the form of a motion containing a full record of its
findings and determinations in each case.
E. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the
Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal shall
have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in
his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of
Appeals or by the Circuit Court, on application, on notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
SECTION 24.08: DUTIES ON MATTERS OF APPEAL
All questions concerning application of the provisions of this Ordinance shall first be presented to
the Zoning Administrator. Questions shall be presented to the Zoning Board of Appeals only on
appeal from the decisions of the Zoning Administrator. Recourse from decisions of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be to the Circuit Court of Marquette County, as provided by law.
SECTION 24.09: DECISION RECORD
All decisions and findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final and may be appealed
only to the appropriate circuit court. All decisions and findings shall be incorporated in a written
document specifying the reasons for the decision and specific findings of fact. The public hearing
record shall be filed with the Township Clerk and be available for public inspection at the
Township Office during regular business hours.
ARTICLE 25 – CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 25 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 25
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
25.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT 2
25.02: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 2
A. Initiation 2
B. Text Amendments 2
C. Map Amendments 2
25.03: SUMMARY OF THE AMENDMENT PROCESS 2
25.04: PROCEDURES 3
25.05: APPLICATION INFORMATION 4
25.06: FACT FINDING 5
ARTICLE 25 – CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 25 Page 2
ARTICLE 25: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION 25.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT
To assure sound, consistent, and desirable development within the Charter Township of Marquette,
this Ordinance may be amended from time to time as conditions warrant. Revisions may be
required due to changing socio-economic conditions, rezoning, the enlargement of existing district
boundaries, to correct or clarify certain sections, or to revise or change regulations, restrictions, or
standards.
SECTION 25.02: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Changes and amendments to this Ordinance shall be consistent with the following procedures:
A. INITIATION
Only the Township Board has the authority to amend or change this Ordinance. Proposals
for amendments or changes may be initiated by the Township Board on its own motion, by
the Planning Commission, or by an individual.
B. TEXT AMENDMENTS
The application for an amendment to the text of this Ordinance shall state in particular the
article, section, subsection, and paragraph sought to be amended. The application shall
contain the language of the proposed amendment and shall state the reasons for the
proposed change in the text.
C. MAP AMENDMENT
Applications to rezone any property, or which seek to change or modify the standards
and requirements imposed on a particular property by the text and maps of this
Ordinance, including applications for variations and special use permits, shall be instituted
by the Township.
SECTION 25.03: SUMMARY OF THE AMENDMENT PROCESS
A. Petitioner shall submit an application and the fee established by the Township Board in
accordance with Article 26, Administration and Enforcement, Section 26.14, Fees, to the
Township Zoning Administrator.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application to the Planning Commission who will
set a public hearing date, and cause the notice of public hearing to be published as
outlined in Section 25.04, Procedures.
ARTICLE 25 – CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 25 Page 3
SECTION 25.03: SUMMARY OF THE AMENDMENT PROCESS – (Cont.)
C. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to the
Township Board. A written summary of the comments received at the public hearing along
with the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the County
Planning Commission in accordance with the requirements of The Michigan Zoning Enabling
Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, and also to the Township Board.
D. After the review of the recommendation by the Township Planning Commission along with
any comments from the County Planning Commission, the Township Board may, at their
discretion, hold an additional public hearing if considered necessary. Notice of public
hearing to be held by the Township Board shall be published by one (1) publication in a
newspaper which is circulated in the Township and shall be given not less than fifteen (15)
before the date of the hearing. After receiving the recommended change or amendment,
the Township Board, at a regular meeting or at a special meeting called for that purpose,
shall consider the recommendation. Any change or amendment shall be approved by a
majority vote of the members of the Township Board. The Planning Commission shall
respond to the Township Board with their recommendation regarding any change or
departure to the original recommendation within a time frame specified by the Township
Board.
SECTION 25.04: PROCEDURES
The procedure for making amendments to this Ordinance shall be as follows:
A. A petition, together with a completed application and fee shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The application must be received by the Zoning Administrator not less than
fifteen (15) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Township Planning
Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for completeness and
shall forward it to the Township Planning Commission for review. The Planning Commission
shall establish a date for a public hearing and the Zoning Administrator shall give proper
notice of the hearing.
B. Before submitting a recommendation regarding a rezoning or text amendment, the
Township Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing, notice of which
hearing shall be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township, not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of hearing. Not less than fifteen
(15) days notice of the time and place of the hearing shall also be given by mail to each
electric, gas, pipeline, and telephone public utility company, and to each railroad
operating within the district or zone affected, that registers its name and mailing address
with the Township Planning Commission for the purpose of receiving the notice.
An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained. The notice shall include the date, place, time,
and purpose of the hearing and the location where the tentative text and any maps
relative to the issue may be examined.
ARTICLE 25 – CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 25 Page 4
SECTION 25.04: PROCEDURES – (Cont.)
C. When an individual property or several adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning,
the Township Zoning Administrator shall serve notice of the proposed rezoning to the
owner of the property in question, to all persons to whom any real property within three
hundred (300) feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of all
single and two (2) family dwellings within three hundred (300) feet. The notice shall be
delivered personally or by mail to the respective owners and tenants at the address given
in the last assessment roll. If the tenant’s name is not known, the term “occupant” may be
used. If the notice is delivered by mail, an affidavit of mailing shall be filed with the
Planning Commission before the hearing. The notice shall be made in accordance with
Section 24.04 Procedures, Item B, and shall state the date, place, time, and the purpose of
the hearing. An amendment for the purpose of conforming a provision of this Zoning
Ordinance to the decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as to any specific lands may
be adopted by the Township Board and the notice of the adopted amendment published
without referring the amendment to any other board or agency provided for under the
requirements of The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
SECTION 25.05: APPLICATION INFORMATION
A. The petitioner shall submit a detailed application to the Zoning Administrator, and when
the petition involves a rezoning and/or change to the zoning map, the petitioner shall
submit the following information:
1. A legal description of the property.
2. A scaled map of the property, correlated with the legal description, and clearly
showing the property’s location.
3. The name and address of the petitioner.
4. The petitioner’s interest in the property, and if the petitioner is not the owner, the name
and address of the owner.
5. Date of filing with the Zoning Administrator.
6. Signature(s) of petitioner(s) and owner(s) certifying the accuracy of the required
information.
7. The desired change and detailed reasons for such change.
ARTICLE 25 – CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 25 Page 5
SECTION 25.06: FACT FINDING
A. In reviewing a petition for a zoning change or amendment, the Planning Commission shall
identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition, and shall report its findings in
full, along with its recommendations for disposition of the petition, to the Township Board,
within thirty (30) days from the date of the public hearing on the petition.
B. The questions to be considered by the Planning Commission relative to a petition for a
zoning change or amendment shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. If a rezoning request, is the area proposed to be rezoned an appropriate location for
the proposed zone, and is the requested zoning change or amendment justified by
reason of a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or if there
was an error in judgment, procedure, or administration which justifies the petitioned
change;
2. Is the requested zoning change or amendment consistent with the goals and policies,
and other elements of the Charter Township of Marquette Comprehensive Plan;
3. What may be the long term effects of precedent which may result from approval or
denial of the petition;
4. Does the Township or other affected government agencies have the capability to
provide the necessary services, facilities, and/or programs that might be required if
the petition is approved;
5. Are there any potentially significant and/or negative environmental impacts if the
petitioned zoning change were approved and the resulting permitted structures built,
including by not limited to, surface water drainage problems, wastewater disposal
problems, or the loss of a locally valuable natural resource;
6. What may be the potential effect of either approval or denial of the petition upon
adopted development policies of the Township or other governmental units;
7. What is the potential effect of the petitioned zoning change upon the value of
adjacent and/or surrounding properties;
8. Has an environmental impact assessment or statement been submitted.
NOTE: All findings of fact, regarding any petition for a rezoning and/or change or
amendment, shall be recorded in the official minutes and made a part of the
public record for all meetings of the Planning Commission, the Township Board,
and the Zoning Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE 26
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION TITLE PAGE
26.01: PURPOSE 2
26.02: ADMINISTRATION 2
26.03: ZONING COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE 2
26.04: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE 2
CERTIFICATES
26.05: PROCEDURES 3
26.06: SITE PLAN REVIEW 4
26.07: SPECIAL USE PERMIT 4
26.08: CHANGE OF USE 4
26.09: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, DUTIES AND POWERS 4
26.10: DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION 5
26.11: PENALITES 5
A. Civil Law 5
B. Civil Law Penalties 5
26.12: REMEDIES 5
26.13: FEES 6
26.14: EFFECTIVE DATE 7
26.15: TOWNSHIP SUPERVISOR AND CLERK SIGNATURES 8
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 2
ARTICLE 26: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 26.01: PURPOSE
This article sets forth the procedures required for obtaining a Zoning Compliance Certificate,
certificate of occupancy, sign permit, and special land use permit. The authority and duties of the
Zoning Administrator, and the Planning Commission are also specified.
SECTION 25.02: ADMINISTRATION
The responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall rest with the
Township Supervisor, who along with the Township Board, shall have the authority to delegate
responsibility to appropriate Township officers and/or employees. The individual administering
and enforcing this Ordinance shall be designated as the Zoning Administrator and shall have the
power of a public official in implementing enforcement procedures.
SECTION 26.03: ZONING COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE
Any development permitted by this Ordinance, including accessory and temporary uses, may not
be established or changed; no structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
razed, moved onto a site nor removed therefrom, and no building used, occupied, or altered with
respect to its use, after the effective date of this Ordinance until a Zoning Compliance Certificate
has been secured from the Zoning Administrator. Nothing herein shall relieve any applicant of the
additional responsibility of seeking any permit required by any applicable statute, ordinance, or
regulations in compliance with all of the terms of this Ordinance.
SECTION 26.04: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ZONING
COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATES
A. All application requests for a Zoning Compliance Certificate shall be executed by the
owner of the subject property or his representative on a form provided by the Township
and filed with the Zoning Administrator.
B. When a Zoning Compliance Certificate is sought for a development which is a part of a
plat of a subdivision which has received final plat approval or which has been issued a
Special Use Permit, the plat, or Special Use Permit, together with any covenants,
conditions, or other restrictions shall be submitted as a part of the application for the
Zoning Compliance Certificate, if not previously submitted and on file at the Township
Hall.
C. Application for a Special Use Permit shall be made prior to application for a Zoning
Compliance Certificate.
D. With regard to subdivision developments, final approval of the final plat in accordance
with Section 148 of the Land Division Act, Act P.A. 288, 1967, as amended, shall be
verified by the Zoning Administrator prior to application for a Zoning Compliance
Certificate.
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 3
SECTION 26.04: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE
CERTIFICATES – (Cont.)
E. A temporary use and an accessory use shall require a Zoning Compliance Certificate as a
precondition to their lawful establishment. The Zoning Administrator may establish
regulations governing the application requirements for a Zoning Compliance Certificate in
the case of either a temporary or accessory use which is established at any time other
than simultaneously with a principal use, in which case all information specified in Section
26.05A of this Article shall be submitted. The purpose of the required information is to
provide the Zoning Administrator with a sufficient factual basis to determine if all
requirements of the Ordinance applicable to temporary and accessory uses have been
fulfilled.
F. No application shall be accepted by the Zoning Administrator until it is completed as
described above and until all fees established by the Township to offset processing have
been paid in full.
SECTION 26.05: PROCEDURES
A. Developments consisting of a single lot of record, a single dwelling unit, or a single
nonresidential unit shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with this
Ordinance. Within five (5) business days after the application for a Zoning Compliance
Certificate has been accepted by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
inform the applicant whether the application has been granted. If the application is
granted, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Zoning Compliance Certificate which shall
state on its face:
“This certificate does not certify building codes review or approval, nor
subdivision review or approval, and is not authorization to undertake any
work without such review and approval, where either is required.”
B. Development consisting of more lots, uses, or structures than described above, shall be
reviewed for compliance with this Ordinance in as timely a manner as possible. The
Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant whether the certificate has been granted
within thirty (30) days after the application for a Zoning Compliance Certificate has been
accepted by the Zoning Administrator.
C. Applications for sign permits shall be reviewed for compliance with this Ordinance, and
within five (5) business days after filing with the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Administrator shall inform the applicant whether the permit has been granted.
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 4
SECTION 26.06: SITE PLAN REVIEW
Site plan review shall be required as a precondition to the issuance of a Zoning Compliance
Certificate in accordance with Section 18.05, Procedures for Site Plan Review. The Zoning
Administrator or the Planning Commission, in those site plan reviews for which it has jurisdiction,
shall review all site plans subject to the procedures, standards, and limitations set forth in this
Ordinance. A Zoning Compliance Permit shall not be issued without written approval of the
Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission, in those site plan reviews for which it has
jurisdiction based upon the submittal requirements specified in Section 18.06, Required
Information.
SECTION 26.07: SPECIAL USE PERMIT
An application for a Special Use Permit required under this Ordinance shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Article 17, Special Land Uses, Section
17.03, Application Procedure.
SECTION 26.08: CHANGE OF USE
A change or alteration of the use of any building, structure, or land shall not be permitted until a
Zoning Compliance Certificate and a Certificate of Occupancy are obtained pursuant to this
Article.
SECTION 26.09: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, DUTIES AND POWERS
A. The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Township Board and shall have the
following responsibilities and the authority to administer the Zoning Ordinance.
1. Receive and review all applications for Zoning Compliance Certificates.
2. Process Zoning Compliance Certificate and Special Use Permit applications for all
permitted uses.
3. Process all applications for Certificate of Occupancy.
4. Receive applications for amendments and variances and forward to the proper board
and/or commission for action.
5. Following disapproval or a permit application, receive application for interpretation
and appeals and forward information to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
6. Record and file all applications for Zoning Compliance Certificates with accompanying
plans and documents. All applications, plans, and documents shall be a public record.
7. Revoke any Zoning Compliance Certificate issued under a mistake of fact or contrary
to the law or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 5
SECTION 26.09: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, DUTIES AND POWERS – (Cont.)
8. Make any other inspections and determinations as specified in this Ordinance.
9. If by amendment to this Ordinance, any zone boundary or any other matter shown on
the official zoning maps is changed by action of the Township Board, such change shall
be promptly indicated on the official map by the Zoning Administrator, together with
the date of passage of the amendment and a sufficient, written description to give a
precise understanding of the change. Every such change shall be certified by the
Township Clerk. An up-to-date copy of the official zoning maps as amended, shall be
available for public inspection in the Township Office during regular business hours.
SECTION 26.10: DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
A. The Planning Commission shall study and report on all proposed amendments to the text of
this Ordinance referred to it by the Township Board. When reviewing any such proposed
amendments, the Planning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days of receipt from the
Zoning Administrator, submit its recommendations and findings to the Township Board.
SECTION 26.11: PENALTIES
A. CIVIL LAW
Any buildings or structure which is erected, altered, or converted, or any use of premises
or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this Ordinance
and in violation of any of the provisions thereof, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. CIVIL LAW PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation found violating the provisions of this Ordinance is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan law and subject to a
civil fine of not less that $50 or more than $500 as determined on the basis of the facts
surrounding the violation(s). Additionally, the violator shall pay costs, which may include
all direct or indirect expenses to which the Township has been put in connection with the
violation. In no case, however, shall costs of less then $10 be ordered. A violator of this
Ordinance shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies, and judicial orders
as are authorized under Michigan law. Each day a violation of this Ordinance continues
to exist constitutes a separate violation.
SECTION 26.12: REMEDIES
The Township Board may also institute proceedings for injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other
appropriate remedies to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of this Ordinance. The
rights and remedies provided herein are both civil and criminal in nature. The imposition of any
fine, jail sentence, or both, shall not exempt the violator from compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 6
SECTION 26.13: FEES
A. To assist in defraying the costs of investigating, reviewing, and administering zoning
applications, appeals, rezoning requests from individual property owners, and other types
of decisions which result in extra costs to the Township, the Township Board may from time
to time adopt by resolution a fee schedule establishing basic zoning fees related to the
following:
1. Zoning compliance certificates and permits.
2. Special land use permits.
3. Appeals to or requests for interpretations by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Appeals
and requests for interpretations initiated by the Township Board, the Planning
Commission, or the Zoning Administrator shall not be subject to a zoning fee.
4. Classification of unlisted property uses.
5. Requests to change a nonconforming use.
6. Requests for variances from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
7. Requests for rezoning of property by individual property owners or amendments to
the zoning ordinance text. Rezoning of property or text amendments initiated by the
Township Board, the Planning Commission, or the Zoning Administrator shall not be
subject to a zoning fee.
8. Site plan reviews.
9. Requests for a planned unit development (PUD).
10. Any other discretionary decisions by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
The amount of these zoning fees shall cover the costs associated with the review of the
application or appeal, including but not limited to the costs associated with conducting
public hearings, publishing public notices in the newspaper, sending required notices to
property owners, postage, photocopying, mileage, time spent by zoning staff, and time
spent by the members of the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals. The
basic zoning fees shall be paid before any application required under this Ordinance is
processed. The basic zoning fees are non-refundable, even when an application or
appeal is withdrawn by the applicant.
B. If the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Zoning Administrator determines
that the basic zoning fees will not cover the actual costs of the application review or
appeal, or if the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Zoning Administrator
determines that review of the application and/or participation in the review process or
appeal by qualified professional planners, engineers, attorneys, or other professionals is
necessary, then the applicant shall deposit with the Township Treasurer such additional
zoning fees an amount determined by the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals
or Zoning Administrator equal to the estimated additional costs. These zoning fees are
required to obtain a professional review of a project which may create an identifiable
and potentially negative impact on public roads, other infrastructure or services, or on the
subject or adjacent properties and because of which, professional input is desired before
a decision to approve, deny or approve with conditions is made. The zoning fees shall be
used to pay for the professional review expenses of the professionals whose expertise
Marquette Township values to review the proposed application and/or site plan, special
use, traffic impact study or other documents of an applicant. The professional review will
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 7
SECTION 26.13: FEES – (Cont.)
result in a report to Marquette Township indicating the extent of conformance or
nonconformance with this Ordinance and to identify and problems which may create a
threat to public health, safety or the general welfare. Mitigation measures or alterations
to a proposed design may be identified where they would serve to lessen or eliminate
identified impacts. The applicant will receive a copy of any professional review or report
completed for Marquette Township and a copy of the statement of expenses for the
professional services rendered, if requested. The additional zoning fees shall be held in
escrow in the applicant’s name and shall be used solely to pay these additional costs. If
the amount held in escrow becomes less than ten percent (10%) of the initial escrow
deposit or less than ten percent (10%) of the latest additional escrow deposit and review
of the application or decision on the appeal is not completed, then the Planning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Zoning Administrator may require the applicant
to deposit additional fees into escrow in an amount determined by the Planning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Zoning Administrator to be equal to the
estimated costs to complete the review or decide the appeal.
Failure of the applicant to make any escrow deposit required under this ordinance shall
be deemed to make the application incomplete or the appeal procedurally defective
thereby justifying the denial of the application or the dismissal of the appeal. Any
unexpended funds held in escrow shall be returned to the applicant following final action
on the application or the final decision on the appeal. Any actual costs incurred by the
Township in excess of the amount held in escrow shall be billed to the applicant and shall
be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit or release of a final decision
on an appeal. Disputes on the costs of professional reviews may be resolved by an
arbitrator mutually satisfactory to both parties.
SECTION 26.14: EFFECTIVE DATE
In accordance with the provisions and procedures as set forth in the Act 110 of the Public Acts of
2006, as amended (Michigan Zoning Enabling Act) and Act 359 of the Public Acts of 1947, as
amended (The Charter Township Act, a Notice of Ordinance Adoption shall be published within
seven (7) days of the date this Ordinance is adopted by the majority vote of the Township Board,
and it shall take effect and be in force on the date of publication.
ARTICLE 26 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance – Article 26 Page 8
Officially adopted by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Marquette, Marquette
County, Michigan, on this 9th day of October, 1996.
1. Date of public hearing(s) _________________ & ______________________.
Publication date of Notice of Ordinance Adoption ___________________, 1996.
FINAL
As approved by the Planning Commission February
11 , 2009 th & Recommended for Adoption to the
Township Board
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
ACCESS CONTROL
AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE NO. _______
ADOPTED: ___________________
EFFECTIVE DATE: ____________
PREPARED FOR:
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE BOARD
MARQUETTE, MI 49855
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF:
THE MARQUETTE TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article I
Page - 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
1.01: SHORT TITLE 2
1.02: REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCES 2
1.03: PURPOSE 2
1.04: INTENT 2
1.05: DESIGNATED AUTHORITY 3
1.06: APPLICATION 3
1.07: VESTED RIGHT 3
1.08: SEVERANCE 3
1.09: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS 3
1.10: RELATIONSHIP TO TEXT AND ATTACHMENTS 3
1.11: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURAL GUIDES 4
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article I
Page - 2
ENACTING CLAUSE
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1.01: SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Charter Township of Marquette Access Control and Land
Development Ordinance.
SECTION: 1.02: REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCES
The previous Charter Township of Marquette Subdivision Control Ordinance, Ordinance No.
______, together with any amendments thereto, is hereby repealed; however this section shall not
be construed to repeal any provision in any applicable Zoning Ordinances, Building Codes or other
ordinances of the Charter Township of Marquette that shall remain in full force and effect
notwithstanding any land division approval hereunder.
SECTION 1.03: PURPOSE
A. This Ordinance is enacted to control and regulate Platted Subdivisions, Condominium
Developments and Land Divisions, and to establish Private Road Standards and Maintenance
Requirements. The general purposes of this ordinance are to:
1. Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development within the community.
2. Provide for the health, safety and welfare of residents and property owners within
the Charter Township of Marquette.
3. Ensure that public and emergency services can safely enter and exit private property
at all times.
SECTION 1.04: INTENT
The primary intent of this Ordinance is to guide and outline procedures for the subdivision of land
into plats in accordance with the requirements of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288, 1967, as
amended, to regulate the development of land within the Township in accordance with the provisions
of the Condominium Act, Public Act 59, 1978, as amended, to outline necessary procedures for
approval of partitioning or division of parcels or tracts of land in accordance with the requirements
set forth in the Land Division Act and to ensure that all private roads will be approved in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Article III, of this ordinance, Private Road Requirements, and will
be maintained exclusively by the benefitting, private property owners.
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article I
Page - 3
SECTION 1.05: DESIGNATED AUTHORITY
The Charter Township of Marquette Township Board, Planning Commission and/or Zoning
Administrator are hereby designated as the approving and/or recommending authorities as specified
in the Articles and Sections of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1.06: APPLICATION
Except as otherwise provided for by preemptive law having authority over Charter Township of
Marquette ordinances or as provided for in this Ordinance, no building, structure, development, or
land use shall be commenced, altered, expanded, continued, used, or occupied unless it is in
compliance with the applicable regulations and requirements of this Ordinance and in accordance
with permits and stated conditions, issued hereunder.
SECTION 1.07 VESTED RIGHT
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted or construed to give rise to permanent vested rights
in the continuation of any particular use, lot, unit, parcel, tract, road, driveway, or any permissible
activities therein. Any part of this Ordinance may be amended by the appropriate authority when
deemed reasonable for the preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
SECTION 1.08 SEVERANCE
This Ordinance and the various Articles, Sections, subsections, provisions, sentences and clauses are
severable. If any part of this Ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or invalid it is declared that
the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected.
SECTION 1.09: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS
Whenever regulations or requirements imposed by this Ordinance are either more or less restrictive
than regulations imposed by any other governmental authority through legislation, rule, or regulation,
the most restrictive, which impose the highest standards, shall govern. Regardless of any other
provision of this Ordinance, no land shall be used, nor structure erected or maintained, nor access
way constructed in violation of any Federal, State, or County pollution control, health, or
environmental protection law or regulation.
SECTION 1.10: RELATIONSHIP TO TEXT AND ATTACHMENTS
In the case of a difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any
caption, illustration, table, or Administrative Procedural Guide the text shall control.
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article I
Page - 4
SECTION 1.11: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURAL GUIDES
For the benefit of residents, landowners, developers, and other interested parties, Administrative
Procedural Guides may be developed outlining the various requirements and procedures established
within this Ordinance. In the event of any discrepancy between this Ordinance and any Procedural
Guide, the Ordinance text shall be the controlling document. The Procedural Guides are intended
to be an aid to understanding the requirements and are not intended to be supplements or additions
to this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE II
LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
2.01: PURPOSE 3
2.02: TABLE II: SUBDIVISION PLAT/CONDOMINIUM
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURE
4
2.03: STATUTORY AUTHORITY: SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
5
2.04: INTENT 5
2.05: DEFINITIONS 6
2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT
OR CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
8
2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
16
2.08: SUBMISSION OF FINAL PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT 22
2.09: DEVELOPMENT COMPLETION - FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
OR CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
23
2.10: VARIANCE AUTHORITY & PROCEDURE 25
2.11: DIVISION OF PLATTED LOTS 26
2.12: NO INTENT TO CREATE A SEPARATE BUILDABLE LOT 27
2.13: INTENT TO CREATE A SEPARATE BUILDABLE LOT 27
2.14: DIVISION OF CONDOMINIUM UNITS 28
2.15: RELOCATION OF CONDOMINIUM UNIT BOUNDARIES 28
2.16: SUBDIVISION OF CONDOMINIUM UNITS 29
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 2
SECTION TITLE PAGE
2.17: DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND 29
2.18: PURPOSE 29
2.19: DEFINITIONS 30
2.20: APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND DIVISION 31
2.21: APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL 31
2.22: PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF LAND DIVISION 32
2.23: LAND DIVISION STANDARDS 33
2.24: CONSEQUENCES OF NON-COMPLIANCE 34
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 3
SECTION 2.01: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to guide and outline procedures for the subdivision of land into plats
pursuant to Public Act 288, 1967 as amended, and to regulate the development of land within
condominiums under the provisions of Public Act 59, 1978 as amended, with the objective of
achieving the same characteristics and land use results as if the development and improvements were
being proposed in accordance with general subdivisions, including all procedures and requirements
as set forth in the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance. The following Table II, is a
Procedural Guide outlining the specific responsibilities and approval procedure for the submission
and municipal review of a proposed Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development Plan.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 4
SECTION 2.02: SUBDIVISION PLAT/CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT
APPROVAL PROCEDURE
TABLE II
SUBMISSION MUNICIPAL REVIEW BODY/ACTION
PRE-APPLICATION
REVIEW
PLANNING COMMISSION TOWNSHIP BOARD
Subdivision Plat
(Optional)
Municipal representative attends a meeting for informal review of
proprietor’s concept plan
Condominium Development Not applicable Not applicable
PRE-PRELIMINARY
Subdivision Plat
(Optional)
Review / COMMENT Not applicable
Condominium Development
(Required)
Review / COMMENT Not applicable
PRELIMINARY
Subdivision Plat
(Required)
Review / RECOMMEND
PUBLIC HEARING
Review / CONDITIONED
TENTATIVE APPROVAL
Condominium Development
(Required)
Review / RECOMMEND Review / FINAL APPROVAL
FINAL PRELIMINARY
Subdivision Plat
(Required)
Not applicable Review / FINAL
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL
Condominium Development Not applicable Not applicable
DEVELOPMENT
COMPLETION
Subdivision Plat Not applicable EXECUTES MUNICIPAL
CERTIFICATE
Condominium Development Not applicable * ISSUES ZONING
COMPLIANCE PERMITS
* Zoning Administrator or Township designee.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 5
SECTION 2.03: STATUTORY AUTHORITY: SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
This section regulates and controls the subdivision of land into plats pursuant to the Land Division
Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, (M.C.L. 560.101, et seq.) and regulates the development
of land within the Township under the provisions of the Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978,
as amended, (M.C.L. 559.101, et seq.) and the Charter Township Act, Public Act 359 of 1947, as
amended, (M.C.L. 42.1, et seq.), being the Township Municipal Charter Ordinance statute.
SECTION 2.04: INTENT
A. It is the intent of the Charter Township of Marquette to assure that both, Subdivision Plats
and Condominium Developments meet the minimum standards as outlined in this Article,
and that the minimum lot size and/or building sites adhere to the zoning district in which the
project is located. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require a Condominium
Development to obtain plat approval.
B. The regulations are specifically designed to:
1. Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the community,
consistent with the Charter Township of Marquette Comprehensive Plan along with
all other local plans and policies;
2. Assure adequate provisions for potable water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, and
other health related requirements, with municipal water and sanitary sewer being the
preferred method of providing for potable water supply and sewage disposal;
3. Provide for adequate recreational areas, open space, educational facilities, lighting,
pedestrian access, and other amenities;
4. Secure adequate traffic circulation and safety through adequately designed and
coordinated street systems with proper connections to existing roads, streets and
driveways, major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities.
5. All plats shall comply with the requirements of the Michigan Land Division Act
(1967 PA 288, as amended), and with the requirements of this Section. All
condominium developments shall comply with the requirements of the Michigan
Condominium Act (1978 PA 59, as amended), and with the requirements of this
Section.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 6
SECTION 2.04: GENERAL PROVISIONS (Cont’d)
C. Fees for Township review of proposed developments shall be established from time to time
by the Township Board, with differing fees dependent upon the following situations:
1. Pre-preliminary review of platted/ condominium subdivision;
2. Preliminary review of platted/ condominium subdivision with private/ public utilities
or combination thereof;
3. Final preliminary review of platted subdivision with private/ public utilities or
combination thereof;
4. Development completion of platted/condominium subdivision with private/ public
utilities or combination thereof.
5. Additional cost incurred by Township personnel, Commissions or Boards in
reviewing the proposed plat/ condominium subdivision will be charged to the
proprietor as specified in Article V, Section 5.08, Fees.
SECTION 2.05: DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Section certain terms and words used herein shall have the following meaning:
“As-built Plans” are the as-constructed record plans showing all approved field changes which vary
from the original approved plan documents.
“Building Site” within a condominium development shall mean that portion of a lot or parcel, which
is a two dimensional condominium unit of land (i.e., envelope, foot print), along with any designated
space above and/or below the land, designed for the construction of a principal building in addition
to any accessory buildings. All building sites shall have access to a public or private street or road.
“Common Elements” means the portions of a condominium project other than the condominium
units.
“Comprehensive Plan” The Charter Township of Marquette Comprehensive Plan, which is a
comprehensive long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of the community.
“Condominium” A single real property parcel with all the unit owners having a right in common to
use the common elements with separate ownership confined to the individual units which are serially
designated, or a system of separate ownership of individual units in multiple-unit building.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 7
SECTION 2.05: DEFINITIONS (Cont’d)
“Condominium Development” A project consisting of not less than two condominium units
established in conformance with, and pursuant to, the Condominium Act, (Act No. 59 of the Public
Acts of 1978, as amended).
“Condominium Plan” The plan as required by this section, including but not limited to, the boundary
survey, utility plan, building site, and the location of existing and proposed structures and
improvements.
“Condominium Unit” That portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate
ownership and use, as described in the Master Deed of the project, regardless of whether it is
intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational or any other type of use approved
by the Michigan Department of Commerce for such projects.
“Consolidating Master Deed” The final amended Master Deed for a contractible condominium
project, an expandable condominium project, or a condominium project containing convertible land
or convertible space in which the final amended Master Deed fully describes the condominium
project as completed.
“Contractible Condominium” A condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land
or buildings may be withdrawn pursuant to the express provisions in the condominium documents
and in accordance with this Section and the Condominium Act.
“Convertible Area” A unit or a portion of the common elements of the condominium project referred
to in the condominium documents within which additional condominium units or general or limited
common elements may be created in accordance with this Section and the Condominium Act.
“Cul-de-sac” A turnaround at the end of a dead-end street, typically circular, and designed and
constructed in accordance with the specifications and requirements of the Marquette County Road
Commission.
“Expandable Condominium” A condominium project to which additional land may be added
pursuant to the express provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with this
Section and the Condominium Act.
“Limited Common Elements” That portion(s) of the common elements reserved in the Master Deed
of a condominium project for the exclusive use of less than all the owners of condominium units in
the project.
“Lot” A single unit or division of land contained in a platted subdivision, whether it be numbered,
lettered or otherwise designated, which has frontage on a public or private street or road.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 8
SECTION 2.05: DEFINITIONS, (Cont’d)
“Master Deed” The legal document prepared and recorded pursuant to Act No. 59 of the Public Acts
of 1978, as amended, within which are, or to which is attached as exhibits and incorporated by
reference, the approved by-laws for the project and the approved condominium subdivision plan for
the project.
“Open Space Subdivision” A platted or a site condominium subdivision developed in accordance
with the provisions of this Ordinance, in which lots/units smaller than the minimum requirements
of the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance are allowed in exchange for the
preservation of a minimum amount of dedicated open space.
“Outlot” A lot included within the boundary of a recorded plat, that is set aside for purposes other
than a development site, park, or other land which is dedicated for public use or reserved for private
use.
“Pre-Application Review Meeting” A meeting held at the option of a proprietor upon submitting a
written request to the Marquette County Plat Board. The purpose of the meeting is to conduct an
informal review with all approving/review entities of the proprietor’s concept plan for the
preliminary plat. A Charter Township of Marquette Municipal Representative shall attend the
meeting and provide all attendees with a memo addressing all topics discussed.
“Reserve Strip” A strip of land, typically at the boundary of a subdivision, retained by a proprietor
in order to control future access.
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A. All Subdivision Plats shall comply with the requirements of the Michigan Land Division Act
(PA 288, 1967 as amended), and with the requirements of this Ordinance and all
Condominium Developments shall comply with the provisions of the Michigan
Condominium Act (PA 59, 1978 as amended), and with the provisions of this Ordinance and
submitted to the Township Zoning Administrator or Designee in accordance with the
following requirements:
1. Ten (10) copies of a Pre-Preliminary Subdivision Plat or Pre-Preliminary
Condominium Development Plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, or
designee, at least ten (10) business days before the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission for their initial review and comment along with a completed
Application Form approved by the Township and the required fee.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 9
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
NOTE: Incomplete plans will not be reviewed and shall be returned to the
applicant with deficiencies noted. The Pre-Preliminary Plans shall be prepared
by a Professional Engineer, Professional Land Surveyor or other person
licensed by the State of Michigan.
2. Topography of the site(s) proposed to be platted or developed as a condominium with
a minimum of two (2) foot contour intervals.
3. Road layout showing inter-connectivity and connection to existing roads/streets.
4. Lot or building site layout, showing size and shape, as well as any dedicated
common open space.
5. Indicate whether the proposed Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development Plan
will be served by a public or private sanitary sewer and/or potable water supply
system.
6. Indicate the location and size of any flood plain located within the proposed
Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development Plan.
7. Address the detention / retention methods for control of storm water run-off along
with all necessary calculations to determine necessary location, areas and depths.
8. Show existing conditions and characteristics of the land along with existing Zoning
District on and adjacent to the site along with any general area set aside for parks,
open space, and other community facilities.
9. If future plans anticipate the platting of adjoining land or future condominium
development, the proprietor shall submit along with the Pre-Preliminary Subdivision
Plat or Condominium Development Plan, a General Development Plan showing the
proposed development of adjoining land.
10. The required fee as established by resolution of the Charter Township of Marquette
Board.
B. Upon receipt of the Pre-Preliminary Subdivision Plat or a Condominium Development Plan,
the Zoning Administrator, or designee, upon review and approval of all of the required
information, shall forward copies to the Planning Commission for their initial review and
comment on the Plan(s) for compliance with the applicable standards as set forth in Section
206. The Planning Commission shall respond with their comment(s) within 30 days of the
initial review of the complete plan.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 10
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
C. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the Pre-Preliminary Subdivision Plat or
the Condominium Development Plan complies with the Charter Township of Marquette
Zoning Ordinance, all applicable Township Ordinances and the State Statutes to determine
if the proposed plan(s) fulfill the following requirements:
1. STREETS AND ROADS:
a. Compliance with the Charter Township of Marquette Road Facilities Plan
adopted by the Township.
b. Street and road layout shall provide for a continuation of existing streets to and
from adjoining areas into the proposed Subdivision Plat or Condominium
Development.
c. Where adjoining areas are not developed, the layout of streets in the proposed
Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development shall be extended to the
boundary line of the tract to make provision for the inter-connectivity of streets
into the adjoining areas. Minor streets within the proposed development shall be
designed to discourage use by through traffic.
d. Where the proposed Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development abuts or
contains a County Primary Road or Major Thoroughfare as defined in the
Township Road Facilities Plan as noted in Item C, the Planning Commission
may recommend service streets located parallel with the Right-of-Way of the
Primary Road or Major Thoroughfare and may require the applicant to address
specific items deemed necessary for the protection of surrounding, residential
properties and to afford separation for through and local traffic.
e. Private streets may be recommended by the Planning Commission, upon
concurrence with the Township Board, if it finds that private streets within the
proposed Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development will not adversely
affect the public health, safety or welfare. Prior to the recommending approval
for any private roads, the Planning Commission shall consider the following
items.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 11
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
(i) The number of dwelling units, building sites or lots to be served by
proposed private streets;
(ii) The layout and inter-connectivity of private roads/streets within the
proposed development;
(iii) Emergency vehicles, access and maneuverability;
(iv) Are the private streets designed to serve as inter-connectivity links
between different public roads;
(v) The proposed private road(s) gradient and site drainage characteristics.
f. A proposed Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development, or future
development which creates a total of fifty (50) or more units shall be developed
providing two (2) or more access streets.
g. All proposed streets shall be named in accordance with Township policy to avoid
duplication of existing Township street names.
h. Proposed streets shall intersect at 90 degrees or as close thereto as possible, and
shall not be less than 70 degrees.
i. Where the proposed continuation of a street at an intersection is not in alignment
with the existing street. A minimum of one hundred seventy-five (175) feet shall
be required between the existing street centerline and the centerline of the
proposed street.
j. The maximum depth allowed for residential lots, in conjunction with depth to
width ratio requirements, shall be 4:1 in accordance with the Charter Township
of Marquette Zoning Ordinance, Article XVIII - Performance Requirements,
Schedule of Regulations, and Minimum Standards, Sections 18.13 thru 18.19
inclusive, for the zoning district in which they are located.
k. All Primary Road Rights-of-Way, as designated by the Charter Township of
Marquette Road Facilities Plan, within or abutting a Subdivision Plat or
Condominium Development shall be not less than 66 feet in width.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 12
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
2. LOTS AND BUILDING SITES:
a. Lots and building sites shall be established in compliance with the minimum lot
dimension provisions set forth in the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance with the exception of Open Space Subdivision Plats or Condominium
Developments.
3. GENERAL PROVISIONS:
a. Privately held reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.
b. Existing natural features which add value to residential development and that
enhance the attractiveness of the community such as streams, water courses,
historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets should be preserved insofar as
possible in the design of the plat or condominium development. When an area
proposed for development of a subdivision contains wetlands, shoreline of Lake
Superior or inland lakes or rivers, steep slopes, rock outcrops, areas subject to
flooding, unique wildlife habitat and/or other natural features which may be
adversely impacted by development, the creation of lots and location of roads,
utility corridors, etc. shall be designed in such a way as to avoid or minimize the
impact on these natural features.
c. Lands subject to flooding or otherwise determined by the Planning Commission
to be uninhabitable should not be platted/ condominiumized for residential,
commercial or industrial purposes unless, they are set aside within the plat or
condominium development for other purposes such as parks and/or open space.
d. Lot size and road orientation in areas where steep slopes are present shall provide
for adequate building sites that will avoid development on steep slopes.
Information on engineering properties of the soil types present on the site shall
be used to determine whether the proposed development is consistent with the
capabilities and physical constraints of the site.
e. Subdivision design shall not change the character of shorelines of inland lakes or
streams, or the Great Lakes.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 13
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
Lots shall be arranged so as to prevent development in areas of critical dunes,
environmentally sensitive areas, or other areas designated by the State of
Michigan as requiring protection. Development which retains natural vegetation
along shorelines is encouraged, as is development of codes, covenants and
restrictions which limit placement of docks or other structures on or near
shorelines. Buffers shall be required on shorelines in accordance with the Charter
Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance, the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers requirements.
f. Bufferyards or greenbelts, a minimum of 30 feet wide, may be required at the
boundary of a proposed subdivision to screen incompatible uses or potentially
undesirable features such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial uses
from the view of adjacent residential properties. Street rights-of-way and utility
easements may not be used to meet the requirement for bufferyards or greenbelts.
Bufferyards or greenbelts may be used to provide open space if an open space
subdivision is proposed. Natural features such as ridges, rock outcrops, etc.,
which serve as natural barriers may provide natural screening which may be used
to replace a bufferyard or greenbelt. Bufferyards or greenbelts should contain
trees, shrubs or structures which block the view of adjacent uses, and such trees,
shrubs or structures shall be maintained within the bufferyard in perpetuity.
4. OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION PLATS AND CONDOMINIUM
DEVELOPMENTS:
a. As an alternative to subdivision design, which relies solely on the minimum
dimensional requirements of the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance to determine lot size and arrangement, subdivision plats and
condominium developments which provide for the preservation of open space
may be developed. An open space subdivision plat or condominium
development is one in which a significant portion of the site is maintained as
permanent open space, in exchange for an arrangement of lots which may be
considerably smaller and more closely spaced than would otherwise be allowed
under the Zoning Ordinance. Such smaller lots, when suitably arranged, can
result in a feeling of spaciousness comparable to that obtained in a subdivision
containing larger lots, while protecting natural features and maintaining open
space. Such development can also result in lower costs for development of roads
and provision of utilities because of the denser arrangement of lots.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 14
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
b. To qualify for a lot size bonus, the proposed development must comply with all
requirements of Section 19.27, Open Space Preservation of the Charter Township
of Marquette Zoning Ordinance. In no case shall the number of lots to be
developed in an open space subdivision plat or condominium development
exceed the number of lots which could be developed on the same site without a
lot size bonus.
The number of lots which could be developed without a lot size bonus shall be
determined using a yield plan or yield formula, as defined below. The proprietor
shall select the method of determining project density.
(i) Yield Plan: A yield plan shall depict a conventional lot and road layout
in compliance with the dimensional requirements as outlined in the
Schedule of Regulations of the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance, including demonstrated soil suitability for septic systems in
accordance with the requirements of the Marquette County Health
Department, if required. Lots shall not include land within permanent
easements, such as utility easements; land in street or road rights-of-way;
or land required to be set aside by some other reviewing agency, such as
the Marquette County Drain Commission. The number of lots shown on
the yield plan shall be the maximum number of lots allowed in a
conventional subdivision plat or condominium development on that same
parcel.
(ii) Yield Formula: Net parcel area shall be determined by subtracting from
the total site size any area required for rights-of-way, any area included
in permanent easements which restrict construction, such as utility
easements, etc.; and any areas protected from development or required by
another reviewing agency, such as the Marquette County Drain
Commission or Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. The net
parcel area shall then be divided by the minimum lot area required by the
Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance for that particular
district to achieve the maximum number of lots which could be
developed without a lot size bonus. This number shall be the maximum
number of lots allowed in a conventional subdivision plat or
condominium development on that same parcel.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 15
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
c. Open space preserved in accordance with this Section shall be permanently
protected with a deed restriction, plat dedication, restrictive covenant,
conservation easement, or other legal means that run with the land, regardless of
ownership. Conservation easements, if not held by the Charter Township of
Marquette, shall provide the Township with the right to enforce the easement.
Open space may be deeded to the Township and held in public ownership, be
owned by all property owners in common, or ownership may be retained by the
developer. In all cases, property owners in the subdivision shall have equal rights
of access to any property preserved as open space.
d. There are several different types of open space which can be used to meet the
requirements of this Section. Some types of open space have been discussed in
earlier Sections, including wetlands, areas subject to flooding, and bufferyards
or greenbelts. The following types of open space are also encouraged:
(i) Public Road Buffers: These buffers are strips of open space along public
roads, and are most effective in preserving the rural character of the area
if left in naturally-occurring vegetation, or if natural vegetation is left to
re-establish on its own. Planting of naturally-occurring plants and trees
is also encouraged. Public road buffers are particularly desirable along
state trunklines and County primary roads.
(ii) Shorelines, Woodlands and Steep Slopes: Protection of these areas as
open space achieves several objectives. Access of property owners to
areas which are often highly scenic is preserved, while at the same time
these areas are protected from development which may compromise
aesthetic values. Maintaining steep slopes as open space can help to
prevent erosion, while protecting shorelines maintains rural character,
provides wildlife habitat, and helps protect lakes, rivers and streams from
runoff which may contain sediments and other pollutants.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 16
SECTION 2.06: SUBMISSION OF PRE-PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
e. The arrangement of lots, including size, width, and density, proposed under an
Open Space Development shall be included on the Pre-Preliminary Subdivision
Plat or Condominium Development Plan submitted, and shall be reviewed by the
Charter Township of Marquette Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may suggest changes in the arrangement of lots.
5. PLANNING COMMISSION COMMENTS:
a. The Planning Commission shall review and note comments on the copy of the
Pre-Preliminary Subdivision Plat/Condominium Development Plan, and note any
comments or suggestions on the copy, to be returned to the proprietor.
Concurrently, a copy of the comments shall be provided to the Township Board.
Comments and suggestions, should not be construed as an indication of approval
of a Preliminary Subdivision Plat or Condominium Development Plan.
SECTION 2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A. All Subdivision Plats shall comply with the provisions of the Michigan Land Division Act
(PA 288, 1967 as amended), and with the provisions of this Ordinance. All Condominium
Developments shall comply with the provisions of the Michigan Condominium Act (PA 59,
1978 as amended), and with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Preliminary Plat shall be
prepared by a Professional Engineer, Professional Land Surveyor or other person authorized
by law within the State of Michigan.
Every person, firm or corporation shall submit not less than ten (10) copies of a proposed
Preliminary Plat or Condominium Development Plan to the Zoning Administrator, or
designee, for Planning Commission initial review, at least fifteen (15) business days before
their next regular meeting, for recommendation and subsequently not less than ten (10)
copies of a proposed Preliminary Plat or Condominium Development Plan to the Township
Board for approval along with a Completed Application made on a form approved by the
Township Board containing the following relevant information and fees:
1. Evidence that the Planning Commission’s comments and suggestions have been
incorporated into the proposed plan from the Pre-Preliminary submission, if
applicable. If the development is a platted subdivision and the Pre-Preliminary Plat
was not submitted, the Preliminary Plat shall comply with the informational
requirements of Section 2.06 (A) (1-10) and Section 2.06 ( C ) (1-4) of this
Ordinance as appropriate.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 17
SECTION 2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
2. Detailed working drawings showing grades, drainage structures, proposed utilities
and road construction plans for public and/or private roads within and adjoining the
plat or condominium project.
3. In the event individual sewage disposal systems are proposed and public sewage
facilities are not reasonably available, a certification from the Marquette County
Environmental Health Department as to the suitability of the land included in the
development for the use of septic tank, dry wells and tile fields shall be required.
4. A "Traffic Assessment" shall be required for developments that would generate
between fifty (50) and ninety-nine (99) directional trips during a peak hour of traffic,
and a "Traffic Impact Study" shall be required for new developments that would
generate over one hundred (100) directional trips during a peak hour or over seven
hundred fifty (750) trips on an average day. The threshold conversions shall be based
on the current Trip Generation Manual, which is published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers(ITE), and updated as needed.
The requirement for a Traffic Assessment or Traffic Impact Study may be waived by
the Planning Commission or Township Board in the following instances:
a. The existing level of service is not expected to be significantly affected by the
proposed development due to the nature of the request or specific conditions at
the subject site.
b. A similar traffic study was previously prepared for the subject site and is still
considered applicable.
5. Ten (10) preliminary copies of any documents to be recorded affecting future
ownership in the Subdivision Plat/Condominium Development including but not
limited to proposed Restrictive Deed Covenants, Bylaws, Master Deed, etc. For
proposed condominium subdivisions, the Master Deed shall be reviewed with respect
to all matters subject to regulation by the Township, including but not limited to: the
description, boundaries, use and preservation of common elements; the maintenance
of drainage, retention ponds, wetlands and other natural areas; and the maintenance
of landscaping in common areas of the project. For a condominium subdivision, the
Master Deed shall provide the means by which any private road right-of-way may be
dedicated to the public entity having jurisdiction in the future should the
Condominium Association deem such later dedication appropriate.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 18
SECTION 2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
6. A fee established by resolution of the Charter Township of Marquette Board.
B. Upon receipt of all required copies of the Preliminary Subdivision Plat or Condominium
Development Plan for approval, the Planning Commission/ Township Board, respectively,
shall examine the documents with such assistance and review by the Township Engineer and
Township Attorney as required. If the development is a subdivision plat, the Planning
Commission shall conduct a public hearing with a public notice published in a local
newspaper at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing and a mailing sent to the
proprietor/applicant and owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed plat (M.C.L.
125.3871, Section 71(5). Upon completing its review, the Planning Commission shall
recommend, and the Township Board shall determine whether the Preliminary Plat or
Condominium Development Plan incorporates the comments and suggestions, if applicable,
and also meets the following requirements:
1. All proposed roads, streets or highways, whether public or private, shall be
constructed according to the Marquette County Road Commission’s “Procedures for
Plat Development and Standards and Specifications”, as amended.
2. All Rights-of-Ways shall be cleared, grubbed and graded for proper drainage. All
trees or other obstructions within the right-of-way which interfere with the grading
and/or drainage shall be removed. The foregoing tree and obstruction removal may
be varied or adjusted by the Township Board upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer where valuable trees or obstacles are involved and as long as drainage and
safety will not be impaired.
3. All surface waters shall be adequately drained within each plat/condominium
development by a separate system of drainage structures or through the connection
of such separate system to an adequate adjoining system. A storm drainage system,
including but not limited to storm sewers, catch basins, manholes, culverts, detention
and/or retention ponds, etc., shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
of the Marquette County Drain Commissioner and the Marquette County Road
Commission.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 19
SECTION 2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
4. A plat/condominium subdivision shall be served by extension of an existing water
and/or sanitary sewer system if such a system is located within 1,320 feet of the
proposed subdivision and is capable of providing service. The distance shall be
measured from the nearest existing main to the nearest boundary of the proposed plat/
condominium subdivision. Where a subdivision is to be served by a public water
supply and/or sanitary sewer system, water and/or sewer mains, hydrants, manholes
and other appurtenances shall be installed by the proprietor in accordance with the
requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. A new water
supply and/or sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality if an existing
system with sufficient capacity is not available. Such new system(s) shall be
conveyed to the Charter Township of Marquette for operation and maintenance upon
completion.
All wells and septic systems, whether installed by the proprietor or individual
property owners, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
Marquette County Health Department. Individual wells and on-site septic systems
are typically not constructed until individual lots are developed. Preliminary
plats/condominiums which indicate that some or all of the proposed subdivision will
be served by municipal water and/or sewer shall be reviewed by the Charter
Township of Marquette Department of Public Works. This review shall be
completed within Twenty (20) business days after receipt of the fee for review of the
proposed plat/ condominium development. The Public Works Department shall
submit a written report to the Planning Commission, setting forth its
recommendations for approval, rejection, or proposed requirements for approval.
5. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all distribution lines of telephone,
electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed
underground entirely throughout the residential area. Electric distribution lines shall
be defined and constructed in accordance with the rules, regulations and standards
promulgated by the Michigan Public Service Commission. Such conduits or cables
shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the
proprietor or within dedicated public right-of-ways. All such facilities placed in
dedicated public right-of-ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other
underground utilities. Private easements for underground utilities shall be shown on
the preliminary plan.
6. A future site grading/ drainage plan for the development must be adequate to insure
each lot/building site and roadway will not be flooded and that all necessary
easements for storm sewers or open drains can feasibly be dedicated to the public for
such purposes.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 20
SECTION 2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
7. No land within the development may be isolated from a public highway, nor may any
adjoining land of the proprietor or others be isolated from a public thoroughfare
thereby creating land-locked parcels.
8. Public street lighting shall be installed and designed in accordance with the Charter
Township of Marquette Street Lighting Policy.
9. Pedestrian access, utilizing sidewalks or bikepaths, are desirable located across the
full width of all lots. Pedestrian access is recommended on county local and primary
roads and required on county primary roads with existing or projected average daily
traffic of three thousand (3000) vehicles or posted speed limits exceeding 35 miles
per hour. Sidewalks shall be of concrete a minimum of five (5) feet wide and four
(4) inches thick, six (6) inches at known driveway crossings constructed upon a two
(2) inch thick sand base. Bikepaths may be concrete, four (4) inches thick or asphalt
two (2) inches thick, a minimum of eight (8) feet wide and with a similar base.
C. Within thirty (30) business days, or after the public hearing, whichever occurs first, of their
examination of the Preliminary Plat or Condominium Development Plan for compliance with
the requirements of Section 2.07 (B) above, the Planning Commission shall submit their
recommendations to the Township Board.
NOTE: Prior to submitting copies of the Condominium Development Plan to the Township Board
for final approval, the developer shall document plan approval, as required, by the Marquette County
Road Commission, Marquette County Drain Commissioner, Charter Township of Marquette
Department of Public Works, Marquette County Health Department, Michigan Department of
Transportation, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and all public and private utilities
which will be servicing the development to resolve any conflicts in location of improvements,
surface water drainage, natural features, public health issues and existing public utilities.
Certified detailed construction drawings showing grades, drainage structures, proposed public/
private utilities and road construction plans for public and/or private roads within and adjoining said
project shall also be submitted for all proposed improvements. Additionally, copies of all applicable
condominium documentation in their final recordable form shall be provided to the Township Board.
If the development is a condominium subdivision or site condominium, the Township Board shall
provide final approval and note its approval on the copy of the preliminary condominium plan, or
approve it subject to conditions and note its approval and conditions on the copy of the preliminary
condominium plan, to be returned to the proprietor, or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection
and requirements for approval, within forty-five (45) business days of receipt of the Planning
Commissions recommendations.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 21
SECTION 2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
Final approval under this section confers upon the proprietor for a period of one year from the date
thereof, approval for development purposes, of lot sizes, lot orientation, and street layout and
application of the then-current subdivision regulations. Final approval of a condominium plan shall
confer upon the proprietor the right to proceed with recordation of the Master Deed which must
occur within this period. The final approval may receive a one-time extension if applied for by the
proprietor and granted by the Township Board in writing.
If the certified detailed construction plans are found to be adequate, an agreement between the
proprietor and the Township shall be made to provide for periodic and final inspection of facilities
under the jurisdiction of the Township to insure conformity to the submitted plans. This agreement
shall be a condition of approval of any detailed engineering plans. Following Township Board
approval of the certified detailed construction plans, the proprietor may begin construction of such
facilities as shown on the approved engineering plans.
The proprietor of a condominium subdivision shall be required to install the public improvements
in accordance with the conditions and specifications set forth in this Section. Final inspection and
acceptance of the public improvements as being in compliance with the approved detailed
engineering plans shall take place prior to Development Completion. Once construction of the
public improvements is complete, the proprietor shall furnish one (1) complete copy of as-built or
Record engineering plans for all required public improvements to the Township. The as-built or
Record plans shall be submitted at the time of Development Completion.
Any subsequent changes to a final approved condominium plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the Township Board as provided for by the original preliminary review
procedures as specified in Section 2.07 of this Ordinance. Final approval of a condominium plan
shall not constitute approval of contractible, convertible area or expandable portions of a
condominium development unless the contractible, expandable or convertible area portions were
specifically reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures of Section 2.07 of this
Ordinance.
If the development is a platted subdivision, the Township Board shall tentatively approve and note
its approval on the copy of the preliminary plat, or tentatively approve it subject to conditions and
note its approval and conditions on the copy of the preliminary plat, to be returned to the proprietor,
or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative approval, within the
following time period, as applicable:
1. Within sixty (60) days after it was submitted to the Township, if the development is
a Subdivision Plat and a pre-application review meeting was held pursuant to Section
111(3) of the Michigan Land Division Act (1967 PA 288, as amended).
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 22
SECTION 2.07: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT OR
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT PLAN, (Cont’d)
2. Otherwise, within ninety (90) days after it was submitted to the Township.
Tentative approval under this section confers upon the proprietor for a period of one (1) year from
the date thereof approval for development purposes of lot sizes, lot orientation, and street layout and
application of the then-current Subdivision plat regulations. The tentative approval may be extended
if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the Township Board in writing.
SECTION 2.08: SUBMISSION OF FINAL PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT
A. Every person, firm or corporation shall hereafter submit ten (10) copies of the Tentative
Approved Preliminary Plat to the Township Board, at least ten (10) business days before the
next regular meeting, for Final Preliminary Approval along with a completed Application on
a form approved by the Township Board, including the following information and payment
of the required fee established by resolution of the Township Board.
1. Evidence that all conditions and requirements imposed by the Township Board at
the time of granting Tentative Preliminary Approval have been incorporated into the
proposed plan.
2. Certified detailed construction drawings showing grades, drainage structures,
proposed public/ private utilities and road construction plans for public and/or private
roads within and adjoining said plat. Prior to submitting copies of the tentative
preliminary plat plan to the Township Board for final preliminary approval, the
developer shall document consultation with all public utilities which will be servicing
the development to resolve any conflicts in location between public utility facilities
and other improvements.
3. Certifications of statutorily required governmental agency approvals, including, if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed and public sewage facilities are not
reasonably available, certification from the Marquette County Environmental Health
Department as to the suitability of the land included in the development for the use
of septic tank, dry wells and tile fields.
4. Copies of proposed deed restrictions, restrictive covenants , etc. and any other
documents to be recorded with the plat.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 23
SECTION 2.08: SUBMISSION OF FINAL PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT (Cont’d)
B. Upon receipt of all required copies of the Tentative Preliminary Plat for Final Preliminary
Subdivision Plat approval, the Township Board shall examine the same with such assistance
and review as required. Upon completing its review, the Township Board shall determine
whether the plat complies with the requirements imposed at the time of Tentative Approval
and has obtained the required statutory approval of other governmental agencies.
If the Township Board determines that the Preliminary Plat has obtained the required statutory
approval of other governmental agencies and complies with the requirements set forth above in this
Ordinance, the Township Board shall, at its next meeting following plan submission, or within
twenty (20) days from the date of submission, grant Final Approval of the Preliminary Plat which
shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval the
conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which said approval was granted will
not be changed. Said two (2) year period may be extended by a one (1) time extension for one (1)
year at the discretion of the Township Board upon application by the proprietor.
If the certified detailed construction plans are found to be adequate, an agreement between the
proprietor and the Township shall be made to provide for periodic and final inspection of facilities
under the jurisdiction of the Township to insure conformity to the submitted plans. This agreement
shall be a condition of approval of any detailed engineering plans. Following Township Board
approval of the certified detailed construction plans, the proprietor may begin construction of such
facilities as shown on the approved engineering plans.
The proprietor of a platted subdivision shall be required to install the public improvements in
accordance with the conditions and specifications set forth in this Section. Final inspection and
acceptance of the public improvements as being in compliance with the approved detailed
engineering plans shall take place prior to Development Completion. Once construction of the public
improvements is complete, the proprietor shall furnish one (1) complete copy or record of as-built
engineering plans for all required public improvements. The as-built or record plans shall be
submitted at the time of Development Completion.
SECTION 2.09: DEVELOPMENT COMPLETION-FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
A. Every person, firm or corporation which is processing a Final Plat or has recorded a
Condominium Master Deed shall submit to the Township Board for Final Approval, along
with a completed Application on a form approved by the Township Board, including the
following information and payment of the required fee established by resolution of the
Township Board.
1. A letter executed by the proprietor of the development with a notarized
acknowledgment stating:
a. All statutorily required monuments have been placed in the ground.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 24
SECTION 2.09: DEVELOPMENT COMPLETION-FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT, (Cont’d)
b. All required roads, streets, street signs and culverts have been completed and
installed.
c. Any flood plains involved in the proposed plat or condominium project have
been restricted as provided by the Land Division Act or the Condominium Act,
and recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds as part of the Plat or Master
Deed or contemporaneously with the recording of the Master Deed.
d. All utilities servicing the development have been installed and water and/ or
sanitary sewer mains have been stubbed to the lot line or building site line and
their locations noted in the As-Built/Record Plans(s).
e. All underground utility installations, including lines for street lighting systems,
which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements. These
easements shall be recorded as part of the Plat or Master Deed as private
easements for public utilities or easements provided by separate instrument.
f. All public improvements, such as street lights, fire hydrants, sidewalks,
bikepaths, parks, etc., which have been required by the Township Board, have
been completed and installed.
g. All greenbelts, bufferyards or other improvements shown on the approved
preliminary plat or condominium shall be in place. Additionally, adequate
provision for open space, parks or recreational areas, public access to water, or
other public or common space noted on the plat/ condominium subdivision has
been conveyed to a public entity by land dedication, deed restrictions,
conservation easements, etc.
h. In the event any or all of Item(s) a. through Item g. above have not been
completed installed or accomplished, a performance/ surety bond, cash deposit,
certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit accruing to
the Township in an amount equal to the estimated cost of construction
completion, including contingencies, will be provided by the proprietor for a
period to be specified by the Township Board. The proprietor and Township shall
enter into a progressive payment agreement reducing the surety to the extent of
the cost of the completed part of the construction.
B. The Township Board shall, at its next regular meeting or within Twenty (20) Business days
from the date of submission, review the above information, and upon determining that it is
satisfactory, grant final approval as follows:
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 25
SECTION 2.09: DEVELOPMENT COMPLETION-FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT (Cont’d)
If the development is a platted subdivision, the Township Clerk will be authorized by a
majority of the Township Board to execute the Certificate of Municipal Approval on the final
plat.
If the development is a condominium subdivision, the Township Board will authorize the
Zoning Administrator, or designee, to process Zoning Compliance Permits for proposed
construction which complies with zoning requirements.
The proprietor shall furnish the plat or condominium maps in an as-recorded digital format
compatible with hardware and software utilized by the Township for inclusion into their
database. The proprietor shall also furnish a complete copy of as-built and/or record of
engineering plans for all required public improvements and copies of any documents
recorded affecting ownership rights for the plat/condominium.
C. In the event the proprietor fails to complete all public improvements within the period of
time required by the conditions of the guarantee for completion, it shall be the responsibility
of the Township Board to have such work completed. In order to accomplish this, the
Township Board shall retain qualified contractors to complete the public improvements, and
shall reimburse the cost of completion of the improvements by appropriating the necessary
funds from the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond, or irrevocable bank letter of
credit. The cost reimbursement shall include any costs associated with advertising for bids,
project monitoring and inspection, etc., which would not have been incurred by the
Township if the proprietor had completed the public improvements as required by the
conditions of the guarantee.
SECTION 2.10: VARIANCE AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE
A. The Township Board may grant variances/waivers from the design and approval
requirements of this Section when the Township Board determines that each of the following
standards are satisfied in the circumstances of each specific case:
1. Strict compliance with the Ordinance requirement would result in a practical
difficulty or undue hardship because of the particular physical surroundings, shape,
or topographical conditions of the tract of property involved, as distinguished from
a mere inconvenience or economic hardship.
2. The variance/waiver may be granted without detriment to the public safety, health,
or general welfare, or have an adverse effect on adjacent property.
3. The variance is the minimum necessary to permit reasonable use of the land and shall
do substantial justice to the applicant as well as other property owners in the area .
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 26
SECTION 2.10: VARIANCE AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE, (Cont’d)
4. The conditions upon which the request for variance is based are unique to the subject
property and not applicable generally to property outside of the proposed plat/
condominium.
5. Approval of a variance/waiver will not in any manner result in a violation of the Land
Division Act (P.A. 288 of 1967, as amended), the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of
1978, as amended), the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance or
Comprehensive Development Plan, or any other plans and policies of the Township.
6. The conditions providing support for the variance/waiver were not created by the
applicant or the applicant's predecessors in title.
B. A request for a variance/waiver identified by section number and description from any
requirement of this Section shall be submitted in writing by the applicant when the
preliminary plat/ condominium is submitted for initial review. The request shall state the
grounds for the requested variance/waiver and all the facts relied upon in support thereof.
Supporting documentation may be attached. The Township Board shall hold a public hearing
on any variance/waiver application.
C. Application Fee. The application fee for consideration of a variance/waiver application
shall be $600.00. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, the Township Board may change the
amount of such application fee prospectively, by motion or resolution.
D. The Township Board shall consider the variance request at the next regularly scheduled
Board meeting and may approve, approve with conditions or deny the request. Conditions
or reasons for the denial shall be set forth in writing.
SECTION 2.11: DIVISION OF PLATTED LOTS
This section shall regulate and control the divisions of recorded lots within land subdivided into plats
pursuant to Section 263, of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended (MCL
560.263). No lot, out-lot or other parcel of land located in a recorded plat shall be further divided
or partitioned into more than four (4) parts and then only in accordance with the requirements of this
Section.
Such divisions shall be consistent with state statutes and the Charter Township of Marquette
Ordinances, be consistent with the character of the neighborhood in which the property is located
and be consistent with the public health, safety, and general welfare.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 27
SECTION 2.12: NO INTENT TO CREATE A SEPARATE BUILDABLE LOT
A. A boundary adjustment is a property transfer between two (2) or more adjacent parcels that
results in no new buildable lots. Applicants are advised that if the parcel is currently
mortgaged, this transfer may affect the mortgage description. The resultant parcel(s) shall
meet all the dimensional requirements of the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance and have direct frontage on a public road. An application for a boundary
adjustment signed by the owner(s) thereof and payment of a fee as prescribed by the
Township Board shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, or designee, along with the
following information:
1. A certificate of survey, certified by a Professional Land Surveyor and drawn to scale
depicting property lines, structures, the involved parcel(s) and the general situation.
2. A complete and accurate legal description of the proposed parcel(s) created by the
boundary adjustment.
3. A copy of all the current recorded deed(s) for all affected parcels.
The Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall review the furnished information for completeness and
determine compliance with zoning requirements. They may approve the application, approve with
conditions or deny the application with the reason(s) for denial furnished in writing to the applicant.
SECTION 2.13: INTENT TO CREATE A NEW BUILDABLE LOT
A lot in a recorded plat may be divided into not more than four (4) parts. All resultant parcels shall
have direct frontage on a public road and comply with all dimensional requirements of the Charter
Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance. Prior to making any division(s), an applicant shall file
the following information with the Zoning Administrator, or designee:
A. A completed signed application form;
B. A copy of the current deed for the parcel proposed to be affected by the division;
C. A Certificate of Survey prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor drawn to scale, including
an accurate legal description of each proposed division, showing boundary lines, existing
structures, dimensions, existing and proposed public utilities and accessibility;
D. A complete and accurate description of each proposed parcel;
E. If the proposed division will not be a served by public sanitary sewer, furnish a copy of a site
evaluation for each division for a sewage disposal system approved by the Marquette County
Health Department;
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 28
SECTION 2.13: INTENT TO CREATE A NEW BUILDABLE LOT, (Cont’d)
F. Payment of a fee as prescribed by the Township Board.
The Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall review the furnished information for completeness and
assess compliance with dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Additionally, the
resultant parcel(s) shall not be inconsistent or incompatible with the existing lots and uses in the
close vicinity, nor shall the divisions result in a change in the character of the immediate area. The
Zoning Administrator, or designee, at their discretion, may request the Planning Commission’s
review and comments prior to approval.
The Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall approve the application, approve with conditions or
deny the application with the reason(s) for denial furnished in writing to the applicant.
SECTION 2.14: DIVISION OF CONDOMINIUM UNITS
This section shall regulate and control the subdivision of land within the Township pursuant to the
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, (MCL 559.148 and 559.149). No
condominium units may be relocated or subdivided unless the condominium documents expressly
permit the relocation or subdivision thereof and then only in accordance with Section 48 or Section
49 of the Condominium Act, as applicable. Such relocations or subdivisions shall comply with
statutes and Township Ordinances, be consistent with the Master Deed and condominium bylaws,
have direct frontage on a public road and be consistent with the public health, safety and general
welfare.
SECTION 2.15: RELOCATION OF CONDOMINIUM UNIT BOUNDARIES
A. The resultant units shall meet all requirements of the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance and have direct frontage on a public road. An application for a boundary
relocation signed by the owner(s) and payment of a fee as prescribed by the Township Board
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, or designee, along with the following
information:
1. A copy of the recorded condominium Master Deed with that portion of the document
highlighted wherein the relocation of boundaries between adjoining condominium
units is expressly permitted.
2. Copy of a document indicating approval of affected mortgagee(s).
3. A certificate of survey prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor, drawn to scale
illustrating the original units(s), the proposed relocation, existing building(s) &
utilities and dimensions.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 29
SECTION 2.15: RELOCATION OF CONDOMINIUM UNIT BOUNDARIES, (Cont’d)
4. Copies of proposed legal descriptions and the recorded deeds for all involved units.
5. A copy of the proposed amendment to the Master Deed identifying the condominium
units involved and relocating the boundaries. The amendment shall also contain the
conveyancing between the co-owners and any other legal requirements.
The Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall review the furnished information for completeness and
assess compliance with zoning requirements. They shall approve the application, approve with
conditions or deny the application with the reason(s) for denial furnished in writing to the applicant.
SECTION 2.16: DIVISION OF CONDOMINIUM UNITS
A condominium unit shall not be subdivided unless the recorded Master Deed expressly permits said
subdivision. If a subdivision of condominium unit(s) require amendments to the Master Deed
assigning new identification numbers to new condominium units, the procedure for division is the
same as provided for by the original preliminary review procedures as specified in Section 2.07 of
this Ordinance.
SECTION 2.17: DIVISION OF UNPLATTED LAND
This section shall regulate partitioning or division of parcels or tracts of land, enacted pursuant but
not limited to the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, (M.C.L. 560.101, et seq.),
and the Charter Township Act, Public Act 359 of 1947, as amended, (M.C.L. 42.1, et seq.).
SECTION 2.18: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to carry out the provisions of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288
of 1967, as amended, MCL 560.101, et seq., formerly known as the Subdivision Control Act, to
establish guidelines and procedures for the division of unplatted land in compliance with the
requirements set forth in the “Act” as well as the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance
and other applicable Ordinances, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to assure orderly
development of the community, and provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and
property owners of the Charter Township of Marquette by requiring reasonable standards for review
and approval of land divisions within the Township.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 30
SECTION 2.19: DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this section, certain terms and words used herein shall have the following meaning:
“Accessible”, in reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets one or both of the following
requirements:
A. Has an area where a driveway provides, or can provide, access to an existing Public road and
meets all applicable location standards of the Michigan Department of Transportation or the
Marquette County Road Commission.
B. Is served by an existing easement that provides, or can provide, access to an existing Public
road and that will meet all applicable location standards of the Michigan Department of
Transportation (MDOT) or Marquette County Road Commission (MCRC).
“Applicant” means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of
any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not.
“Development” means any parcel or lot on which exists or which is intended for building
development. It does not include agricultural use, involving the production of plants or animals
useful to humans, or forestry use, involving the planting, management or harvesting of timber.
“Divide” or “Division” means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the
proprietor, his/her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for
the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or
more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of Sections
108 and 109 of the Land Division Act (M.C.L. 560.108 and 560.109). "Divide" and "Division" does
not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one
parcel is added to an adjacent parcel. Any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site
unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act and the requirements of
other applicable local Ordinances.
“Exempt split” or “Exempt division” means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land
by the proprietor thereof, or by his/her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives,
successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the
equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from
one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site
unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act and the requirements of
other applicable local ordinances.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 31
SECTION 2.19: DEFINITIONS, (Cont’d)
“Forty acres or the equivalent” means 40 acres, or a quarter-quarter section containing not less than
30 acres, or a Government Lot containing not less than 30 acres.
“Governing body” - The Charter Township of Marquette Board of Trustees.
“MCRC” - Marquette County Road Commission.
“MDOT” - Michigan Department of Transportation.
SECTION 2.20: APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND DIVISION
All proposed land divisions located in the Charter Township of Marquette, which are intended to
create from one (1) to four (4) new parcels, shall not be divided without the review and approval of
the Zoning Administrator, or designee. When more than four (4) parcels are proposed, the Township
Planning Commission shall review and approve all parcel divisions in accordance with this Section
and the Land Division Act. The following conditions shall be exempt from this requirement:
A. A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat in accordance with the
requirements of the Land Division Act;
B. A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the requirements of the
Land Division Act;
C. An exempt split or exempt division as defined in Section 2.19, or other partitioning or
splitting that resulted in parcels of 20 acres or more, if each is not accessible and the parcel
was in existence on March 31, 1997.
D. An exempt split or exempt division which resulted from exempt splitting under the
provisions of the Land Division Act.
SECTION 2.21: APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL
An applicant shall file the following information with the Zoning Administrator, or designee, for
review and approval prior to making any division, either by deed, land contract, lease for more than
one year, or for building development. The Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall review all
proposed divisions to a maximum of four (4), the Planning Commission shall review and approve
all proposed land divisions over four (4) and, respectively, make a decision regarding the proposed
land division. The following information shall be required for all land divisions within the Charter
Township of Marquette.
A. A completed application form as provided by the Zoning Administrator, or designee;
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 32
SECTION 2.21: APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL, (Cont’d)
B. Copy of the current recorded deed of record as proof of fee ownership of the land proposed
to be divided and copies of recorded deeds to document the prior divisions of land which
the proposed division was a part of and to verify that the parcel to be divided was lawfully
in existence as of March 31, 1997;
C. A tentative parcel map drawn to scale, including an accurate legal description of each
proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, dimensions, and the accessibility for
vehicular traffic and public utilities for each division in a recordable format;
D. Proof, that all requirements of the Land Division Act and this Section have been addressed
and verified;
E. If a transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer, detailed information regarding
the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer;
F. If a proposed division creates a parcel intended to be declared a “non-development site”, the
applicant shall provide a copy of a recordable affidavit or deed restriction clearly identifying
the parcel as “not a development site”, as defined under 1967 PA 288, as amended. Upon
recordation any parcel so designated shall not thereafter be used as a “development” site;
G. Payment of a fee as established by resolution of the Governing body for land division
processing to cover the costs of review and administration of this Section and the Land
Division Act.
SECTION 2.22: PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF LAND DIVISION
A. The Zoning Administrator, or designee, or the Planning Commission, shall approve or
disapprove a land division applied for within forty five (45) days after receipt of a complete
application conforming to the requirements of this Section and the Land Division Act. The
Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the
decision, and if denied, the reasons for such denial. Incomplete submittals will not be
reviewed and shall be returned to the applicant for completion and refiling in accordance
with this Section.
B. Approval of a parcel division(s) is not a determination that the resulting parcel(s) comply
with other statutes or regulations. Furthermore, parcel division approval is not a
determination that adequate facilities are available for public water and/or sewer, nor is it a
determination that any parcel which results from a division will satisfy applicable standards
for on-site potable water supply and/or sewage disposal systems.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 33
SECTION 2.22: PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF LAND DIVISION, (Cont’d)
C. When the land owner creates parcel(s) from the parent parcel or tract, and transfers the right
to make a specific number of further divisions to the future (subsequent) owner of the created
parcel, the specific number of future land divisions granted under the right to make future
divisions shall be noted.
The land division(s) shall not become effective until a complete “Notice to Assessor of
Transfer of a Right to Make a Division of Land” form provided by the Township, has been
filed with the Township Assessor within forty-five (45) days of the date of delivery of the
deed by the owner of the parent parcel or tract.
D. The Township Assessor shall maintain an official record of all approved land divisions and
transfers of land division rights.
E. The Governing body, its officers and employees, shall not be liable for approving a land
division if building permits for construction on the parcel(s) are subsequently denied because
of the inability of a parcel to be serviced by a public water supply or sanitary sewer, nor due
to the inability of a parcel to receive approval for an on-site potable water supply or sewage
disposal system. Any notice of approval shall include a statement to this effect.
F. Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Administrator, or designee, or
the Planning Commission may, within Thirty (30) days of said decision, appeal the decision
to the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), which shall consider
and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of said Board at its next regular meeting affording
sufficient time for a Twenty (20) day written notice to the applicant (and appellant where
other than the applicant) of the time and date of said meeting and appellate hearing. Payment
of the fee as established by resolution of the Governing body for appeal processing is
required prior to the meeting.
SECTION 2.23 LAND DIVISION STANDARDS
A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria are met:
A. All parcel(s) created by the proposed division(s) shall comply with the minimum width, area
and structure setback requirements as specified in the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance, Article XVIII - Performance Requirements, Schedule of District Regulations and
Minimum Standards, Sections 18.13 thru 18.19 inclusive, for the zoning district in which
they are located or which may have received a variance from such requirements from the
ZBA.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 34
SECTION 2.23 LAND DIVISION STANDARDS, (Cont’d)
B. Depth to width ratio requirements shall apply to all created parcels of any size including the
remainder of the parent parcel or tract. The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by
division shall not exceed a four to one (4:1) ratio exclusive of access roads, easements, or
non-development sites.
The depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be determined by measuring the
horizontal distance between the front and rear parcel lines as measured along the midpoint
between side parcel lines within the boundaries of each parcel. The width of a parcel shall
be as defined as the required horizontal distance between the side parcel lines measured at
the two points where the required front setback line intersects the side parcel lines.
C. Parcels originally created by aliquot part divisions may not contain sufficient area, and
topographical and other physical constraints existing on-site, as well as compatibility issues
with surrounding lands may also be an issue. Under these circumstances, with a written
request and detailed documentation from the applicant identifying the practical difficulties
or undue hardship, parcels which exceed the four to one depth to width ratio may be
considered for approval.
D. The proposed land division(s) comply with all requirements of this Section and the Land
Division Act.
E. All parcels created by division as development site(s) shall be accessible meeting State,
County, or Township standards for driveway location either by an existing or proposed
driveway/ easement or an area available therefore, and have sufficient width for public
utilities and/or emergency and other vehicles from all created parcels with direct access to
a public right-of-way or road.
F. A division which creates a parcel that does not satisfy one or more of the standards of
Subsections A, B, and C of Section 2.23 shall be approved if the owner executes and records
an affidavit or deed restriction referencing the description and designating the parcel(s) as
“not a development site, as defined under 1967 PA 288, as amended”. A parcel so designated
shall not be used as a development site as defined under 1967 PA 288, as amended.
SECTION 2.24: CONSEQUENCES OF NON-COMPLIANCE
Any division of land in violation of any provision of this Section shall not be recognized as a
separate parcel on the Township tax roll or assessment roll. The Assessor shall give written notice
of the suspected violation to the owner of record requesting compliance with this Section. The
Township shall have authority to initiate injunctive action or other relief to prevent any violation or
continuance of any violation of this Section.
ARTICLE II - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article II
Page - 35
SECTION 2.24: CONSEQUENCES OF NON-COMPLIANCE, (Cont’d)
Any division of land in violation of this Section shall not be eligible for any Zoning Compliance or
Building Permit or for any Construction or Improvement thereto. Any person, firm or corporation
who violates any of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to be responsible for a Municipal
Civil Infraction as defined by Article V, Section 5.06, Penalties, and Section 5.07, Remedies.
Pursuant to Section 267 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.267), an unlawful division or split shall
also be voidable at the option of the purchaser and shall subject the seller to the forfeiture of all
consideration received or pledged therefore, together with any damages sustained by the purchaser,
recoverable in an action at law.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE III
PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
3.01: PURPOSE 2
3.02: DEFINITIONS 2
3.03: FEES AND APPLICATION 3
3.04: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL 5
3.05: ROAD PERMIT DENIAL / RIGHT TO APPEAL 7
3.06: CONSEQUENCE OF NON-COMPLIANCE 8
3.07: EXISTING PRIVATE ROADS 8
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 2
SECTION 3.01: PURPOSE
It is the intent of the Charter Township of Marquette to regulate the development of private roads
to promote the health, safety and general welfare of Township residents by setting standards for the
construction of all private roads. Unobstructed, safe and continuous vehicle access to adjacent
property lots is necessary to ensure that public and emergency service vehicles can safely enter and
exit private property at all times. It is further the intent to ensure that private roads are maintained
and repaired exclusively by the private property owners who own and use the road. If a proposed
private road is to serve three (3) or more residential lots, a Private Road Permit is required.
SECTION 3.02: DEFINITIONS
“Common Driveway” - A vehicular access way serving two lots with recorded easement and
maintenance agreements between landowners.
“Driveway” - A vehicular access way serving one lot.
“Lot” - A parcel of land, excluding any portion in a street or road right-of-way, of at least sufficient
size to meet minimum requirements for use, coverage, lot area, set backs and open space as defined
in the current Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance.
“Private Access Easement” - An easement agreement between property owners that own the land
that provides an access road to other lots located on or along the same route. Easement widths and
locations may vary, but reasonable access across the property can not be denied.
“Private Road” - A privately-owned road serving more than two (2) lots which shall also provide
access for Township vehicles and equipment along with other public and/or private utility company
vehicles to provide and maintain services.
“Professional Engineer” - An engineer licensed by the State of Michigan.
“Professional Land Surveyor” - A land surveyor licensed by the State of Michigan.
“Public Easement” - An easement held by a municipality for purposes of public access to land or
water not otherwise connected to a public way, which confers the right of unobstructed public access
by motor vehicle or foot but does not obligate the municipality to repair or maintain the easement.
“Public Road” - A way or public easement for highway purposes held by any governmental body.
“Right-of-Way” - A street, alley, or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for
passage of persons, vehicles, or location of utilities. The right-of-way is delineated by legally
established lines or boundaries.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 3
SECTION 3.02: DEFINITIONS - (Cont’d)
“Road” - Any public or private way designed for vehicular access, other than driveways, farm roads,
trails or logging roads. The term “road” includes the normal meaning conveyed by synonymous
words including street, avenue, highway, lane, court, and way.
“Seasonal Road” - Any road intended to provide access only during the months of May through
October. These roads are not normally maintained nor snow plowed during the winter.
“Through Roads” - These are roads that serve as connections to public roads, providing circulation
and access to commercial areas and residential developments. Through roads must accommodate
both a regular flow of passenger vehicles and commercial traffic including trucks.
SECTION 3.03: FEES AND APPLICATION
The application fee for a Private Road Permit will be established by the Charter Township of
Marquette Board and must be paid at the time of the application. The following information shall
be submitted to the Township Zoning Administrator, or designee, as part of the Application for a
Private Road Permit:
A. A completed and signed Application for Private Road as provided by the Township.
Incomplete applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant.
1. Name of Applicant(s) and the names and addresses of the lot or parcel owners to be
serviced by the proposed private road.
2. Copies of any legal encumbrances affecting the land upon which the proposed road
is located.
3. Copy of a recordable, Access and Utility Easement(s) which addresses construction,
road ownership/maintenance, costs and a Township Indemnification and Hold
Harmless Clause. All access and utility easements shall run with the land.
B. An illustrated sealed plan prepared by a Professional Engineer or Professional Land Surveyor
addressing the following requirements:
1. The estimated volume and type of traffic to use the road.
2. The anticipated starting and completion dates of each phase of road construction.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 4
SECTION 3.03: FEES AND APPLICATION - (Cont’d)
3. A description of erosion, sedimentation, and dust control measures to be employed
during and following construction.
4. A description of storm water management and drainage provisions, together with
supporting calculations and documentation.
5. The proposed private road plan(s) shall include the following items: scale, the
direction of magnetic North; the starting and ending point of the proposed road with
relation to established roads and any planned or anticipated future extensions; the
boundary lines of all properties abutting the proposed road, including any new lots
or parcels to be created.
a. Proposed locations of driveways affording access to the private road.
b. All natural waterways; the location and profile, including size and capacity of all
existing and proposed storm water management and drainage structures,
including sanitary sewer or septic systems, water lines or private wells.
c. A copy of the Marquette County Road Commission or Michigan Department of
Transportation Driveway Permit if the proposed road accesses a public Right-of-
Way.
d. The design and profile of the fifty (50) feet of the proposed road at its intersection
with any public or private road intersection; if proposed to be over three hundred
(300) feet in length, the design of an emergency vehicle turnaround.
e. The location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities.
f. The location of existing and proposed structures.
g. A cross section of the proposed road, showing the types and depths of material
to be used in the sub-grade, road base and surface.
h. The number of plan copies submitted for processing purposes will be determined
by the Zoning Administrator, or designee.
C. Upon completion of construction, the licensed professional shall submit a report whenever
a private road is constructed or reconstructed or extended which is subject to the terms of this
Section. A Zoning Compliance Permit for any building or any additional building accessed
by the private road shall not be issued until the owner’s licensed professional has certified
to the Township, with sealed documentation, that the private road has been constructed,
reconstructed or extended in compliance with all of the applicable requirements of this
Section.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 5
SECTION 3.03: FEES AND APPLICATION - (Cont’d)
The certification shall specifically include, without limitation, the requirements of this
Section for the Subbase, the Aggregate Base Course, and the Overlay of the base course, as
required by the approved construction plans.
SECTION 3.04: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL
The proposed private road shall comply with the minimum construction, alignment, spatial and
material standards of the Marquette County Road Commission and meet the following standards:
A. The minimum right-of-way width shall be sixty-six (66) feet.
B. Adequate sight distance of ten (10) times speed limit in feet (e.g., 25 mph zone requires 250
feet) visibility in each direction. This shall be measured from where the driver’s seat of a
vehicle would be situated fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the shoulder, with eye level at
three and one half (3-1/2) feet, to the top of an object at four and one half (4-1/2) feet above
the pavement.
C. Storm Drainage shall neither erode the proposed road nor wash directly onto an adjacent
public road.
D. Proposed roads and rights-of-way over three hundred (300) feet long shall provide an
adequate place for emergency vehicles to turn around in accordance with the requirements
set forth in Article XX, Section 20.07, Item B of the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance.
E. No fence, wall, sign, screen or any planting shall be erected or maintained in such a way as
to obstruct vision within a Clear View Triangle described as being located between a height
of three (3) and ten (10) feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of a road
right-of-way line and a private road right-of-way line and a line connecting two (2) points
which are located on the intersecting right-of-way lines, thirty (30) feet from the point of
intersection.
F. Parcels fronting on private roads shall meet the required front yard setback and lot width for
their specific Zoning District as set forth in the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning
Ordinance.
G. All Division of Unplatted Land shall be in compliance with Article II, Land Development
Requirements, Section 2.20 thru 2.24 of this ordinance.
H. The angle of intersection with any public road, or road right-of-way shall be as close to 90°
as possible, but not less than 70°.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 6
SECTION 3.04: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL - (Cont’d)
I. For roads servicing any permanent, year-round structure, it is required that private roads and
rights-of-way that are over three hundred (300) feet long shall meet current Marquette
County Road Commission paved road specifications to facilitate emergency vehicle access.
If this standard is not met, the affected owners must acknowledge added risk and sign a
separate recordable Indemnification and Hold Harmless statement affecting their property
and acknowledging that emergency vehicle access may not be possible, and may involve
above average risk to life and property.
J. All private roads must be constructed according to the current requirements of the Marquette
County Road Commission paved road specifications if any of the following conditions
occur:
1. The road serves three (3) or more residential lots.
2. The road provides access to any multiple family development(s).
3. The road provides connection between any two (2) public roads.
4. The road provides access to industrial or commercial property.
K. In reviewing the Application for Private Road construction, the Township Zoning
Administrator, or designee, may approve the Permit or may schedule a public hearing to be
held by the Township Planning Commission. All public notification requirements, outlined
in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended, shall be followed. The
Zoning Administrator, or designee, may also request that the plans be submitted for review
and comments to the following agencies along with other agencies which may be deemed
necessary.
1. The Township Engineer
2. County Drain Commissioner
3. County Road Commission
4. County Conservation District
5. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
6. The Michigan Department of Transportation
7. Other Agencies as may be determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
L. Public Hearing Approval General Standards
The Township Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances for all private
road requests under consideration in terms of the following standards, and shall recommend
approval of a private road only upon a finding of compliance with following standards:
1. The private road and its intended use shall be designed, constructed, operated and
maintained in a manner not to be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
proposed use or users of the road, adjacent property and the surrounding area.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 7
SECTION 3.04: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL - (Cont’d)
L. Public Hearing Approval General Standards, (Cont’d)
2. The proposed private road shall not be hazardous to adjacent property, or involve
uses, activities, materials or equipment which will be detrimental to the health,
safety, or welfare of persons or property through the excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, odor, fumes or glare.
3. The proposed private road and its intended use shall not place demands on public
services and facilities in excess of current capacity.
4. The proposed private road shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this
Ordinance, and the objectives of any adopted Charter Township of Marquette
Development Plans and/or Policies.
5. The proposed private road shall provide access to Township vehicles and equipment
as well as other public/private utility companies to provide necessary services.
6. The owners(s) of the proposed private road shall pay for and install a road sign at the
time the road is constructed. The sign and location must be the same type and design
as existing Township signs and the road name approved by the Township.
M. Conditions
The Township Planning Commission may impose conditions along with the approval of a
private road which are necessary to insure compliance with the standards for approval stated
in this Section along with any other applicable standards contained in this Section. Any such
conditions shall be considered an integral part of the Private Road Permit approval and shall
be enforced by the Zoning Administrator, or designee. In addition, the Township Planning
Commission shall also consider the activity levels of the proposed road and may impose
conditions to insure the preservation and protection of property values of adjacent properties.
SECTION 3.05: ROAD PERMIT DENIAL/RIGHT TO APPEAL
If any of the applicable conditions as outlined above are not met or there is information missing from
the application, the Marquette Township Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall deny the Private
Road Permit Application.
If the applicant determines that the Marquette Township Zoning Administrator, or designee, has
erred in their interpretation of this Section, the applicant may file an administrative written appeal
with the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days of the date
of denial.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE ROAD REQUIREMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article III
Page - 8
SECTION 3.05: ROAD PERMIT DENIAL/RIGHT TO APPEAL (Cont’d)
If the applicant is aggrieved by the denial of a Private Road Permit and it is practical difficulty, or
undue hardship, the applicant may request a variance from the Marquette Township Zoning Board
of Appeals pursuant to standards for a variance as set forth in the Charter Township of Marquette
Zoning Ordinance. All public notification requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A.
110 of 2006, as amended, shall be followed.
SECTION 3.06: CONSEQUENCES OF NON-COMPLIANCE
Any parcel accessed by a private road created by non-compliance with this Section shall not be
granted a Zoning Compliance Permit, Zoning Approval for Land Divisions, or a Special Land Use
or Site Plan Approval. In addition, any violation of this Section shall subject the violator to the fines
and enforcement actions set forth in Article V, Section 5.06, Penalties, and Section 5.07, Remedies.
SECTION 3.07: EXISTING PRIVATE ROADS
Private roads that were created prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be subject to all the
conditions specified in this Section for any addition or extension to the existing private road. Any
parcel accessed by an extension of an existing private road created in non-compliance with this
Section shall not be granted a Zoning Compliance Permit, Zoning Approval for Land Divisions, or
a Special Land Use or Site Plan Approval.
ARTICLE IV - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article IV
Page - 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE IV
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
4.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT 2
4.02: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 2
4.03: PROCEDURES OF THE AMENDMENT PROCESS 2
ARTICLE IV - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article IV
Page - 2
SECTION 4.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT
To assure sound, consistent, and desirable development within the Charter Township of Marquette,
this Ordinance may be amended from time to time as conditions warrant. Revisions may be required
due to Michigan Statutory Amendments, to correct or clarify certain sections, or to revise or change
regulations, restrictions, or standards.
SECTION 4.02: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Changes and amendments to this Ordinance shall be consistent with the following procedures:
A. Initiation
Only the Township Board has the authority to amend or change this Ordinance. Proposals
for amendments or changes may be initiated by the Township Board on its own motion or
recommended, by the Planning Commission.
B. Text Amendments
An amendment to the text of this Ordinance shall state in particular the Article, Section,
Subsection, and Paragraph sought to be amended. The amendment language shall be
complete and shall state the reasons for the proposed change in the text.
SECTION 4.03: PROCEDURES OF THE AMENDMENT PROCESS
All Procedures for amendments shall comply with the requirements of the Charter Township Act,
Public Act 359 of 1947, as amended (M.C.L. 42.1, et seq.) which are summarized as follows:
A. The complete text of the proposed amendment shall be introduced at a Township Board
meeting in written or printed form.
B. The complete text of the proposed amendment shall be published or posted as it was
introduced, indicating when it will be considered for adoption by the Township Board
1. For the publication option:
a. The complete text of the proposed amendment shall be published as it was
introduced at least one (1) time in a newspaper circulating within the Township.
ARTICLE IV - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article IV
Page - 3
SECTION 4.03: PROCEDURES OF THE AMENDMENT PROCESS (Cont’d)
2. For the posting option:
a. The complete text of the proposed amendment shall be posted as it was
introduced at the Township Clerk's office and at five (5) other public places
within the Township, or at the Township Clerk’s office and on the Township’s
website; and
b. A notice of the posting shall be published at least once in a newspaper circulating
within the Township within seven (7) days after the posting was completed. The
notice of posting must describe the purpose or nature of the proposed amendment
and identify the locations within the Township where the complete text of the
proposed amendment was posted.
C. File the Affidavit of Publication from newspaper and/or Affidavit of Posting in the Township
Ordinance Records.
D. Adopt the Ordinance amendment by a motion approved by the majority of Township Board
members voting, on a roll call vote, at any regular meeting or properly scheduled special
meeting. The minutes of the meeting must reflect the decision and the vote.
E. Publish a complete amendment or legally proper summary of the amendment as adopted, or
post the complete amendment as adopted, within thirty (30) days after the date of adoption.
1. For the publication option:
a. Publish the complete amendment as adopted, or a summary of the amendment,
in a newspaper circulating within the Township within thirty (30) days after the
date of adoption. If a summary of the amendment is published; the following
procedures shall be required:
(i) It may be prepared by the person who drafted the amendment, by the
Township Board or legal counsel.
(ii) It must be written in clear and non-technical language.
(iii) Each section must be preceded by a "catch line", as appropriate.
(iv) It must designate the location in the Township where a true copy of the
complete amendment can be inspected or obtained.
ARTICLE IV - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article IV
Page - 4
SECTION 4.03: PROCEDURES OF THE AMENDMENT PROCESS (Cont’d)
2. For the posting option:
a. The complete text of the amendment shall be posted as adopted at the Township
Clerk's office and at five (5) other public places in the Township, or at the
Township Clerk’s office and on the Township’s website; and
b. A notice of the posting shall be published at least once in a newspaper circulating
within the Township within seven (7) days after the posting was done. The notice
of posting must describe the purpose or nature of the amendment and identify the
locations in the Township where the complete amendment was posted.
F. File the Affidavit of Publication from the newspaper and/or Affidavit of Posting in the
Township Ordinance records.
G. File an Attested Copy of the amendment with the County Clerk within one (1) week after the
Publication/Posting. This is not required if the Township offices are open to the public
during regular hours on each business day.
H. Record the complete amendment in Township Book of Ordinances within one (1) week after
Publication/Posting, with the Certificate of the Township Clerk, Recording date of adoption
of amendment, names of the Township Board members voting thereon, how each member
voted, the date of Publication/Posting and the name of the newspaper, and where applicable,
the date of filing of the Ordinance with the County Clerk.
I. Authentication of the record by the Township Supervisor and the Township Clerk both
signing the Ordinance Certificate.
J. Distribution of copies of new Ordinance to all appropriate Township officials.
ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article V
Page - 1
CONTENTS OF ARTICLE V
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION TITLE PAGE
5.01: PURPOSE 2
5.02: ADMINISTRATION 2
5.03: APPROVALS 2
5.04 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, DUTIES AND POWERS 2
5.05 DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION 2
5.06 PENALTIES 3
5.07 REMEDIES 3
5.08 FEES 3
5.09 EFFECTIVE DATE AND TOWNSHIP SUPERVISOR AND
CLERK SIGNATURES
6
ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article V
Page - 2
SECTION 5.01: PURPOSE
This Article sets forth the procedures required for administration, enforcement and fees associated
with this ordinance. The authority and duties of the Township Board, Zoning Administrator, and
the Planning Commission are also specified.
SECTION 5.02: ADMINISTRATION
The responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall rest with the
Township Supervisor, who along with the Township Board, shall have the authority to delegate
responsibility to appropriate Township officers and/or employees. The individual administering and
enforcing this Ordinance shall be the Zoning Administrator, or designee, and shall have the power
of a public official in implementing enforcement procedures.
SECTION 5.03: APPROVALS
Any development permitted by this Ordinance, including Subdivision Plats and Lot Divisions
thereof, Condominium Development and unit divisions thereof, Parcel or Tract Land Divisions, or
Private Road Construction, may not be commenced until the required approvals, specified within
these Articles and Sections have been received. No structure shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, moved onto a site nor removed therefrom, and no building used, occupied,
or altered with respect to its use, until a Zoning Compliance Certificate has been secured from the
Zoning Administrator. Nothing herein shall relieve any applicant of the additional responsibility of
seeking any permit required by any applicable statute, ordinance, or regulations in compliance with
all of the requirements of the Charter Township of Marquette Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 5.04: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, DUTIES AND POWERS
A. The Zoning Administrator or designee, shall be appointed by the Township Board and shall
have the responsibilities and the authority to review, comment, process, approve, deny,
administer and enforce, as appropriate, the provisions of the Access Control & Land
Development Ordinance as detailed in the Articles and Sections of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5.05: DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
A. The Planning Commission shall have the duty and the authority to Review, Comment,
Recommend, Appeal or Deny approval of all Land Development Proposals including
Subdivision Plats, Condominium Developments, Land Divisions and Private Roads, in
accordance with Provisions and Requirements as set forth in the Access Control and Land
Development Ordinance as detailed and outlined in the Articles and Sections herein.
ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article V
Page - 3
SECTION 5.06: PENALTIES
A. Civil Law
Any buildings or structure which is erected, altered, or converted, or any use of premises or
land which is begun or changed in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Civil Law Penalties
Any person, firm, or corporation found violating the provisions of this Ordinance is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan law and subject to a civil
fine of not less that $50 or more than $500 as determined on the basis of the facts
surrounding the violation(s). In no case, however, shall costs of less than $10 be ordered.
A violator of this Ordinance shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies, and
judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan law. Each day a violation of this Ordinance
continues to exist constitutes a separate violation.
SECTION 5.07: REMEDIES
The Township Board may also institute proceedings for injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other
appropriate remedies to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of this Ordinance. The
rights and remedies provided herein are both civil and criminal in nature. The imposition of any
fine, jail sentence, or both, shall not exempt the violator from compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 5.08: FEES
A. To assist in defraying the costs of investigating, reviewing, and administering development
applications, appeals, and other types of actions which result in extra costs to the Township,
the Township Board may from time to time adopt by resolution a schedule establishing
required fees related to the following:
1. Pre-Preliminary, Preliminary, Final Preliminary approvals of Subdivision Plats with
private/public utilities or combination thereof and development completion;
2. Pre-Preliminary, Preliminary approvals of Condominium Development Plans with
private/public utilities or combination thereof and development completion;
3. Variance/waiver applications for Subdivision Plats and Condominium Development
Plans;
SECTION 5.08: FEES, (Cont’d)
ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article V
Page - 4
4. Division of platted lots, including both buildable and non-buildable divisions;
5. Division or relocation of condominium unit boundaries;
6. Division of unplatted land;
7. Appeals of Land Division denials;
8. Private Road applications;
9. Appeals of Private Road application denials;
10. Any other discretionary decisions by the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of
Appeals, or Zoning Administrator/designee.
The amount of these development fees shall cover the costs associated with the review of the
application or appeal, including but not limited to the costs associated with conducting public
hearings, publishing public notices in the newspaper, sending required notices to property
owners, postage, photocopying, mileage, time spent by Township staff, and time spent by the
members of the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals. The required fees
shall be paid before any application required under this Ordinance is processed, and are nonrefundable,
even when an application or appeal is denied or withdrawn by the applicant.
B. If the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or Zoning Administrator determines
that the required fees will not cover the actual costs of the application review or appeal, or
if the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or Zoning Administrator determines
that review of the application and/or participation in the review process or appeal by
qualified professional planners, engineers, attorneys, or other professionals is necessary, then
the applicant shall deposit with the Township Treasurer such additional fees in an amount
determined by the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Zoning Administrator
equal to the estimated additional costs. These required fees are necessary to obtain a
professional review of a project which may potentially create a negative impact on public
roads, other infrastructure or services, or on the subject or adjacent properties and because
of which, professional input is desired before a decision to approve, deny or approve with
conditions is made.
ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article V
Page - 5
SECTION 5.08: FEES, (Cont’d)
The development fees shall be used to pay for the professional review expenses of the
professionals whose expertise Marquette Township values to review the proposed
application, site plan, traffic impact study or other documents of an applicant. The
professional review will result in a report to Marquette Township indicating the extent of
conformance or nonconformance with this Ordinance and to identify and problems which
may create a threat to public health, safety or the general welfare. Mitigation measures or
alterations to a proposed design may be identified where they would serve to lessen or
eliminate identified impacts. The applicant will receive a copy of any professional review
or report completed for Marquette Township and a copy of the statement of expenses for the
professional services rendered, if requested. The additional development fees shall be held
in escrow in the applicant’s name and shall be used solely to pay these additional costs. If the
amount held in escrow becomes less than ten percent (10%) of the initial escrow deposit or
less than ten percent (10%) of the latest additional escrow deposit and review of the
application or decision on the appeal is not completed, then the Planning Commission,
Zoning Board of Appeals or Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to deposit
additional fees into escrow in an amount determined by the Planning Commission, Zoning
Board of Appeals or Zoning Administrator to be equal to the estimated costs to complete the
review or decide the appeal.
Failure of the applicant to make any escrow deposit required under this ordinance shall be
deemed to make the application incomplete or the appeal procedurally defective thereby
justifying the denial of the application or the dismissal of the appeal. Any unexpended funds
held in escrow shall be returned to the applicant following final action on the application or
the final decision on the appeal. Any actual costs incurred by the Township in excess of the
amount held in escrow shall be billed to the applicant and shall be paid by the applicant prior
to the issuance of any permit or release of a final decision on an appeal. Disputes on the costs
of professional reviews may be resolved by an arbitrator mutually satisfactory to both parties.
ARTICLE V - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Charter Township of Marquette Access Control & Land Development Ordinance - Article V
Page - 6
SECTION 5.09: EFFECTIVE DATE AND TOWNSHIP SUPERVISOR AND CLERK
SIGNATURES
In accordance with the provisions and procedures as set forth in the Charter Township Act, P. A. 359
of 1947, as amended, MCL 42.1 Et. Seq., A Notice of Ordinance Adoption shall be published within
seven (7) days of the date this Ordinance is adopted by the majority vote of the Township Board, and
it shall take effect and be in force on the date of publication.
1. Publication date of Notice of Public Hearing __________, 2009.
2. Public Hearing date and recommendation to adopt by the Planning Commission of
the Charter Township of Marquette, Marquette County, Michigan, on this
__________ day of _________________________, 2009.
3. Officially adopted by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Marquette,
Marquette County, Michigan, on this _______ day of _______________, 2009.
4. Publication date of Notice of Ordinance Adoption __________________, 2009.
___________________________________
Ray J. Adamini
Charter Township of Marquette Supervisor
___________________________________
Patricia D. Mayer
Charter Township of Marquette Clerk
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
2020 Fee Schedule
Assesssing/Planning/General:
Appeals to Zoning Board of Appeals (includes permit fee) 250.00
Assessment Field Card (Mail or Fax) 5.00
Assessment Roll (Real Property Only) 800.00
Assessment Field Card (Office) 3.00
Copy Charge, Per Page 0.15 BW; 0.45 Color
GIS-Digital Orthophoto Map Sheet 200.00
plus reprod.costs
GIS-Digital Topographic Map Sheet 400.00
plus reprod.costs
GIS-Autocadd Discs - Orthophotography 200.00 per 1/4 sec.
GIS-Autocadd Discs - Topographic 400.00 per 1/4 sec.
Grading Permit (up to 10 Acres; add $100 for each additional 10 acres or portion) 410.00
Non-Sufficient Funds Checks 30.00
Sign Permit (Temporary) 25.00
Sign Permit (Permanent) 1 SF to 100 SF Maximum 100.00
Site Plan/Architectural Plan Filing Fee Per SF of Facility 0.10
Site Plan Compliance Review - Base 255.00
Site Plan additional beyond base at actual time at staff hourly rate Varies
Special Meeting with Planning Commission 325.00
Special Use Permit Application (no plot plan) 75.00
Special Use Permit Application (plot plan) 255.00
Special Use Permit Application (site plan) 510.00
(All special use permit application fees include required regular Planning
Commission meeting and public hearing at no cost; add $185 for any special
meeting or public hearing)
Temporary Use Zoning Permit 25.00
Traffic Enforcement Fee 50.00
Zoning Map Amendment Application (includes regular Planning Commission 510.00
meeting and public hearing with two legally required newspaper notices at
no cost; add $185 for any special meeting or public hearing)
Mineral Extraction of earth products--includes regular public Planning 510.00
Commission meeting and public hearing at no cost; any special meeting or
public hearing is $185)
Mineral Extraction Permit Annual Renewal 100.00
Residential Alterations / Accessory Structures (plot plan) 35.00
Single Family Dwelling (plot plan) 55.00
Multifamily Dwelling - non-commercial (plot plan) 100.00
Commercial Alterations & Additions 140.00
Accessory Buildings and Uses not requiring County Building Permit (plot plan) 35.00
Parcel Division:
First Division 50.00
Each additional 10.00
Zoning Text Amendment Application (includes regular Planning Commission 510.00
meeting (public hearing not required); add $185 for any special meeting)
1
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
2020 Fee Schedule
DPW:
Door Hanger Shut Off Notice 20.00
Water Fund Monthly Debt Retirement (3/4" or 5/8" or 1" Line) 15.00
Water Fund Monthly Debt Retirement (1 1/2") 30.00
Water Fund Monthly Debt Retirement (2" Line) 60.00
Water Fund Monthly Debt Retirement (4" Line) 240.00
Water Fund Monthly Debt Retirement (6" line) 525.00
Water Fund Monthly Debt Retirement (8" Line) 945.00
Water Fund Monthly Debt Retirement (10" Line) 1470.00
Fire Hydrant Rental Fee Per Month 53.00
Fire Protection Private (2" Connection) Per Month 10.00
Fire Protection Private (3" Connection) Per Month 17.00
Fire Protection Private (4" Connection) Per Month 27.00
Fire Protection Private (6" Connection) Per Month 53.00
Fire Protection Private (8" Connection) Per Month 100.00
Fire Protection Private (10" Connection) Per Month 160.00
Fire Protection Private (12" Connection) Per Month 250.00
Public Fire Protection Per Year 20,000.00
Garbage Collection -Residential Monthly 14.75
Lawn Meter Monthly (5/8" or 3/4" meter) 2.00
Lawn Meter Monthly (1" Meter) 4.50
Lawn Meter Monthly (1 1/2" Meter) 9.00
Lawn Meter Monthly (2" Meter) 14.00
Lawn Meter Permit (5/8" or 3/4" meter) 140.00
Lawn Meter Permit (1" Meter) 260.00
Lawn Meter Permit (1 1/2" Meter) 1175.00
Lawn Meter Permit (2" Meter) 1475.00
Marquette County Landfill Per Ton (minimum $10 per load) 57.50
Marquette Township Surcharge Per Ton 12.00
Meter Replacement (5/8 or 3/4") 140.00
Meter Replacement (1") 260.00
Meter Replacement (1 1/2") 1175.00
Meter Replacement (2") 1475.00
Meter Replacement (2" Compound) 1850.00
Meter Replacement (3" ) 2250.00
Non-Sufficient Funds Checks 30.00
Read Meter 20.00
Special Billing Request 10.00
Thawing Water Lines (Regular Business Hours Per Hour) 85.00
Thawing Water Lines (Non-Business Hours Per Hour) (Minimum 115) 127.50
2
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
2020 Fee Schedule
Wastewater Base Fee Monthly
3/4", 5/8" Meter 9.00
1" Meter 22.50
1-1/2" Meter 45.00
2" Meter 72.00
3" Meter 144.00
4" Meter 225.00
6" Meter 450.00
8" Meter 990.00
Wastewater Construction Inspection ($0 - $2,500) 150.00
Wastewater Construction Inspection ($2,500 - $7,500)(8% but not less than $300) Varies
Wastewater Construction Inspection ($7,500 - $15,000)(6% but not less than $600) Varies
Wastewater Construction Inspection ($15,000 - $30,000)(4% but not less than $900) Varies
Wastewater Construction Inspection (Over $30,000)(3% but not less than $1,200) Varies
Wastewater Construction Permit Review (2% of the estimated cost) Varies
Wastewater Deposit (Residential) 50.00
Wastewater Deposit (Other--One Month's Estimated Bill) Varies
Wastewater Expansion - $100 for each factor Varies
Wastewater Service Shutoff (Regular Business Hours) 40.00
Wastewater Service Shutoff (Non-Business Hours) 65.00
Wastewater Service Turn On (Regular Business Hours) 40.00
Wastewater Service Turn On (Non-Business Hours) 65.00
Wastewater Tap-In (single family with prepaid tap) 500.00
Wastewater Tap-In (single family w/o prepaid tap) first factor 5000.00
Wastewater Tap-In (other properties with prepaid tap) 500.00
Wastewater Tap-In (other properties with prepaid tap--additional factors) 200.00
Wastewater Tap-In (other properties w/o prepaid tap) 5000.00
Wastewater Tap-In (other properties w/o prepaid tap-additional factors) 200.00
Wastewater Volume (1,000 Gallons Monthly) 12.18
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (Unverif. 5/8, 3/4 inch meter) 6.60
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (1 inch meter) 16.50
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (1 1/2 inch meter) 33.00
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (2 inch meter) 52.80
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (3 inch meter) 105.60
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (4 inch meter) 165.00
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (6 inch meter) 330.00
Wastewater Fund Monthly Debt Retire (8 inch meter) 726.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (Unverified, 3/4" or 5/8" Meter) 8.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (1" Meter) 20.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (1 1/2" Meter) 40.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (2" Meter) 64.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (3" Meter) 128.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (4" Meter) 200.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (6" Meter) 400.00
Water Base Monthly Fee (8" Meter) 880.00
3
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
2020 Fee Schedule
Water Construction Inspection ($0-$2,500) 150.00
Water Construction Inspection ($2,500-$7,500) (8% but not less than $300) Varies
Water Construction Inspection ($7,500-$15,000) (6% but not less than $600) Varies
Water Construction Inspection ($15,000-$30,000) (4% but not less than $900) Varies
Water Construction Inspection (over $30,000) (3% but not less than $1,200) Varies
Water Construction Permit Review (2% of the estimated cost) Varies
Water Deposit (Residential) 40.00
Water Deposit (Other--One Month's Estimated Bill) Varies
Water Expansion - $100 for each factor Varies
Water Service Shutoff (Regular Business Hours) 40.00
Water Service Shutoff (Non-Business Hours) 65.00
Water Service Turn On (Regular Business Hours) 40.00
Water Service Turn On (Non-Business Hours) 65.00
Water Tap-In (single family dwelling with prepaid tap) 500.00
Water Tap-In (single family dwelling w/o prepaid tap) first 3000.00
Water Tap-In (other properties with prepaid tap) 500.00
Water Tap-In (other properties with prepaid tap-additional factors) 200.00
Water Tap-In (other properties without prepaid tap) $100/factor 3000.00
Water Tap-In (other properties without prepaid tap-additional factors) 200.00
Water Volume Rate (Per Thousand Monthly) 8.76
4
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
2020 Fee Schedule
Fire Department:
Site Plan Review:
First Review 75.00
Each Additional Review (charged per hour, minimum charge is 1 hour) 75.00 per hour
New Construction / Remodel Fire Code Review:
Fee includes 1 inspection
0 - 2,000 sq. ft. 200.00
2,001 - 5,000 sq. ft. 300.00
5,001 - 10,000 sq. ft. 375.00
10,001 - 50,000 sq. ft. 475.00
50,001 - 100,000 sq. ft. 550.00
100,001 - 500,000 sq. ft. 1000.00
Over 500,000 sq. ft. 1500.00
Additional Inspections (charged per hour, minimum charge is 1 hour) 100.00 per hour
Fire Sprinkler / Standpipe / Foam System
Fee includes 2 Inspections
1 - 100 heads 300.00
101 - 200 heads 350.00
201 - 300 heads 400.00
301 - 400 heads 450.00
401 - 500 heads 500.00
More than 500 heads (plus $.25/head over 500) 500.00
Systems supplied by pump 300.00 per pump
Standpipe 75.00 per standpipe
Hose Connection 5.00 per connection
Additional Inspections (charged per hour, minimum charge is 1 hour) 100.00 per hour
Commercial Cooking Hood Suppression System (box/release assembly) 230.00 per cont.
Fee includes 1 inspection
Additional Inspections (charged per hour, minimum charge is 1 hour) 100.00 per hose
Special Hazard Systems:
Fee includes 1 inspection
Dry Chemical, Wet Chemical, Clean Agent, and Total Flood Systems 350.00
Additional Inspections (charged per hour, minimum charge is 1 hour) 100.00 per hour
Fire Alarm / Smoke Detection Systems:
Fee includes 1 inspection
Alarm control panel 100.00 each
Remote Annunciator 20.00 each
Booster Power Supply 20.00 each
Alarm / Supervisory / Auxiliary device point connection 6.00 each
Notification device / speaker 3.00 each
Additional Inspections (charged per hour, minimum charge is 1 hour) 100.00 per hour
Minimum permit fee for minor system modifications (at discretion of reviewer) 100.00
Short Term Rental Inspections
Initial Inspection 75.00
Bi-Annual Inspection 75.00
Additional Inspections (charged per hour/minimum charge is one hour) 75.00
5
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
2020 Fee Schedule
Special Event Plan Review Fees Including Temporary tents, membrane
structures, carnivals, fairs, exhibits, trade shows, fireworks displays
or any other large assembly function:
Fee includes plan review and 1 inspection during normal business hours
Each Event (not considered public assembly, determined by Fire Marshal) 150.00
Inspections during non-business hours (charged per hour, minimum charge is 2 hrs.) 100.00
Large membrane structures constituting a public assembly occupancy 250.00
Based on event and special hazard considerations trained Fire personnel may
be required. Fire Marshal's office would determine if this is needed and establish
a fee schedule based on the needs at that time
Additional Inspections:
75.00
non-business hours (charged per hour, minimum charge is 2 hours) 100.00
Outdoor Wood Furnace Permit Application Fee 50.00
Fire Board of Appeals Hearing 400.00
6


1
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE,
COUNTY OF MARQUETTE, STATE OF MICHIGAN
ORDINANCE NUMBER 040103
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
An ordinance of the Charter Township of Marquette adopting the 2012 edition of NFPA 1, Fire
Prevention Code edition; and documents listed in Chapter 2 of that Code; prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection fees; repealing Ordinance No(s). 032492-2 and 050295-2 of
the Charter Township of Marquette and all other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict
therewith; providing a penalty; providing a severability clause; and providing for publication;
and providing an effective date.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE ORDAINS:
Section 1: Title
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Fire Prevention Code for the Charter Township
of Marquette.
Section 2: Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
That the NFPA-1, Fire Code 2012 edition, and documents adopted by Chapter 2, a copy of which
is on file and open to inspection by the public in the Office of the Township Fire Marshal of the
Charter Township of Marquette Fire Station, are hereby adopted and incorporated into this
ordinance as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall
take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Charter Township
of Marquette. The same are hereby adopted as the code of the Charter Township of Marquette
for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion and providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees.
Section 3: Additions Insertions and Changes – Fire Department Access.
3.1 General.
Fire department access roads shall be provided and maintained in accordance with this section.
3.2 Fire Apparatus Roads.
3.2.1 Required Access.
Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided in accordance with this Section for every facility,
building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction
when any portion of the facility or any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of the building
is located more than 150 feet from fire apparatus access as measured by an approved route
around exterior of the building or facility. The Fire Department access road shall extend to
within 50 ft. of at least one exterior door that can be opened from the outside and that provides
access to the interior of the building.
2
Exceptions:
1. When buildings are completely protected with an approved automatic fire sprinkler
system, the provisions of this Section may be modified by the Fire Marshal.
2. When access roads cannot be installed due to location on property, topography,
waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar conditions, the Fire Marshal is authorized
to require additional fire protection.
3. When there is not more than two Group R, Division 3, or Group U Occupancies, the
requirements of this Section may be modified by the Fire Marshal.
More than one fire apparatus road shall be provided when it is determined by the Fire Marshal
that access by a single road might be impaired by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain,
climatic conditions or other factors that could limit access.
3.2.2 Specifications
3.2.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less
than 20 feet and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet.
Exception:
Vertical clearance may be reduced provided such reduction does not impair access by fire
apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical
clearance when approved.
Vertical clearances or widths shall be increased when, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, vertical
clearances or widths are not adequate to provide fire apparatus access.
3.2.2.2 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the
imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be provided with a surface so as to provide all-weather
driving capabilities.
3.2.2.3 Turning Radius. The turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be approved.
See Attachment B (T-shaped turn around).
3.2.2.4 Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be
provided with approved provisions for the turning around of fire apparatus. See Attachments A
& B.
3.2.2.5 Bridges. When a bridge is required to be used as part of a fire apparatus access road, it
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with nationally recognized standards. The
bridge shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of fire apparatus.
Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges when required by the Fire
Marshal.
3.2.2.6 Grade. The gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 8% maximum.
3
3.2.2.7 Curve Radius. The curve radius shall be designed to American Association of State
Highway transportation official standards for minimum radius for 25 mph posted speed.
3.2.3 Marking. See Section 18.2.3.5 of NFPA-1 of 2012.
3.2.4 Obstruction and control of fire apparatus access.
3.2.4.1 General. The required width of a fire apparatus access road shall not be obstructed in any
manner, including parking of vehicles. Minimum required widths and clearances established
under Section 3.2.2.1 shall be maintained at all times.
Entrances to roads, trails or other access ways which have been closed with gates and barriers in
accordance with Section 3.2.4.2 shall not be obstructed by parked vehicles.
3.2.4.2 Closure of access ways. The Fire Marshal is authorized to require the installation and
maintenance of gates or other approved barricades across roads, trails or other access ways, not
including public streets, alleys or highways.
When required, gates and barricades shall be secured in an approved manner. Roads, trails and
other access ways which have been closed and obstructed in the manner specified by Section
3.2.4.2 shall not be trespassed upon or used unless authorized by the owner and the Fire Marshal.
Exception: Public officers acting within their scope of duty.
Locks, gates, doors, barricades, chains, enclosures, signs, tags or seals which have been installed
by the fire department or by its order or under its control shall not be removed, unlocked,
destroyed, tampered with or otherwise molested in any manner.
Exception: When authorized by the Fire Marshal or performed by public officers acting within
their scope of duty.
3.3 Access to Building Openings.
3.3.1 Required access. Exterior doors and openings required by this code or the Building Code
shall be maintained readily accessible for emergency access by the fire department.
An approved access walkway leading from fire apparatus access roads to exterior openings
required by this code or the Building Code shall be provided when required by the Fire Marshal.
3.3.2 Maintenance of exterior doors and openings. Exterior doors or their function shall not be
eliminated without prior approval by the Fire Marshal. Exterior doors which have been rendered
nonfunctional and which retain a functional door exterior appearance shall have a sign affixed to
the exterior side of such door stating THIS DOOR BLOCKED. The sign shall consist of letters
having principal stroke of not less than 3/4 inch wide and at least 6 inches high on a contrasting
background. Required fire department access doors shall not be obstructed or eliminated.
4
3.4 Key Boxes. All commercial buildings and multi-family residential buildings containing three
or more dwelling units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities shall be equipped with
a key box. The key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain necessary
access as required by the Fire Marshal. Whenever access to or within a structure or an area is
unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life
saving or firefighting purposes, the Fire Marshal is authorized to require a key box to be installed
in an accessible location.
Section 4: Additions, Insertions and Changes –Water Supplies and Fire Hydrants.
4.1 General. Water supplies and fire hydrants shall be in accordance with Sections 901 and 903
of the Uniform Fire Code 1997.
4.2 Required Water Supply for Fire Protection. An approved water supply capable of
supplying the required fire flow for fire protection shall be provided to all premises upon which
facilities, buildings or portions of buildings are hereafter constructed or moved into or within the
jurisdiction. When any portion of the facility or building protected is in excess of 150 feet from a
water supply on a public street as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the
facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains capable of supplying the required fire flow
shall be provided when required by the Fire Marshal. See Section 4.4.
4.3 Type of Water Supply. Water supply is allowed to consist of reservoirs, pressure tanks,
elevated tanks, water mains or other fixed systems capable of providing the required fire flow. In
setting the requirements for fire flow, the Fire Marshal may be guided by National Fire
Association formula for fire flow.
4.4 Fire Hydrants Systems.
4.4.1 General.
4.4.1.1 Applicability. Fire hydrant systems and fire hydrants shall be in accordance with Section
4.4.
4.4.1.2 Testing and maintenance. Fire hydrant systems shall be subject to such periodic tests as
required by the Fire Marshal. Fire hydrant systems shall be maintained in an operative condition
at all times and shall be repaired where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations, and servicing
shall be in accordance with approved standards.
4.4.1.3 Tampering with Fire-protection Equipment, Barriers, Security Devices, Signs and
Seals.
4.4.1.3.1 Fire Department Property. Apparatus, equipment and appurtenances belonging to or
under the supervision and control of the fire department shall not be molested, tampered with,
damaged or otherwise disturbed unless authorized by the Fire Marshal.
5
4.4.1.3.2 Fire Hydrants and Fire Appliances. Fire hydrants and fire appliances required by
this code to be installed or maintained shall not be removed, tampered with or otherwise
disturbed except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training, recharging or making necessary
repairs, or when allowed by the fire department.
When a fire appliance is removed as herein allowed, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as
the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
4.4.1.3.3 Barriers, Security Devices, Signs and Seals. Locks, gates, doors, barricades, chains,
enclosures, signs, tags, or seals which have been installed by the fire department or by its order
or under its control shall not be removed, unlocked, destroyed, tampered with or otherwise
molested in any manner.
Exception: When authorized by the Fire Marshall or performed by public officers
acting within their scope of duty.
4.4.2 Obstruction and Impairment of Fire Hydrants and Fire Protection Equipment.
4.4.2.1 General. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or things
shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections of fire-protection
system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from
being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from
gaining immediate access to fire-protection equipment or hydrants.
4.4.2.2 Clear Space around Hydrants. A 3-foot clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved.
4.4.2.3 Fire-Extinguishing Equipment. Class II standpipe hose stations, Class I and Class III
standpipe outlets, and portable fire extinguishers shall not be concealed, obstructed or impaired.
4.4.2.4 Fire Alarm Equipment. Alarm-initiating devices, alarm-signaling devices and
annunciators shall not be concealed, obstructed or impaired.
4.4.3 Required installations. The location, number and type of fire hydrants connected to a
water supply capable of delivering the required fire flow shall be provided on the public street or
on the site of the premises or both to be protected as required and approved.
Fire hydrants shall be accessible to the fire department apparatus by roads meeting the
requirements of Section 3.2
4.4.4 Protection, marking and obstruction of hydrants. Fire hydrants subject to possible
vehicular damage shall be adequately protected with guard posts.
4.4.5 Maintenance and use of hydrants. See Sections 13.5 of NFPA-1 of 2012.
6
Section 5: Final Approval
When the site has been substantially developed in compliance with the approved site plan
documents, the petitioner shall request an on-site inspection. The on-site inspection shall require
the review and approval of all the required plan elements to the satisfaction of the Fire Marshal
in accordance with the requirements as set forth in the Ordinance. After the inspection has been
completed and the site has been approved by the Fire Marshall, a letter of acceptance will be
provided to the petitioner. If there are deficiencies on the site and the improvements are not in
compliance with the approved site plan documents, a similar letter setting forth the reasons for
such denial shall be sent to the petitioner. Until such time as the stated deficiencies are corrected,
an official letter of acceptance will not be authorized.
Section 6: Penalty for Violations
Any person or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan law and subject to a civil fine determined in
accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum Maximum
Fine Fine
First violation within three year period*………………….. $50.00 $500.00
Second violation within three year period*……………….. $125.00 $500.00
Third violation within three year period*…………………. $250.00 $500.00
Fourth or subsequent violation within three year period*… $400.00 $500.00
*Determined on the basis of the date of violation(s).
Additionally, the violator shall pay costs, which may include all direct or indirect expenses to
which the Charter Township of Marquette has been put in connection with the violation. In no
case, however, shall costs of less than $10.00 be ordered. A violator of the Ordinance shall also
be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies, and judicial orders as are authorized under
Michigan law. Each day a violation of this Ordinance continues to exist constitutes a separate
violation.
Section 7: Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed
That Ordinance Number(s) 032492-2 and 050295-2 of the Charter Township of Marquette and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 8: Severability Clause
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of the ordinance is, for any reason,
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or
constitutionality of the remaining portions of the ordinance. The Charter Township of Marquette
7
hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause, or
phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses, and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section 9: Publication and Effective Date
That this ordinance and the rules, regulation, provision, requirements, orders, and matters
established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force immediately upon
publication.
1
State of Michigan
County of Marquette
Charter Township of Marquette
ORV Ordinance No. 17-
An ordinance adopted for the purpose of authorizing and regulating the operation of Off-Road
Vehicles (ORVs) on the roads in the Charter Township of Marquette for the purpose of providing
penalties for the violation thereof, and to provide for the distribution of public funds resulting from
those penalties pursuant to 2008 PA 240, MCL 324.81131.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE ORDAINS:
Section 1.
Definitions: As used in this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
“ATV or “All-Terrain Vehicle” means a three (3), four (4), or six (6) wheeled vehicle designed for
off-road use that has low pressure tires, has a seat designed to be straddled by the rider, or
designed to accommodate more than a one rider either side-by-side or in-line, and is powered
by a 50cc or greater, gasoline engine, an engine of comparable size using other fuels, or by
electric propulsion;
“County” means the County of Marquette;
“Development District” means that area of the Charter Township of Marquette designated on
the Marquette Township Official Zoning Map as “Development District” or “DD”;
“Driver License” means an operator’s or chauffeur’s license or permit issued to an individual by
the Secretary of State under Chapter III of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL
257.301 to 257.329, for that individual to operate a vehicle, whether or not conditions are
attached to the license or permit;
“Operate” means to ride in or on, and be in actual physical control of the operation of an ORV;
“Operator” means a person who operates or is in physical control of the operation of an ORV;
“ORV” means a motor driven off-road recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without
benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other
natural terrain. ORV or vehicle includes, but is not limited to, a multi-track or multi-wheel drive
vehicle, an ATV, a motorcycle or related 2, 3, 4, or 6-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a
ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from
a source other than muscle or wind. ORV does not include a registered snowmobile, a farm
2
vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement
purposes, a vehicle owned and operated by a utility company or an oil or gas company when
performing maintenance on its facilities or on property over which it has an easement, a
construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function, or a registered
aircraft;
“Road” means a County primary or County local road as described in Section 5 of 1951 PA 51,
MCL 247.655, and does not include State or Federal highways or rights-of-way;
“Rural Residential” means that area of the Charter Township of Marquette designated on the
Marquette Township Official Zoning Map as “Rural Residential” or “RR”;
“Safety Certificate” means a certificate of issue pursuant to 1994 PA 451 as amended, MCL
324.81129, or comparable ORV safety certificate issued under the authority of another state or
province of Canada;
“Scenic Residential” means that area of the Charter Township of Marquette designated on the
Marquette Township Official Zoning Map as “Scenic Residential” or “SR”;
“Township” means the Charter Township of Marquette;
“Township Board” means the board of trustees of the Charter Township of Marquette;
“Urban Residential” means that area of the Charter Township of Marquette designated on the
Marquette Township Official Zoning Map as “Urban Residential” or “UR”; and
“Visual supervision” means the direct observation of the operator with the unaided or normally
corrected eye, where the observer is able to come to the immediate aid of the operator.
Section 2.
Permissible ORV Operation and Maps: An ORV may be operated on the far right of the
maintained portion of a road within the Township with these exceptions:
a) Roads closed to the operation of ORVs either by the Road Commission or by the Township
pursuant to MCL 324.81131(4).
b) The Township shall maintain a map that depicts all roads closed to ORV use, which map shall
be posted on the Township website.
Section 3.
Road Commission Closure: Pursuant to MCL 324.81131(4), the Road Commission may close no
more than thirty (30%) percent of the total linear miles of Roads in the County to protect the
environment or if the operation of ORV poses a particular and demonstrable threat to public
safety.
3
Section 4. Operation on State or Federal Highway Prohibited: An ORV may not be operated on
the road surface, roadway, shoulder, or right-of-way of any state or federal highway in the
Township.
Section 5 Conditions for ORV Operation: Except as otherwise set forth herein or otherwise
provided by law, an ORV meeting all of the following conditions may be operated on Roads in
the Township:
a) at a speed of no more than 25 miles per hour, or a lower posted speed limit;
b) within any zoning district, except that an ORV may not be operated between the hours of
10:00 PM and 7:00 AM within any area zoned Urban Residential (UR), Scenic Residential
(SR), Rural Residential (RR), or Development District (DD).
c) by a person not less than twelve (12) years of age;
d) with the flow of traffic;
e) in a manner that does not interfere with traffic on the road;
f) traveling single file except when overtaking and passing another ORV;
g) while crossing a street, county road, or highway, other than a limited access highway, at
right angles, for the purpose of getting from one area to another, after bringing the ORV to a
complete stop before proceeding, if the operation can be done safely, while yielding the
right-of-way to traffic on the street, country road, or highway;
h) while displaying a lighted headlight and lighted taillight at all hours;
i) while the operator and each passenger is wearing a crash helmet and protective eyewear
approved by the United States Department of Transportation unless the vehicle is equipped
with a roof that meets or exceeds standards for a crash helmet and the operator and each
passenger is wearing a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt;
j) with a throttle so designed that when the pressure used to advance the throttle is removed,
the engine speed will immediately return to idle;
k) while the ORV is equipped with a spark arrestor type United States Forest Service approved
muffler in good working order and in constant operation;
l) pursuant to noise emission standards defined by law; and
m) consistent with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances.
Section 6.
Operation By Children Under Age 18 On Township Road: A child less than the age of eighteen
(18) years shall not operate an ORV on a Road in the Township unless the child is in possession
of a valid driver’s license or under the direct visual supervision of an adult and the child has in
his or her possession a Michigan issued ORV safety certificate or a comparable ORV safety
certificate issued under the authority of another state or a province of Canada.
Section 7.
4
ORV Registered As Motor Vehicle: Unless a person possesses a valid driver’s license, a person
shall not operate an ORV on a Road in the Township if the ORV is registered as a motor vehicle
and is either more than sixty (60) inches wide or has three (3) wheels.
Section 8.
Penalty: Any person who violates this ordinance is guilty of a municipal civil infraction and may
be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars.
Section 9.
Restitution: A court may order a person who causes damage to the environment, a Road, or
other property as a result of the operation of an ORV to pay restitution for that damage above
and beyond the penalties paid for civil fines.
Section 10.
a) Fines and Damages Allocation: The County Treasurer, Township Treasurer, or other
person charged with collecting fines and damages collected under this Ordinance
shall deposit all such fines and damages into a fund to be designated as the ORV
Fund. Revenue in the ORV Fund shall be appropriated as follows: Fifty (50%)
percent to the County Road Commission for repairing damage to Roads and the
environment that may have been caused by ORVs, and for posting signs indicating
ORV speed limits, or indicating whether Roads are open or closed to the operation
of ORVs; and,
b) Fifty (50%) percent to the County Sheriff for ORV enforcement and training.
Section 11.
Severability: The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any section,
provision or word is determined to be void or unenforceable for any reason by any court of
competent jurisdiction, all remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall be fully effective,
enforceable, and unaffected thereby.
Section 12.
Effective Date: This Ordinance shall become effective the day following publication of notice of
its adoption in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
Section 13.
Repeal: All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed.
5
By: Lyn J. Durant
Its: Supervisor
By: Randy Ritari
Its: Clerk
(Customary Ordinance Certification)
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE
COUNTY OF MARQUETTE, STATE OF MICHIGAN
ORDINANCE NO. 071613
NOISE ORDINANCE
An ordinance to secure the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and
property owners of the Charter Township of Marquette, by regulating, and where necessary
prohibiting noise within said Township and proscribing penalties for the violation thereof.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE, COUNTY OF MARQUETTE,
STATE OF MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
Section 1: Repealer.
Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the prior Ordinance No. 091801, known as the
Anti-Noise and Public Nuisance Ordinance is, at the same time, repealed.
Section 2: Title.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Noise Ordinance of the Charter
Township of Marquette.
Section 3: Purpose.
Pursuant to its statutorily authorized power to enact ordinances for the purpose of
preserving and protecting the general health, safety, and welfare, the Township Board of the Charter
Township of Marquette hereby enacts the following Noise Ordinance, the purpose of which is to
prohibit excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, or unusually loud noises, or which are prolonged,
unusual, and unnatural in their time, place, and use, and which disturb the peace and comfort of the
public, or are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, peace and
prosperity of the general public, and to provide penalties for the violation of this Ordinance.
Section 4: General Prohibited Noise.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make, maintain, or continue, or cause to be
made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, repeated, prolonged or unusually
loud noise, or any noise which annoys or disturbs or injures or irritates or unreasonably
impairs the comfort, repose, health, or peace of another, within the limits of the Charter
Township of Marquette.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises within the Charter Township of
Marquette, and for the occupant or person in possession of any premises within the Charter
Township of Marquette, whether individual, corporate, or otherwise, to knowingly make,
allow to be made, or to permit to be made upon the premises so owned, occupied, or
possessed, any excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, repeated, prolonged or unusually loud
noise, or any noise which annoys or disturbs or injures or irritates or unreasonably impairs
the comfort, repose, health, or peace of other, within the limits of the Charter Township of
Marquette.
Section 5: Specific Noises Prohibited; Standards.
The following noises and acts are hereby declared to be excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, or
unusually loud which annoy, disturb, injure, or unreasonably impair the comfort, repose, health, or
peace of others in violation of this Ordinance, said specification is not to be construed to exclude
other violations not enumerated:
A. HORNS AND OTHER SIGNALING DEVICES. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, boat, bus, truck, or other vehicle, except as a danger
warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time, or at an unnecessary and unreasonable time of the day or night; and, the use of any
hand held or hand operated signal device which emits a loud or harsh sound except as a
danger warning.
B. RADIOS, TELEVISIONS, PHONOGRAPHS, AND MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. The
using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio receiving set,
television receiving set, phonograph, or musical instrument, or other such device for the
production or reproduction of sound, in such a manner as to unreasonably or unnecessarily
irritate, annoy, or disturb the peace, quiet, and conform of the neighboring inhabitants, or at
any time at a volume unnecessary for convenient listening of the person or persons in the
room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is being operated, and who are
voluntarily listeners thereto. The operation of any such radio, television, phonograph,
musical instrument, or other such machine or device between the hours of ten o’clock
(10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of fifty (50’) feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located, or
which is plainly audible in a dwelling unit other than that in which it is located, shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section.
C. YELLING, SHOUTING, AND VERBAL NOISE. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling,
singing, or other verbal noise upon any premises, or upon the public streets, between the
hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m., or at any other time or place,
in such a manner so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb peace, natural quietude, comfort, or
repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of
any persons in the vicinity where such noise is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50’) feet
from its point of origin shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section.
D. ANIMALS, BIRDS, OR PETS. The keeping of any animal, bird, or pet which, by causing
frequent or continuous noise, plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50’) feet from its point of
origin, shall be a prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section.
E. EXHAUST NOISES. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, or any other form of engine, whether in a boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, off-road vehicle, or tractor, except through a muffler or other device
which effectively prevents or reduces loud or explosive noises.
F. LOADING, UNLOADING, AND OPENING OF BOXES. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or trailer, or the
opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
G. CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIRING OF BUILDINGS. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure other than between
the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. and nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. where such activity results
in the creation of unusually loud noise or noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or
unreasonably impairs the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others except in case of
urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, for the duration of such
emergency.
H. BUSINESS OPERATIONS AND OTHER PREMISES ACTIVITIES. The carrying on of
any business operations, or any other activities upon any premises in such a manner so as to
create any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise, which disturbs, injures, or
unreasonably impairs the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others.
I. PILE DRIVERS AND OTHER HEAVY EQUIPMENT. The operation between the
hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. of any pile driver, steam
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other form of heavy
equipment, the use of which is attended by loud, or repeated or continuous noise.
J. The operation of any race track, proving ground, testing area, or obstacle course for vehicles,
motorcycles, boats, racers, automobiles, snowmobiles, off-road vehicles, or vehicles of any
kind or nature in a residential area of the Township, or adjacent to a residential area of the
Township where such noise emanating from the identified vehicles would be unusually loud
or continuous, or unreasonably disturbing, or upsetting to persons in that vicinity.
K. FIREWORKS. Pursuant to Public Act 65 of 2013, the ignition, discharge and use of
consumer-grade fireworks on the day before, the day of and the day after a national holiday
between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) a.m. and eight o’clock (8:00) a.m.
Section 6: Exceptions.
The noise prohibitions set out hereinbefore shall not apply to the following:
A. Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine, or other emergency vehicle while engaged in
necessary emergency activities.
B. Excavation or repair of bridges, streets, or highways, or other property by or on behalf of
the State of Michigan, Charter Township of Marquette, or County of Marquette, between
sundown and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. when the public welfare, health, safety or
convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during other hours.
C. Noises emitted from warning devices for the purpose of notifying individuals or the public
at large as authorized by law.
D. All railroad operations meeting the maximum permissible noise levels allowed or permitted
by law.
E. Noise emanating from the discharge of firearms providing that such discharge is otherwise
authorized under Michigan law or local ordinance.
Section 7: Severability.
The several sections of this Ordinance shall be deemed severable, and should any section,
clause, or provision thereof be declared unconstitutional or contrary to the law of the State of
Michigan, and therefore voided by any court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the
validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part or section so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 8: Violations.
A violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a civil infraction, and any person, firm,
or entity found responsible therefore shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each offense.
A violator of this Ordinance may be subject to additional sanctions, remedies, injunctions or judicial
orders as authorized under Michigan law. Each day a violation of this Ordinance continues to exist
constitutes a separate violation.
Section 9: Effective Adoption and Date.
A. This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after its publication, as required by
law.
B. This Ordinance was adopted by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Marquette,
County of Marquette, and State of Michigan, at its regular meeting held on July 16, 2013.
Revised January 2011
Solid Waste Management Ordinance
No. 100494
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF
SOLID WASTE WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE, MARQUETTE
COUNTY, MICHIGAN, PURSUANT TO THE TERMS AND PROVISIONS OF THE
WASTE MANAGEMENT RESOURCE RECOVERY FINANCE ACT OF 1978 (M.S.A. §
5.2725) (11) ET. SQ.).
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE, MARQUETTE COUNTY,
MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
The existing Marquette Township Solid Waste Ordinance, Ordinance 011690, adopted January 16,
1990, and amended by Ordinance 061990, adopted June 19, 1990, and amended by Ordinance
080990, adopted August 9, 1990, are hereby superseded by this Ordinance.
Section 1: TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Marquette Township Solid Waste Management
Ordinance.”
Section 2: DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases are hereby defined:
a. “Ashes” means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, refuse, wastewater sludge,
or other combustible materials.
b. “Garbage” means rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or
vegetable matter used or intended for food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking,
dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable matter.
c. “Person” means an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, association, or corporation,
public or private, organized or existing under the laws of the State of Michigan or any other
state, including a federal corporation.
d. “Residential solid waste” means solid waste generated or originating from any building,
home, structure, or premises which is used or intended for use as a dwelling or place of
residence of one or more natural persons.
e. “Rubbish” means non-decaying solid waste, consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery, and litter of any kind, that may be a detriment to the public health and safety, but
excluding ashes, demolished building materials, and building materials.
f. “Solid Waste” means garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street
cleaning, municipal and industrial sludges, and solid commercial and industrial waste, animal
Revised January 2011
waste, but excluding human body waste, liquid waste or sanitary sewage, and ferrous or nonferrous
scrap.
g. “User” means a person receiving solid waste collection services.
h. “Seasonal residences” means a home that either cannot be occupied more than six (6)
months a year by law or where the hauler is unable to serve during the winter months.
Terms or words used in this Ordinance and not defined herein shall have the meaning as defined in
Act 641, P.A. 1978, and the rules and regulations issued thereunder, or as commonly understood
and used if not so defined.
Section 3: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
a. The Charter Township of Marquette shall, by contract, engage the services of one or more
persons to provide for the regular collection and disposal of solid waste generated within the
Charter Township of Marquette. Each residential premises within the Charter Township of
Marquette that is served by said collection and disposal service shall be assessed a reasonable
charge in accordance with the “User Fee Charge Schedule” attached hereto and incorporated
herein by reference.
b. If service cannot be provided, whether curbside or roadside to a residential premise, there
will be no users fee charge. The owners or occupants of non-serviced residential premises
will be required to dispose of their solid waste by delivering it to a licensed solid waste hauler
or transfer facility. The determination as to which residential premises fall within the
provisions of this subsection shall be made by the Township Manager.
Section 4: COLLECTION PROCEDURES FOR SOLID WASTE.
a. Each single and duplex family residence will receive curbside or roadside collection of
residential solid waste in accordance with a schedule approved by the Township Board.
b. Each business, commercial establishment/rental complex, apartment house, restaurant,
institution, and premises in the Charter Township of Marquette which generates solid waste
shall contract for collection with a commercial hauler as often as is reasonable and necessary
in order to protect the public health.
c. All garbage must be placed in plastic bags, properly sealed so as to prevent leakage or
spillage. No plastic bag containing garbage shall exceed a weight of thirty (30) pounds. All
garbage, after having been placed in a plastic bag, shall be placed in either a metal or plastic
garbage receptacle, which container shall have two (2) handles and a tight fitting cover. No
garbage container shall exceed a weight of sixty (60) pounds.
d. All items of solid waste other than garbage may be placed in any type of container or
receptacle, provided; however, that no such container or receptacle shall exceed a weight of
sixty (60) pounds. Containers or receptacles which the user wishes to retain after collection
services shall be clearly marked or labeled so that the solid waste hauler does not remove
them from the premises.
Revised January 2011
e. Each business, commercial establishment/rental complex, apartment house, restaurant,
institution, and premises which generate solid waste, other than normal domestic solid
waste, may elect to place such waste in a dumpster or other large container; provided,
however, that all garbage shall be placed in plastic bags and properly sealed.
f. No person shall place at curbside, roadside, or anywhere else any white goods (refrigerators,
stoves, water heaters, etc.), or other household appliances, vehicles, motor vehicles, motor
vehicle frames, chassis, parts or engines, building materials, human body waste, toxic
materials or hazardous waste (as defined in Act No. 64, P.A. 1979), yard wastes, or any other
type of material required to be disposed of at a Type III landfill, for collection by the solid
waste hauler, and these types of materials shall not be accepted for collection by the solid
waste hauler.
g. Any person or user wishing to dispose of these types of materials shall be required to make
private arrangements with a properly licensed solid waste hauler, solid waste processing
plant, solid waste transfer facility, or disposal area, as these terms are defined in Act 641,
P.A. 1978 (M.S.A. 13.29 (1) et. seq.; M.C.L.A. § 229.401 et. seq.) for the proper and legal
disposal thereof.
h. Solid waste shall be placed out prior to the scheduled collection time to ensure pick-up.
i. No person shall place, deposit, throw, or dispose of any solid waste in or on any street, alley,
sidewalk, road, public building, or public place within the Charter Township of Marquette,
except the placement thereof for collection by a licensed solid waste hauler in accordance
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
j. Any user wishing to dispose of demolished building materials, building materials, and any
other non-toxic or non-hazardous waste, the collection of which is not provided during
schedule collection, may contract with the solid waste hauler for a special collection of such
materials or deliver them to an authorized transfer facility.
k. Any user having a complaint against the solid waste hauler engaged by the Charter Township
of Marquette shall communicate such complaint to the Township Manager. It shall be the
duty of the Township Manager or the Public Works Superintendent to investigate each
complaint, to assist in resolution of the problem, if possible, and to provide a brief written
summary as to the results of the investigation. A copy of the written summary shall be
delivered to the complainant and to the solid waste hauler.
Section 5: COLLECTION OF USER FEE CHARGES AND ADMINISTRATION OF
ORDINANCE.
a. There is hereby created a Solid Waste Disposal Fund which is established as a separate fund
to be maintained by the Charter Township of Marquette.
b. The Marquette Township Board shall adopt a “User Fee Charge Schedule” which will
provide sufficient revenues so that the Solid Waste Disposal Fund shall be adequate to
finance all contract payments and other expenses incurred by the Township in operating the
system. If the rates and charges collected from users of the system are inadequate to meet
Revised January 2011
all such expenses, then funds may be transferred, on a loan basis, from the Marquette
Township General Fund, or from any other fund which may be validly used for such
purposes to the Solid Waste Disposal Fund to cover any deficiency; provided, however, that
if it appears that the system is not self-supporting, then the Marquette Township Board shall
adjust the rates and charges to users of the system to establish a rate structure which will
cover all costs and expenses incurred by the Township in operating the system.
c. All user fee charges assessed against users and commercial haulers pursuant to the terms of
this Ordinance shall be collected by the Charter Township of Marquette, and shall be
deposited into the Solid Waste Disposal Fund.
d. Residential user fee charges as established in the “User Fee Charge Schedule” attached
hereto shall be billed to each user on the first (1st) day of each month, and shall be payable
without penalty on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the same month. Thereafter, late
payment charges shall be imposed on all delinquent payments in accordance with the “User
Fee Charge Schedule.”
e. Since the Marquette County Solid Waste Management Authority has restricted the use of the
landfill located in Sands Township, Michigan, solid waste haulers shall be preauthorized to
use the landfill by the Authority through the issuance of a license. Solid waste haulers doing
business in Marquette Township must apply through Marquette Township, the municipality
in which the solid waste is generated and collected, for the license. The solid waste hauler, at
time of issuance or renewal of the license, shall either post a bond with or pay a deposit to
the Township. This bond or deposit shall be equal to one (1) month’s estimated tippage
fees plus charges for landfill debt retirement as specified in the “User Fee Charges
Schedule.” Interest at the prevailing average annual rate will be paid on all cash deposits.
Commercial hauler fee charges, as established in the “User Fee Charge Schedule” attached
hereto, shall be billed to each solid waste hauler on a monthly basis and shall be payable
without penalty within thirty (30) days of the billing date. Late payment charges shall be
imposed on all delinquent payments in accordance with the “User Fee Charge Schedule.”
f. The rates and charges to residential users of the system shall be a lien on the premises for
which the services have been provided, and amounts delinquent for six (6) months or more
shall be certified annually to the Township Assessor, to be entered upon the next tax roll
against the premises to which the services have been rendered. The charges shall be
collected and the lien enforced in the same procedure established by law for the
enforcement and collection of delinquent real property taxes against the premises, and may
be utilized notwithstanding the fact that there are or may be no delinquent real property
taxes outstanding against the premises.
Section 6: UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OR DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township of Marquette to collect and/or
transport for a fee any residential solid waste unless that person has been authorized to do
so pursuant to a written contract entered into between that person and the Charter
Township of Marquette.
Revised January 2011
b. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Charter Township of Marquette to dispose of
any solid waste by depositing same upon or by delivering it to the property of any person,
unless the receiver of the solid waste is the owner or operator of a disposal area duly
licensed by the Director of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Charter Township of Marquette to transport
solid waste, or to deliver any solid waste to any other person for transportation, unless the
receiver of the solid waste is a solid waste hauler who is using a solid waste transporting unit,
which complies with the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act and the rules
promulgated pursuant to said Act.
Section 7: PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate the provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil infraction and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100) and a cost of prosecution for the first offense. Upon conviction of subsequent
violations, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500)
and cost of prosecution. The imposition of punishment for a civil violation of this Ordinance shall
not relieve any person for civil responsibilities to the Charter Township of Marquette for payment
of rates and charges for services furnished to such person under the provisions of this Ordinance,
and the Charter Township of Marquette may simultaneously pursue its civil remedies and
enforcement of any lien it may have against any premise in connection with any violation of the
terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 8: SEVERABILITY.
The various parts, sections, and clauses of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any
part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Section 9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the
extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 10: EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force seven (7) days after its publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Charter Township of Marquette.
Revised July 1, 1991
1
ORDINANCE 060491-1
ORDINANCE FOR WASTEWATER AND WASTEWATER COLLECTION
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, EXPANSION AND
FINANCING OF THE WASTEWATER SYSTEM WITHIN THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF
MARQUETTE; FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND THE RATES THEREOF; AND FOR
AMENDMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE, IN THE INTEREST OF THE HEALTH, SAFETY AND
WELFARE OF THE RESIDENTS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE ORDAINS:
PART ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SECTION 1. Authority.
This Ordinance is adopted in accordance with the powers vested in the Charter Township of Marquette pursuant to
the Revenue Bond Act, Act 94 P.A., 1933, the Michigan Public Code, Act 368 P.A., 1978 and the general ordinance
powers of the Township, MCLA 41.181 et. seq.
SECTION 2. Purpose and Policy.
An Ordinance regulating private and public sewers, sewer connections, industrial waste pretreatment facilities and
discharge of industrial waste into the publicly operated treatment works and providing for pollutant limitations, data
collection, monitoring and sampling, and providing for penalties for the violation thereof.
The objectives of this Ordinance are:
a. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the normal
operation of the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;
b. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment
in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;
c. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system.
SECTION 3. Short Title.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Charter Township of Marquette Wastewater Collection
Ordinance.
SECTION 4. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this Ordinance, shall
have the meanings hereinafter designated:
Act or “The Act” – the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
Revised July 1, 1991
2
Administrator – defined in Part Two, Section 3 of this Ordinance.
Applicable County Health Department – shall mean the County of Marquette Health Department.
Authorized Representative of Industrial User – a) an authorized representative of an Industrial User is a
corporation b) a general partner or proprietor if the Industrial User is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
or c) a duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facilities from which any direct discharge or indirect discharge originates.
Available Public Wastewater System – a system of sanitary sewers, pump stations, treatment facilities, and
appurtenances owned, operated and controlled by the Township, or by the Authority, through which wastewater is
collected and treated.
Authority – means the joint Sewer System Authority of the City of Marquette, Charter Township of Marquette, and
Charter Township of Chocolay.
Backflow – shall mean water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminants entering a public water supply
system due to a reversal of flow.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) – the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed interims of weight and
concentration (milligrams per liter).
Board (Township Board) – shall mean the elected governing body of the Charter Township of Marquette.
Building Drain – shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives
discharge from drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and coveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5)
feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building Sewer – shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Categorical Standards – National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standard.
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) – a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic
matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant
in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not
necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed and
dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively.
Chlorine Demand – shall mean the difference between the amount of chlorine applied and the amount of free
chlorine available at the end of the contact time, expressed in milligrams per liter.
City – the City of Marquette, Michigan, its agents and employees.
Combined Sewer – shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
Commercial User – a business engaged in buying, selling, or exchanging goods or services.
Commercial Waste – shall mean a liquid or water-carried waste material from a commercial business engaged in
buying, selling, exchanging goods or services.
Revised July 1, 1991
3
Compatible Pollutant – a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater plant such as biochemical oxygen
demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
Permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such
pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand,
total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils, and greases of
animal or vegetable origin.
Composite Sample – a series of samples taken over a specific time period whose volume is proportional to the
flow in the waste stream, which are combined into one sample.
Contaminate – means a physical, chemical, biological and radiological substance or matter in water.
Cooling Water – the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which
the only pollutant added is heat.
Debt Service Charge – means charges levied to customers of the wastewater system which are used to pay
principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system.
The debt service charge shall be in addition to the User Charge specified below.
Design Standards – Township Utility Department Standards and Ten State Standards.
Direct Discharge – the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly into the waters of the State.
Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA – the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Administrator or other
duly authorized official.
Garbage – shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
Grab Sample – a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the
waste stream and without consideration of time.
Holding Tank Waste – any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic
tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
Incompatible Pollutants – any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant.
Indirect Discharge – the discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants into the POTW (including
holding tank waste discharged into the system).
Indirect Wastes – the wastewater discharges from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or
wastewater discharge from any structure with these characteristics, as distinct from their employee’s domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
Industrial User – business engaged in the production, manufacturing or processing of products.
Infiltration – shall mean any waters entering the system from the ground, through such means as, but not limited
to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished
from inflow.
Infiltration/Inflow – shall mean the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow.
Revised July 1, 1991
4
Inflow – shall mean any waters entering the system through such sources as, but not limited to, building
downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas and
storm drain cross connection.
Interference – the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the NPDES Permit or reduces the efficiency of the POTW. The term also includes
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW.
Laboratory Determination – the measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes in
accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition at the time of any such measurement, test, or analysis of
“Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water”, a joint publication of the American Public Health
Association, the American Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation or in accordance
with any other method prescribed by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this Ordinance.
Lateral Line – that portion of the wastewater system located under the street or within the street right-of-way from
the property line to the trunk line and which collects sewage from a particular property for transfer to the trunk line.
Major contributing industry – any User of the publicly owned treatment works that:
a. Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
b. Has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow carried by the Township Collection System receiving the
wastes;
c. Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in the standards under Section 307(a) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972; or
d. Is found by any regulatory agency to significantly impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
Manager – shall mean the Township Manager, or his authorized representatives.
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Pretreatment Standard – any federal regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to a specific category of Users.
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit – a permit issued pursuant to Section
402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standard – any regulation developed
under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5.
Natural Outlet – shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
groundwater.
New Source – any source of wastewater, the construction of which is commenced after the adoption of this
Ordinance.
Normal Domestic Sewage (NDS) – wastewater which, when analyzed, shows a daily average concentration of
not more than 200 mg/l of BOD; not more than 240 mg/l of suspended solids; nor more than 10 mg/l of
phosphorus.
Revised July 1, 1991
5
Obstruction – any object of whatever nature which substantially impedes the flow of wastewater from the point of
origination to the trunk line. This shall include, but not limited to, objects, wastewater, tree roots, rocks and debris
of any type.
Operation and Maintenance – means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate
and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with insuring adequate treatment of
wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES Permit and other applicable state and federal
regulations, and includes the cost of replacement.
Owner – the owner or owners of record of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagor or
vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in
possession or control of a building.
Person – any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity or any legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH – the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of
solution.
Plans and Specifications – shall mean a true description or representation of the wastewater and appurtenances
thereof to be constructed, and shall include a location map with a legal description of the easements wherein the
wastewater mains are to be constructed if such easements are not located within a public highway, street or
right-of-way.
Pollutant – any of various chemicals, substances, and refuse materials such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, and industrial, municipal and agricultural
wastes which impair the purity of the water and soil.
Pollution – the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of
water.
POTW Treatment Plant – that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
Pressure System – all service lines and equipment for the disposal of sewage installed or located on any property,
from the grinder pump to and including any structure or facility which exists on the property.
Pretreatment or Treatment – the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
Pretreatment Requirements – any substantive or procedural requirement for treating of a waste prior to inclusion
in the POTW.
Private Sewer Lines – all service lines and equipment for the disposal of sewage installed or located on any
property, from the property line, to and including any structure or facility which exists on the property.
Process Flow – any industrial or commercial activity resulting in wastewater discharge.
Revised July 1, 1991
6
Properly Shredded Garbage – shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that
have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
Property Owner – the owner of the property which abuts the street.
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) – a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, which is
owned in this instance by the County of Marquette. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to
the POTW Treatment Plant. For the purposes of this Ordinance, “POTW” shall also include any sewers that
convey wastewaters to POTW from persons outside the City of Marquette who are, by contract or agreement with
the City of Marquette, Users of the POTW.
Public Sewer – shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by
public authority or by the Authority.
Public Wastewater System – a system of sanitary sewers, pump stations, treatment facilities and appurtenances
owned, operated and controlled by the Township, or by the Authority, through which wastewater is collected and
treated.
Replacement – means the replacement in whole or part of any equipment, appurtenances and accessories in the
wastewater transportation or treatment systems to insure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with
the NPDES Permit and other applicable state and federal regulations.
Sanitary Sewer – shall mean a sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are
not intentionally admitted.
Sewage – shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions
and industrial establishments, together with such ground waters as may be present.
Sewage Treatment Plant or Wastewater Treatment Plant – shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
Sewage Works – shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
Sewer – shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Sewage Service Charge – means the sum of the applicable user charge, surcharges and debt service charges.
Shall – is mandatory; May is permissive.
Significant Industrial User – any User of the Township Wastewater Disposal System who (a) has a discharge flow
of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; or (b) has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the wastewater
treatment system; or (c) has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or State
Statutes and rules; or (d) is found by the Charter Township of Marquette, Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the
system’s effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
Slug Load – any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a
POTW.
Revised July 1, 1991
7
Standard Classification (SIC) – a classification pursuant to the Standard Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the U.S. President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
State – State of Michigan.
Storm Sewer or Storm Drain – shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but
excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
Storm Water – any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
Superintendent – the person designated to supervise the operation of the POTW, or his duly authorized
representative.
Surcharge – as part of the service charge, any customer discharging wastewater having strength in excess of limits
set forth herein may be required to pay an additional charge to cover the cost of treatment of such excess strength
wastewater.
Suspended Solids – the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater
or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
System – the public wastewater system.
Township – the Charter Township of Marquette, Michigan, and its agents and employees.
Township Utility Department Standards – shall mean the standard water main and sanitary sewer construction
specifications.
Toxic Pollutant – any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can be potentially harmful to public
health or environment including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Act or other statutes.
Trunk Line – the main sewer line located under any street or within any street right-of-way, or within any easement
granted for a municipal wastewater system, which collects and transmits the wastewater of the various properties
served by the wastewater system.
Uncontaminated Industrial Waste – wastewater that has not come into contact with any substance used in or
incidental to industrial processing operations and to which no chemical or other substance has been added.
User – any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW.
User Charge – means a charge levied on Users of a treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of
sewerage works pursuant to Section 204(b) of PL 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement.
User Class – means the kind of User connected to sanitary sewers including but not limited to residential,
industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental. The User classes are defined as follows:
Residential User – shall mean a User of the treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a
domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, semi-detached and row houses,
mobile homes, apartments, or permanent multi-family dwellings (transit lodging is not included, it is considered
commercial).
Industrial User – shall mean any User who discharges “industrial wastes” as defined in this Ordinance.
Revised July 1, 1991
8
Commercial User – shall mean an establishment listed in the Office of the Management and Budget’s “Standard
Industrial Classification Manual” (SICM), involved in commercial enterprise, business or service which, based
on a determination by the Administrator, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences and which is not a Residential User or an Industrial User.
Institutional User – shall mean any establishment listed in the SICM involved in a social, charitable, religious, or
educational function, based on a determination by the Township Administrator which discharges primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
Governmental User – shall mean any federal, state, or local government user of the wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater – the liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
Wastewater Advisory Board – the administrative board which oversees operation of the Authority.
Watercourse – a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
Waters of the State – all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, wetlands, springs,
reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the
State or any portion thereof.
SECTION 5: Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
1. BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
2. CFR Code of Federal Regulations
3. COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
4. EPA Environmental Protection Agency
5. l Liter
6. mg Milligrams
7. mg/l Milligrams per Liter
8. NDS Normal Domestic Sewage
9. NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
10. P Phosphorus
11. POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
12. SIC Standard Industrial Classification
Revised July 1, 1991
9
13. SICM Standard Industrial Classification Manual
14. SS Suspended Solids
15. SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S. C. 6901, et. Seq.
16. O&M Operation and Maintenance
17. CWA Clean Water Act
Revised July 1, 1991
10
PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION.
SECTION 1. Powers of the Board.
The Board shall determine or supervise all aspects of administration in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. Duties shall include the receipt of plans and permit requests and the determination of permit grant or
denial. Administrator shall also mean his authorized representatives.
SECTION 2. Administrator.
The Township Board shall appoint an Administrator to implement this Ordinance. Duties shall include the receipt
of plans and permit requests and the determination of permit grant or denial. Administrator shall also mean his
authorized representatives.
SECTION 3. Variances/Exceptions.
The Administrator shall administer and enforce all provisions of this Ordinance and shall not waive any provision
or make any exceptions to the requirements contained herein. If it is determined that a proposal fails to meet the
requirements of this Ordinance, the person making the proposal may request a variance from this Ordinance. All
variance requests shall be heard and determined by the Township Board. No variances may be granted respecting
provisions of the Michigan Public Health Code or Safe Drinking Water Act or the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
SECTION 4. Variance Procedure.
In the event of a variance request, a public hearing shall be held by the Board to determine the merits of the
variance request. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the public
hearing. Notice shall contain the date, time and place of the meeting, a description of the property involved and
conditions of the request. All decisions of the Board shall be final. The provisions in this section are subject to the
provisions for disconnection and emergency situations which shall have precedence over the variance procedure set
out herein. A request for variance shall not stay disconnection or other emergency measures undertaken by the
Township.
SECTION 5. Enforcement – Operation.
5.1 The Administrator is charged with the duty of investigating, preventing and abating violations and enforcing
the provisions of this Ordinance.
5.2 The Administrator shall be responsible for the supervision and control of the maintenance of the existing
sewer line and all new connections. The Administrator shall be responsible for the supervision and control
of all other matters related to the operation, maintenance, alteration, repair, and management of the
wastewater collection system.
The Township may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as advisable to carry out
the efficient management and operations of the system and may make such necessary or recommended
rules, orders and regulations to assure the efficient management and operation of the system, including the
setting of rates, surcharges, fees, penalties, or other charges, for the use of said system.
5.3 The Administrator is hereby empowered to:
a. Supervise the implementation of this Ordinance.
Revised July 1, 1991
11
b. Institute actions against all Users violating these sections and institute legal proceedings in the name of
the Township in a court of competent jurisdiction for the abatement or prevention of any nuisance,
injunctive relief, damages, or other relief with respect to violations of this Ordinance.
c. Review the plans for pretreatment equipment submitted by Users.
d. Make periodic inspections and tests of existing and newly installed, constructed, reconstructed, or
altered sampling, metering, or pretreatment equipment to determine compliance with the provisions of
these sections.
e. Investigate complaints of violations and make inspections and observations of discharges. Record such
investigations, complaints, and observations.
f. Issue orders requiring compliance with these sections.
g. Propose the imposition of civil penalties for violations of these sections.
h. Make recommendations to the Township Manager for amendments to these sections.
i. Encourage voluntary cooperation by persons of affected groups in water pollution control.
j. Collect and disseminate information of water pollution control.
k. Coordinate activities under these sections with planning and zoning agencies to promote conservation
and management of the water resources of the Township.
l. Cooperate with federal, interstate, state, county, district, municipal, or other agencies concerned with
water pollution with respect to studies, abatement programs, public complaints, and other matters to
conserve and improve the natural resources of the Township.
m. Institute legal proceedings in the name of the Township in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with provisions of this Ordinance or any determination or order which may be promulgated
or issued pursuant to these sections.
SECTION 6. Penalties.
6.1 Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be served with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
6.2 Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500, or by imprisonment of not more than 90 days or both, such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court. Each day in which any such violation shall continue, shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Enforcement and Property Liens. The charges for services which under the provisions of Section 21, Act
94, Public Acts of Michigan 1933, as amended (The Revenue Bond Act of 1933) may be a lien on all
premises served thereby are hereby declared to be lien upon all such premises served, and those charges
delinquent for six (6) months or more shall be certified annually, on November 16 of each year, by the
Township Supervisor to the Township Tax Assessor, whereupon the lien shall be entered upon the tax roll
by the Tax Assessor, against the premises to which the services shall have been rendered, and the charges
shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes
Revised July 1, 1991
12
assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for the taxes. The Township shall not render
services until a cash deposit is made as a security for the payment of charges as follows:
For a single-family residential service, a cash deposit in the amount of $35.00 shall be required.
For any other type of service, a cash deposit in the amount of one month’s estimated bill for services shall
be required.
In addition to the foregoing, the Township shall have the right to shut off water and/or service to any
premises for which charges for water and/or sewer service are more than thirty (30) days delinquent, and
any such service shut-off shall not be restored until all delinquent charges and penalties and turn-on charge,
to be specified by the Township Board, have been paid. The enforcement of payment of delinquent water
and sewer bills by shutting off service as hereinabove provided shall be in addition to any other lawful
enforcement methods which the Township may have, shall be cumulative thereto, and may be pursued by
the Township in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies which the Township may have to collect
the dept or to require compliance with any Township Ordinance.
6.3 Any business, industry or individual violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance, which results in fines or
penalties being levied against the Township, shall become liable for said fine or penalty, plus any expenses, loss
or damage occasioned by such violation. This cost be levied in addition to the fine identified in the section
entitled “User Charge System”.
6.4 Every person who shall violate any of the provision of this Ordinance shall be liable to the Township for
civil damages incurred by the Township in correcting any defect, curing the violation, or otherwise securing
compliance, and such civil liability shall be in addition to any criminal liability set forth above.
SECTION 7. Administrative Appeals – Board of Appeals.
a. In Order that the provisions of this Ordinance may be reasonable applied and substantial justice done in
instances where unnecessary hardship would result from carrying out the strict letter of these sections, the
Township Board shall serve as a Wastewater Board of Appeals. The duty of such Board shall be to consider
appeals from the decision of the Administrator and to determine, in particular cases, whether any deviation
from strict enforcement will violate the intent of the Order or jeopardize the public health or safety.
b. An informal hearing before the Administrator may be requested in writing by any User or contractee deeming
itself aggrieved by any citation, order, charge, fee, surcharge, penalty or action with ten (10) days after the date
thereof, stating the reasons therefore with supporting documents and data.
The informal hearing shall be scheduled at the earliest practicable date, but not later than five (5) days after
receipt of the request, unless extended by mutual written agreement.
The hearing shall be conducted on an informal basis at the Township Hall or at such place as designated by the
Administrator.
SECTION 8. Records Retention.
All Users subject to this Ordinance shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, any records, books,
documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereto, relating to monitoring,
sampling and chemical analysis made by or in behalf of a User in connection with its discharge. All records which
pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation
activities brought by the Township pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the User until all
enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.
Revised July 1, 1991
13
SECTION 9. Records.
The Township will maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts, separate from all other records and
accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the System. The Township
will cause an annual audit of such books of record and account for the preceding operating year to be made by a
recognized independent certified public accountant, and will supply such audit report to authorized public officials
on request.
There shall be an annual review by the Township Board of the sewer charge system to determine whether revenues
are meeting expected expenditures for the following year and to insure proportionality among User classes as
required by federal regulations.
Classification of old and new industrial users shall also be reviewed annually.
The Township will maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of the System, of the kinds and in the
amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of sewage disposal
systems. All monies received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement
and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed.
Revised July 1, 1991
14
PART THREE: SYSTEM CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS
SECTION 1. Permits Required.
Before any Township permit may be issued or work commenced toward any alteration or modification of the public
wastewater system, the person making the proposal shall obtain either written approval from the Administrator for
the proposal or a written statement that the proposal has been reviewed by the Administrator and does not require
his approval under law.
There are hereby established two Township permits to be known as:
a. Wastewater Connection Permit – for tapping a building service line into the public wastewater system.
b. Wastewater Construction Permit – for constructing extensions to the public wastewater system.
The following requirements for these permits and their effect shall be provided in the following sections of this
part.
SECTION 2. General Permit Requirements.
2.1 Design standards are adopted by the Township Board to provide a reasonable and proper basis for the
design and construction of engineering improvements in Marquette Township. They are written for
engineers and applicants, and provide procedures and criteria for water system improvements and
wastewater system improvements.
These standards are minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and the general welfare of the Township. These standards are not intended to repeal, abrogate,
annual or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or ordinances of the Township, nor conflict with
any statutes of the State of Michigan or Marquette County ordinances except that these standards impose a
greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations.
2.2 All general plans for engineering improvements and all site plans shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch
white prints having blue or black lines, and shall be neatly and accurately prepared and contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
a. Title Block showing name and description of property, registered land surveyor or engineer drawn by:
date, scale, etc.
b. North arrow
c. Bench marks (USGS Datum)
d. Engineer’s stamp or seal
e. Existing contour lines
f. Proposed contour lines
g. Off-site elevations (100 feet on each side of parcel)
h. Existing utilities – proposed future utilities
i. Street names and R.O.W. width
j. Easements
k. Lot numbers and dimensions of acreage or tract
l. Stationing
m. Names of adjacent plat or subdivision
n. Tie from nearest cross street or section corner
o. Location of proposed building on property
p. Sewer and water services (location, inverts, and size)
Revised July 1, 1991
15
q. Location and elevations of ditches, culverts, and county drains
2.3 Easements shall be prepared by the applicant and granted to the Township where required. Minimum
requirements are as follows:
a. All public utilities require easements
b. Minimum width shall be 20 feet
c. Utilities in easements shall be at least 2 feet from side or rear lot lines
d. Developments traversed by a water course or containing a water area shall provide a storm drain
easement or other means of access fro public maintenance of flow
e. Public walkway easements, not less than 10 feet wide, shall be provided and constructed where
requested
f. Easement shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall include both a metes and bounds
description and a survey drawing
2.4 As-built plans shall be submitted upon completion of the development and be certified by a licensed
engineer or registered land surveyor.
SECTION 3. Building Sewer System Connections and Permits.
3.1 No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer
or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent. No building
sewer shall be covered until after it has been inspected and approved by their Administrator. All control
manholes and the equipment contained therein are deemed to be part of the public wastewater system.
3.2 The owner or his agent shall make application for a sewer permit on a form furnished by the Township.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information required by
this Ordinance or considered pertinent in the judgment of the Township. A hook-up fee shall be paid to
the Township Treasurer at the time the application is filed. A plumbing permit is also required. If a street
opening is required to make the lead connection, an additional attachment to the permit must be completed.
3.3 All cost and expense incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer to the
public sewer connection shall be borne by the property owner.
3.4 All costs, expenses and liabilities incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Township from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
a. It shall be the duty of each property owner to maintain, clean and repair the private sewer lines on his
property at his own expense as necessary to keep such lines free and clear of obstructions and in good
working order and to maintain and keep clear of obstructions the lateral lines servicing his property.
b. It shall be the duty of the Township to maintain, clean and repair as necessary and at its expense the
sewer trunk lines and to repair or replace any broken or crushed lateral lines. The Township shall not be
responsible for cleaning or maintenance of lateral lines.
c. In the case of a bona fide dispute as to whether needed maintenance, cleaning or repair of a portion of
sewer line is the responsibility of the property owner or the Township under the provisions of this
Ordinance, it shall be the duty of the property owner to establish that the obstruction disrepair or defect
has occurred in that portion of the line for which the Township is responsible.
Revised July 1, 1991
16
If the property owner fails to establish the Township’s responsibility, it shall be the property owner’s
responsibility to perform the necessary maintenance as provided in this Ordinance.
If the Township responsibility is established, the Township shall perform the necessary maintenance and
shall reimburse the property owner for reasonable expenses incurred in locating the defect in the line or
in otherwise establishing the Township responsibility.
The property owner would be responsible under this Ordinance for the total maintenance and repair of
the private sewer lines on his property and for the maintenance and cleaning, although not including
major repair, of the entire sewer line out to the truck line. The Township, on the other hand, is
responsible for major repair of the truck line and lateral lines only and has no responsibility of any sort
for the private lines. The Township also has no responsibility to clean the lateral lines.
d. Any property owner who shall violate the provisions of this Ordinance shall be liable to the Township
for civil damages incurred in correcting the defect, and in addition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
If any property owner fails to maintain a private sewer line as required by this Ordinance, in addition to
the other penalties prescribed, the sewer may be declared a public nuisance by the County Health
Officer and the defect may be corrected by the Township. Any costs so incurred shall be assessed
against the property and become a lien on the property if not timely paid.
3.5 A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; provided however that
where one building stands at the rear of another, or on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard or driveway, the building sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building.
3.6 Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the Administrator, to meet all requirements of this article.
3.7 The building sewer shall be constructed of materials approved by the Administrator. The Township
reserves the right to specify and require the encasement of any sewer pipe with concrete, or the installation
of the sewer pipe in concrete cradle if foundation and construction are such as to warrant such protection in
the opinion of the Administrator.
3.8 The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to approval by the Administrator, but in no event
shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four (4) inch pipe shall be not less than
one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. The slope of pipe, the diameter of which is six
(6) inches or more, shall be not less than one-eight (1/8) inch per foot unless otherwise permitted.
3.9 Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement
floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might
thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer
shall be laid at uniform grade. The line shall be straight or laid with properly curved pipe and fittings.
Changes in direction greater than forty-five (45) degrees shall be provided with cleanouts accessible for
cleaning.
3.10 In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the Superintendent, and
discharged to the building sewer.
3.11 All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All joints and discharges to the building
sewer shall be approved by the Superintendent.
Revised July 1, 1991
17
3.12 No sewer connection will be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift
stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of BOD and
suspended solids.
3.13 All newly constructed building sewers shall have a properly sized cleanout at the head of said sewer that is
accessible at all times. This cleanout shall allow access of sewer cleaning equipment of a size equivalent to
the size of the building sewer.
3.14 All sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the “Ten State Standards”.
SECTION 4. Mandatory Connection to Available Public Wastewater System.
Structures in which sanitary wastewater originates lying within the Township shall be connected to the available
public wastewater system as defined herein, within 90 days of mailed notice by regular mail from the Township that
such sanitary sewer is ready for use. Persons owning such structures shall pay all fees and charges due under this
Ordinance at the time of connection. If, in the opinion of the Administrator, connection at an earlier time is
necessary to protect the public health, the Board may so require.
SECTION 5. Wastewater Construction Permit.
5.1 The construction of any sanitary sewer which is designed or intended to serve two or more separate
buildings, dwellings or mobile homes by connection to the public wastewater system shall not be
commenced by any person before filing with the Administrator the plans and specifications therefore, and
obtaining from the Administrator a valid permit for such construction.
Any person or the agent of any person applying for such a permit shall file with the Administrator an
application therefore on a form furnished by the Administrator giving:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of each contractor who will be involved in constructing the
improvement.
b. The correct names and addresses of all owners of land, and a legal description of the respective parcels,
wherein the improvement is to be made.
c. Evidence that all permits have been issued that are required by law or contract to be obtained for
construction of the improvement from other governmental agencies.
d. The plans, profiles, and specifications, for the improvement.
e. The estimated cost of the work set forth in the plans as estimated by the engineer preparing for the plan.
f. A computation of the appropriate fees as set forth in the scheduled ordinance, and,
g. Such other information deemed necessary by the Administrator.
5.2 Submittal Requirements.
1. For Township approval of public service area of the proposed wastewater systems the following documentation
must be submitted for ultimate review by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources:
Revised July 1, 1991
18
a. Attach a map of the general service area of the proposed wastewater systems, showing their relationship
to the existing wastewater system to which the proposed wastewater systems will discharge.
b. Identify the service area of the proposed wastewater systems in terms of initial acreage of wastewater
service area, future acreage of service area and year of future projection.
c. Identify the population density and total population to be tributary to the wastewater system for initial
and future conditions.
d. Identify the per capita sewage flow contributions, average and maximum for initial and future
conditions.
e. Describe commercial and industrial contributions, if known, or identify the flow volume allowance
made for such future discharges. Include waste type, strength and volume (average and maximum
condition).
f. Identify the anticipated flow rate at each point of entry into the existing system.
g. Tabulate the size and grade of each segment of the proposed sewer.
h. Attach an analysis of the effect the proposed flow will have on the existing rates for present and future
flow conditions.
i. Describe the steps to be taken with respect to collected wastewater in case of power failure or
equipment breakdown within a receiving wastewater collection and/or treatment system. Include a
description of alternate power sources and/or reserve units available for emergency treatment, storage
or transportation of the wastewater.
j. Describe utilities on profile, crossing proposed sewer.
2. All sanitary sewer plans and profiles shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch white prints having blue or black
lines, and shall be neatly and accurately prepared by a registered engineer and contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
a. Sewer locations.
b. Sewer size (minimum 8-inch).
c. Depth of invert (preferred 10 feet).
d. Sewer slope.
e. Class and type of pipe for various depths.
f. Bedding (class “B” minimum).
g. Compaction of trenches across roadways, driveways, sidewalks and parking lots (Class II Granular
Backfill at 95% compaction).
h. Building service connections – location and type.
i. Manhole location.
j. Existing utilities on profile, crossing proposed sewer.
3. The applicant shall submit five (5) sets of final plans and specifications. The Administrator will insure proper
submittal to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources for their issuance of a construction permit.
Revised July 1, 1991
19
5.3 Design Standards.
Sanitary wastewater systems shall be designed according to Ten State Standards (contribution for laterals shall be
400 gallons per capita per day and for trunk lines 250 gallons per capita per day) and Township Utility Department
Standards.
SECTION 6. Unsanitary Deposits, Discharge to Natural Outlets Prohibited.
6.1 It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner
upon public or private property within the Township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Township, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
6.2 It shall be unlawful, when an available public wastewater system exists, to discharge to any natural outlet
within the Township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Township any sanitary sewage, industrial
wastes, or other polluted waters. Under no circumstances shall such discharge be made unless specifically
permitted by the applicable county health department.
6.3 It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage, unless specifically permitted by the applicable county health
department or as hereinafter provided.
6.4 The owner of every house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes, situated within the Township and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
there is located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the Township, which is not more than two hundred
(200) feet from any such structure, is hereby required at his/her expense to install suitable sewage facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90)
days after receipt of official notice to do so.
SECTION 7. Process Wastewater.
7.1 Wastewater Contribution Information.
Every industry or structure discharging process flow to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or receiving stream
shall file the material listed below with the Administrator. Any industry which does not normally discharge
to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or receiving stream, but has the potential to do so from accidental spills
or similar circumstances, shall also file the material listed below:
The Administrator may require any person who applies for or receives sewer service, to file the material
listed below on a disclosure form prescribed by the Administrator.
a. Name, address, and location of discharge site (if different from the address).
b. SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
c. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Section 2
of this Ordinance as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures and methods detailed in:
? “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”, American Public Health Association,
current edition.
Revised July 1, 1991
20
? “Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes”, United States Environmental Protection
Agency, current edition.
? “Annual Book of Standards, Part 131, Water, Atmospheric Analysis”, American Society of Testing Materials,
current edition.
d. Time and duration of contribution.
e. Average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
f. Industries identified as significant industries or subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or those required by the Administrator must submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size,
location, and elevation.
g. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are
or could be discharged.
h. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any
Township, City, County, State, Federal Pretreatment Standards, and a statement regarding whether or
not the Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the Industrial User to meet
applicable Pretreatment Standards.
i. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the Pretreatment
Standards; the shortest schedule by which the User will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable Pretreatment Standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
1. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the User to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards.
2. No increment referred to in paragraph 1 shall exceed 9 months.
3. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the User
shall submit a progress report to the Administrator including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by
the User to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9)
months elapse between such progress reports to the Administrator.
j. Each product produced by type, amount, process, or processes and rate of production.
k. Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day.
l. Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation
of pretreatment system.
m. Any other information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the
POTW.
Revised July 1, 1991
21
n. The discharge form shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the User and a qualified engineer.
o. The Administrator will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data furnished and may require
additional information. Within 90 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
Administrator shall notify the user of the acceptance thereof.
7.2 Discharge Modifications.
Within nine (9) months of the promulgation or revision of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, all
affected Users must submit to the Administrator the information required by paragraph 1 (h) and 1 (i) of
Section 7.1.
7.3 Discharge Conditions.
Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable
regulations, User charges and fees established by the Township. The Township may:
a. Set unit charges or a Schedule of user Charges and Fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the
POTW
b. Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics
c. Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations
and equalization
d. Require the installation and maintenance of inspection sampling facilities
e. Establish specifications and monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of
sampling, number, types and standards for testing and reporting schedule
f. Establish compliance schedules
g. Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports
h. Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as
specified by the Township, and affording the Township access thereto, and copying thereof
i. Require notification of the Administrator for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any
substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.
j. Require notification of slug discharges
k. Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to ensure compliance with this
Ordinance.
l. Require waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste streams, or other potential waste problems to
be placed under the specific supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an
appropriate state agency as properly qualified to supervise such facilities
m. Require records and file reports to be maintained on the final disposal of specific liquids, solids, sludges,
oils, radioactive materials, solvents, or other wastes.
Revised July 1, 1991
22
7.4 Compliance Date Report.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment Standards or, in the
case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater info the POTW, any
User subject to Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit to the Administrator a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which
are limited by Pretreatment Standards and Requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the User facility which are limited by such Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. The
report shall state whether the applicable Pretreatment Standards or Requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to
bring the User into compliance with the applicable Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. This
statement will be signed by an authorized representative of the Industrial User, and certified to be a qualified
representative.
7.5 Periodic Compliance Reports.
Any User or New Source discharging into the POTW, shall submit to the Administrator during the months
of June and December, unless required more frequently in Pretreatment Standards or by the Administrator,
a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
Pretreatment Standards or this Ordinance. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows
which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in paragraph 3(c) of Section 7.
At the discretion of the Administrator and in consideration of such factors as local high or low rates,
holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Administrator may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are to be submitted.
The Administrator may also impose mass limitations on Users which are using dilution to meet applicable
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. In such case, the report required by subparagraph (a) of this paragraph shall also indicate the
mass of pollutants regulated by Pretreatment Standards in the effluent of the User.
7.6 Monitoring Facilities.
The Township may require to be provided and operated at the User’s own expense, monitoring facilities to
allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems.
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the User’s premises, but the Township may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the User allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping
or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the User.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided
in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the Administrator and shall
comply with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed
within 90 days following written notification by the Administrator.
7.7 Inspection and Sampling.
The Administrator may inspect the facilities of any User to ascertain whether the purpose of this Ordinance
is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Township or its representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling records examination,
records copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The Township, Michigan Department of
Revised July 1, 1991
23
Natural Resources, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the User’s property such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a
User has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into their premises, the User shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards to that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Township, Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
7.8 Pretreatment.
Industrial Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this Ordinance and
Shall achieve compliance with all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as
specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations and as required by the Township. Any facilities required
to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Township shall be provided, operated, and maintained at
the User’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the Administrator for review, and shall be approved by the Administrator before construction
of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the User from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Township under
the provisions of this Ordinance. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to, and be acceptable to, the Township prior to the User’s initiation of the
changes.
The Township shall annually publish in the major local newspaper a list of the Users which were not in
compliance with any Pretreatment Standards or Requirements at least once during the twelve previous
months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the User(s) during the
same twelve months.
All records relating to compliance with Pretreatment Standards shall be made available to officials of the
EPA, Township or Michigan Department of Natural Resources upon request.
7.9 Confidential Information.
Information and data on a User obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the User specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secret of the user under state or federal law.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this Ordinance, the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, or the Pretreatment Programs; provided, however; that
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the State or any State agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the User or the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the
Township as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by
the Township until and unless a ten (10) day notification is given to the User.
Revised July 1, 1991
24
SECTION 8. Use of the Public Sewers.
8.1 General Discharge Prohibitions.
No User shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW whether or not the User is subject to the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state, local pretreatment standards or
requirements. The Township may refuse to accept any wastes which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES discharge limits. A User may not contribute the following substances to any POTW:
a. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature and quantity are, or may be, sufficient either
alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way
to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
b. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference
with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage
with particles greater than one-half (1/2”) in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper,
wood, plastics, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grindings or polishing wastes.
c. Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 9.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the POTW.
d. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants, to injure or interfere with nay wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation
set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. This prohibition of toxic pollutants will conform to
Section 307 (a) of the Act.
e. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other
wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into
the sewers for maintenance and repair.
f. Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other product of the POTW such as
residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process.
g. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES Permit or the receiving water quality
standards.
h. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable solutions.
i. Any wastewater having a temperature will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which
exceeds 40 C (104F).
j. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW.
Revised July 1, 1991
25
k. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Administrator in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
l. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
m. Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, storm water, ground water, roof water, or
non-contact cooling water.
n. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or any constituent of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
o. Any waste from individual sewage disposal systems except at the POTW Treatment Plant as provided in
Section 8.4(a) except that waste from any individual sewage disposal system may be disposed of directly
into a sanitary sewer upon entering into an agreement with the Township, which agreement shall specify
the site of disposal, sewage disposal charge and such other conditions as may be required to satisfy the
sanitation and health requirements of the Township and County. For the purpose of this subsection,
“individual sewage disposal system” is defined to include every means of disposing of industrial,
commercial, household, domestic or other water-carried sanitary waste or sewage other than a public
sanitary sewer.
p. Any sludge, precipitate or congealed substances resulting from an industrial or commercial process, or
resulting from the pretreatment of wastewater or air pollutants.
8.2 Specific Pollutant Limitations.
If any waters are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in the NPDES Permit and which in the judgment of
the Administrator may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Township may:
a. Reject the wastes.
b. Require pretreatment to the level defined as “Normal Domestic Sewage”.
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharges.
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing
taxes, sewer charges.
e. Require new industrial customers or industries with significant changes in strength or flow to submit
prior information to the Superintendent concerning the proposed flows.
If the Township permits the pretreatment or equalization or waste flows, the design and installation of the
Plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and shall be subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
8.3 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular subcategory, the
Pretreatment Standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Ordinance for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Ordinance and shall be
considered part of this Ordinance. The Administrator shall notify all affected Users of the applicable
reporting requirements.
Revised July 1, 1991
26
8.4 State Requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than
federal or state requirement and limitations on those in this Ordinance.
a. No User shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, water
from footing drains, or roof water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection. Any premises connected
to a storm sewer shall comply with county, state, and federal requirements as well as those of the
Township.
Downspouts, septic tank and roof leaders shall be disconnected from sanitary sewers within six (6)
months after the effective date of this Ordinance. If this is not done, the Township shall perform this
work and bill the User.
Storm water, groundwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall only be discharged to such sewers as
are specifically designed as combined sewers or storm sewers. Discharge of cooling water or unpolluted
process water to a natural outlet shall be approved only by the Michigan Water Resources Commission.
b. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the Administrator they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be
of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers, which when bolted in
place shall be gastight and watertight.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or flow equalizing facilities shall be maintained by
the owner, at his own expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
c. The admission into any sanitary sewers or storm sewers or any waters or wastes containing the following
are prohibited:
1. Five (5) day BOD greater than two hundred (200) parts per million by weight, or
2. Containing more than two hundred forty (240) parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or
3. Containing more than ten (10) parts per million by weight of phosphorus, or
4. Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 8.1, or
5. Having an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily sewage flow of the
POTW, or having a rate of flow (gallons per day) greater than ten percent (10%) of the average daily
POTW flow for a period of one hour or more, shall be subject to review and approval of the
Administrator.
Where necessary, in the opinion of the Township, the property owner shall provide at his expense,
such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the five (5) day BOD, suspended solids
and phosphorus or to reduce objectionable characteristics of constituents to within the maximum
limits provided for in Section 8.5, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
d. Where the strength of sewage from an industrial, commercial, or institutional establishment exceeds
limits established by NPDES Permit and where such wastes are permitted to be discharged to the sewer
system by the Administrator, an added charge, as noted below, will be made against such establishment
according to the strength of such wastes. The cost of taking and making the first of these samples shall
Revised July 1, 1991
27
be borne by the Township. The cost of any subsequent sampling and testing shall be borne by the
industry or establishment, whether owner or lessee. Tests shall be made by an independent laboratory
or at the County owned wastewater treatment plant.
Added charges shall be determined by the Township. These charges shall be based on the cost of
operation, maintenance, and equipment replacement for the sewage works.
SECTION 9. Monitoring Requirements for Industrial Waste.
When required by the Township, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
Ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage”, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls or premises is appropriate or whether grab samples should be
taken. The responsibilities of industry are further defined below:
1. One person from each industry shall be delegated the authority to be responsible for industrial wastes admitted
to the municipal sewers. Such person would be involved with maintaining the pretreatment facility operations
and assuring a continual high level of performance. In case no pretreatment is provide, such person would be
involved with the prevention of accidental discharges of process wastes admitted to the sanitary sewer system.
Such person must become aware of all potential and routine toxic wastes generated by their industry. Such
person must also be informed of all process alternations which could, in any manner, increase or decrease
normal daily flow or waste strength discharged to the sanitary sewers.
2. This industrial representative must catalog all chemicals stored, used, or manufactured by their industry. Such a
listing should include specific chemical names, not manufacturer’s codes. Those wastes admitted to the sanitary
sewer are a prime concern; however, all discharges should be cataloged. An estimate of daily average flows and
strengths must be made including process, cooling, sanitary, etc. Such a determination should separate the
flows according to appropriate categories. The aforementioned flow and chemical listing is to be sent to the
Administrator.
3. The industrial representative shall determine whether or not large process alternations will occur during the next
few years, one year, two years, five years. Management should be consulted to determine if such alternations are
scheduled and forthcoming.
4. A sketch of the plant building(s) must be made, including a diagram of process and chemical storage areas.
Locations of any pretreatment equipment shall be indicated and floor drains located near process and storage
areas shall be noted. Manhole and sewer locations at the industry’s point of discharge into the municipal
collection system shall be included on the plant layout sketch.
Revised July 1, 1991
28
5. There must be separation of spent concentrations from the sanitary sewer to prevent toxic wastes from upsetting
the municipal biological treatment plant. Supervision and operation of the operation of the pretreatment
equipment for spent concentrations as well as all toxic wastes and high strength organic wastes to an acceptable
level as detailed in this Sewer Use Ordinance is the responsibility of the industrial representative. All sludges
generated by such treatment must be handled in an acceptable manner, such as designated areas of a sanitary
landfill or by a licensed waste hauler. Adequate segregation of those waters and wastes to be pretreated to meet
discharge limits is a vital portion of the industrial effort to prevent operational problems at the wastewater
treatment plant.
6. Throughout the industry, adequate secondary containment of curbing must be provided to protect all floor
drains from accidental spills and discharges to the receiving sewers. Such curbing should be sufficient to hold
150% of the total process area tank volume. All floor drains found within the containment area must be
plugged and sealed. Spill trough and sumps within process areas must discharge to appropriate pretreatment
tanks. Secondary containment should be provided for storage tanks which may be serviced by commercial
haulers and for chemical storage areas.
7. An adequate sampling vault or manhole must be provided in an accessible place for municipal treatment plant
personnel to obtain samples and flow measurement data. The complexity of the vault will vary with the
sampling requirements the Township determines necessary to protect the treatment plant and receiving stream.
Should the Township desire continual flow recording and long duration, 24-hour composite sampling, then a
more complex manhole would be mandatory – complete with 110 volt AC. Samples collected shall be divided
between the industry and Township for analysis if so desired by the industry. The sampling vault shall be
located so as to give access by the Township personnel without entering the industrial property.
Industrial cooling water containing such pollutants as insoluble oils and grease or other suspended solids shall
be pretreated for removal of the pollutants and then discharged to a Michigan Department of Natural
Resources approved drainage outlet.
Agents of the Township, Marquette County Health Department, Michigan Department of Natural Resources or
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, shall have the right to enter all properties for the purpose of inspecting,
measuring, sampling, and testing the wastewater discharge and copying applicable pretreatment records.
SECTION 10. Flow Determination.
To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the Administrator may use one of the following methods:
a. The amount of water supplied to the premises by the Township or a private water company as shown upon the
water meter if the premises are metered, or
b. If such premises are supplied with river water or water from private water company as shown upon the water
meter if the premises are metered, or
c. If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of such a nature that the water supplied to
the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of sewage
discharged into the wastewater system made by the Administrator from the water, gas, or electric supply, or
d. The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the sewer system as determined by measurements and samples
taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system at his/her own expense in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the Administrator pursuant to Section 1, or
e. A figure determined by the Administrator by any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable
method.
Revised July 1, 1991
29
SECTION 11. Excessive Discharges.
No User shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant – specific limitation developed by the Township or
State. Dilution may be an acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in Section 8 upon
prior written approval of the Administrator.
SECTION 12. Accidental Discharge.
When required by the Administrator or otherwise, a User shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials by other substances regulated by this Ordinance. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge or
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or Users own cost and expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Township for
review, and shall be approved by the Township before construction of the facility. All required Users shall
complete such a plan within 180 days after the adoption of this Ordinance. If required by the Township, a User
who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Township.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the Industrial User from the
responsibility to modify the User’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Ordinance. In the case of
an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the User to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the
incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.
a. Written Notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the User shall submit to the
Administrator a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the User to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the User of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability civil or criminal which may be imposed under this Ordinance or other applicable law.
b. Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posed on the User’s bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
SECTION 13. Special Agreements.
No statement contained in this Ordinance shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Township and any person, firm or corporation whereby waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the Township, subject to payment therefore by the person, firm or corporation, provided such waste
will not damage the sanitary sewer or storm sewer or sewage treatment plant or the receiving waters.
SECTION 14. Right of Revision.
The township reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges
to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Part 1, Section 2
of this Ordinance.
Revised July 1, 1991
30
SECTION 15. Disposal at POTW Treatment Plant.
Waste from individual sewage systems may be accepted at the POTW Treatment Plant with permission of the
Superintendent. No waste or wastes described in Section 8 of this Ordinance, shall be disposed of at the POTW
Treatment Plant.
SECTION 16. Fees for Pretreatment.
16.1 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Section 16 to provide for the recovery of costs from Users of the POTW for the
implementation of the pretreatment program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in
the Township’s Schedule of Charges and Fees, which is identified as Schedule A of this Ordinance.
16.2 Charges and Fees.
Charges and fees are established to fully fund the operation, maintenance and improvements of the system. These
charges and fees are:
a. For reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program.
b. For monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
c. For reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
d. For filing appeals.
e. For consistent removal by the Township of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards.
f. And others as the Township may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
g. Additional surcharges may be made by the Township to compensate the Township for the cost of treatment of
pollutant loadings not normally treated at or in excess of those normally treated by the POTW.
h. There shall be additional charges for laboratory testing of wastewater. The laboratory charge shall be for the
cost thereof and will be determined for each Industrial User.
The charges and fees for the services provided by the system shall be levied upon any User which may have any
sewer connections with the POTW and which discharges industrial waste to the POTW or any part thereof. Such
charges shall be based upon the quantity and quality of industrial wastewater produced or generated.
SECTION 17. Protection from Damage.
No unauthorized person shall enter or maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works.
The Township shall not be responsible for interruptions of service due to natural calamities, equipment failures, or
actions of the system Users. It shall be the responsibility of the customer that all connected equipment remain in
good working order so as not to cause disruption of service of any sewer or treatment plant equipment.
SECTION 18. Power and Authority of Inspectors.
The Administrator and other duly authorized employees of the Township acting as his duly authorized agent,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon such properties as may be necessary
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with provisions of
this Ordinance.
Revised July 1, 1991
31
SECTION 19. Orders.
If the Administrator determines that a User has violated any provision of this Ordinance, the Administrator may
issue an order to take action deemed appropriate under the circumstances, including but not limited to the
following:
19.1 Immediate Cease and Desist Order.
The Superintendent may issue an Order to Cease and Desist from discharging any wastewater, incompatible
pollutant, or illegal discharge. Such order shall have immediate effect where the actual or threatened discharge of
pollutants to the system presents, or may present, imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, or causes interference with the operation of the public system or treatment plant. If
action is not taken immediately to correct illegal discharge, the Administrator will implement whatever action is
necessary to halt said discharge. Any penalties, fines, expenses or losses incurred as applicable will be assessed
through provisions of the Section entitled “User Charge System”.
19.2 Order to Cease Discharge Within a Time Certain.
In cases other than those defined above, the Administrator may issue an Order to Show Cause why an Order to
Cease and Desist by a certain time and date should not be used. The proposed time for remedial action shall be
specified in the Order to Show Cause. Such order may also contain such conditions deemed appropriate by the
Administrator.
19.3 Order to Effect Pretreatment.
The Administrator may issue an Order to Show Cause why a User should not be required to pretreat in accordance
with this Section.
a. Any User subject to an order to pretreat shall prepare a plan to effect and achieve the pretreatment of its
wastewater so that the same shall comply with the requirement of this Section. Such plan shall be submitted to
the Administrator within a reasonable period specified in the pretreatment order. The plan shall be prepared in
accordance with good engineering practice and shall state whether construction is necessary as well as identify
the measure which may be implemented without necessitating construction. The plan shall contain a schedule
of compliance for the completion of each of the various phases necessary to implement full pretreatment, which
schedule shall be approved by an order of the Administrator.
b. A pretreatment plan shall include a schedule of compliance consisting of one or more remedial measures,
including enforceable timetables for a sequence of actions or operations leading to compliance with an effluent
standard, or other prohibition or standard.
c. The following steps or phases shall be included in the schedule of compliance where applicable and appropriate:
1. Retain a qualified engineer and/or consultant.
2. Obtain any engineering or scientific investigations or surveys deemed necessary.
3. Prepare and submit a preliminary plan to achieve pretreatment.
4. Prepare plans and specifications, working drawings, or other engineering or architectural documents which
may be necessary to effect pretreatment.
5. Establish a time to let any contract necessary for any construction.
6. Establish completion times for any construction necessary.
7. Establish a time limit to complete full pretreatment pursuant to the final order.
8. In the event a phase or unit of construction or implementation may be effected independently of another
phase or unit, establish separate timetables for such phase or unit.
Revised July 1, 1991
32
19.4 Order to Perform Affirmative Action.
The Administrator may also issue an Order requiring a User to perform an action required under this Ordinance or
any applicable regulation, and/or to submit samples; install sampling, metering, and monitoring equipment, submit
reports; and permit access for inspection, sampling, testing, monitoring and investigation.
An Order issued by the Administrator shall contain the facts and grounds for its issuance and the remedial action
ordered, together with the time within such action shall be taken. No such Order shall be deemed insufficient,
however, for inconsequential errors and omissions in the facts and grounds for the order. If any User seems the
content of the Order to contain insufficient information, it may request additional information from the
Administrator; however, no request shall extend any time limit or defer any payment, except as hereinafter set forth.
In the event noncompliance with an Order is due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the User, as
determined by the Township, such noncompliance shall not be in violation and such Order shall be modified to
take account of these factors.
An Order shall be subject to amendment, change or revocation, provided notice of such action is served upon the
User in the same manner as the original order and is subject to the same procedure for review and appeal.
SECTION 20. Private Sewage Disposal.
20.1 Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 4 of part 3, the building sewer shall be
connected to an approved private sewage disposal system.
20.2 Before commencement of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first apply to the Marquette
County Health Department for a soil evaluation test. The fee shall be determined by the Marquette County
Health Department, and shall be paid to the Marquette County Health Department. At completion of the
above soil evaluation test showing positive results, the property owner shall apply for a Permit for
Installation for the proposed wastewater system. The owner shall include plans, specifications and other
information as deemed necessary by the Marquette County Health Department. At the time the application
is filed, the fee determined by the Marquette County Health Department for the permit and inspection shall
be paid.
20.3 A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the Marquette County Health Department. The Marquette County Health
Department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Marquette County Health Department when the work is ready for
final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within
seven (7) days of the receipt of notice by the Marquette County Health Department. All persons receiving a
permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall provide the Administrator with copies of all final
approved inspection reports issued by the Marquette County Health Department.
20.4 The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the Marquette County Health Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
20.5 At such time as a public wastewater system becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater
disposal system as provided in Section 4 of Part 3, a direct connection shall be made to the public
wastewater system in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned for sanitary use and filled with a suitable material subject to
inspection by the Township and/or applicable County Health Department.
Revised July 1, 1991
33
20.6 The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all
times at no expense to the County or the Township.
20.7 No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that
may be imposed by any other agency having legal jurisdiction.
Revised July 1, 1991
34
PART FOUR: SYSTEM CHARGES AND RATES.
SECTION 1. User Charge System.
1.1 Established, to Whom Applicable, Basis for Computations.
Rates and charges for the use of the wastewater system of the Township are hereby established as set forth in
Schedule A of this Ordinance. Revision to the rates and charges may be made by action of the Township Board,
which may be enacted apart from the published ordinances as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenues in
meeting operation, maintenance and replacement costs, as well as debt service. Such charges and rates shall be
made against each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have any sewer connections with the wastewater
system of the Township, or which may otherwise discharge sewage or industrial waste, either directly or indirectly
into such system or any part thereof. Such charges shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon or
therein.
1.2 Amounts, Billings, Sewer Service Charges.
The rates and charges for service furnished by such system shall be levied upon each lot or parcel of land, building
or premises, having any sewer connection with such system, on the basis of the quantity of water used thereon or
therein as the same is measured therein used, or in the absence thereof, by such equitable method as shall be
determined by the Township Board, and shall be collected at the same time, and in the same manner as provided
for the payment of charges for water used, except in cases where the character of the sewage from manufacturing or
industrial plant, building or premises is such that unreasonable additional cost of treatment created thereby shall be
an additional charge over the regular rates hereinafter set forth; or the Township Board may, if it deems it advisable,
compel such manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises, to treat such sewage in such manner as shall be
specified by the Township before discharging such sewage into the sewage disposal system. Rates for all Users
obtaining all or part of their water supply from sources other than the Township water system may be determined
by gauging or metering the actual sewage entering the system or by metering the water used by them, in a manner
acceptable to the Township.
The rates to be billed for use of the System shall be as adopted by the Board.
1.3 Annual Audit.
The rates hereby fixed are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the expenses of operation, maintenance and
replacement of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. Such rates shall
be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts. An annual audit shall be
prepared. Based on said audit, rates for sewage services shall be reviewed annually and revised as necessary by the
Township Board to meet system expenses and to insure that all User classes pay their proportionate share of
operation, maintenance and equipment replacement cost.
1.4 No Free Service.
No free service shall be allowed for any User of the Township’s wastewater system.
1.5 Billing.
Billing for wastewater service shall be the Township’s responsibility. All water meters shall be read monthly and bill
rendered monthly.
Revised July 1, 1991
35
1.6 Service Fee for Nonpayment.
If payment is not received or satisfactory arrangements have not been made by the 20th day of the month, an
additional charge of 5% of the total unpaid balance shall be added.
1.7 Collection of Delinquent Accounts.
Unpaid charges for sewage disposal service furnished to any premises within the Township shall be a lien against
the premises. Enforcement of this lien shall be made pursuant to Township Ordinance and/or statue. This lien
remedy does not preclude any other remedy provided by law. Those premises outside the township that are served
by the Township wastewater system that have delinquent bills will be certified to their governmental unit for
collection as provided in the contract between the Township and the governmental unit.
1.7 Annual Notification.
All customers of the Township’s wastewater system will receive an annual notification, either printed on the bill or
enclosed in a separate letter, which will show the breakdown of the sewer bill into its components for operation,
maintenance and replacement and for debt service.
SECTION 2. Connection Permit Fee (Tap-In Fee) (Hook-Up Fee).
2.1 Single-Family Dwellings.
The connection charge for the single-family dwelling property owner connecting to the present system shall be a
sum established by the Township Board.
2.2 All Other Properties or Units.
The connection permit fee for all other property owners connecting to the system, including but not limited to,
multiple-family residential units, commercial and industrial units shall be as follows: Number of equivalent Users
derived from Equivalent User Factor Table multiplied by the single-family dwelling connection permit fee =
connection permit fee; provided, however, that the minimum connection permit fee shall not be less than the
single-family dwelling connection permit fee.
SECTION 3. Equivalent Factors.
3.1 The Township does hereby adopt a Table of Equivalent Use Factors as set forth in Schedule A. This Table
may be modified or amended from time to time by the Township Board.
3.2 Rules for Interpreting Table.
a. Annual Review. The equivalent units of Users having an equivalent unit factor of more than one shall be
reviewed by the Township at least once a year, unless the equivalent unit factor of such User is changed by the
Township Board prior to the commencement of the system’s fiscal year.
b. Annual Review of Industrial Users with Meters. Where the Industrial User has been required by this
Ordinance to install a meter in the absence of metered municipal water supply to register flow, the equivalent
unit factor for purposes of determining the service charge of such user shall be reviewed and adjusted yearly to
assure that the equivalent unit factor assigned said User is accurate.
Revised July 1, 1991
36
SECTION 4. Expansion or Change Charge.
There shall be paid on behalf of each non-single family premises connected to the system, a fee at time of any
change or expansion of use, for any change of use of any premises or expansion of use of any premises, the sum of
the single-family dwelling connection permit fee multiplied by the factors provided for in the equivalent factor table.
SECTION 5. Construction Permit Fees.
a. Review Fee. A fee equal to 2% of the estimated cost of the improvement will be submitted at the time of initial
plan submittal as outlined in Part Three, Section 1 of this Ordinance.
b. Inspection Fee. A fee as determined by the Township Board will be submitted prior to the issuance of a
construction permit by the Administrator.
SECTION 6. Service Charges.
These charges are set forth in Schedule A and will be billed periodically in accordance with this Ordinance and are
separate from, and in addition to the User charges. The specific charges will be established by the Township Board.
Revised July 1, 1991
37
PART FIVE: FINANCING OF THE SYSTEMS.
SECTION 1. Fiscal Year.
The Wastewater System shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year that coincides with the Township’s fiscal year.
SECTION 2. Receiving Fund.
There is hereby established a Marquette Wastewater System Receiving Fund into which all revenues of the system
after being set aside as collected, shall be deposited and shall be transferred from the Receiving Fund only in
accordance with Sections 3 and 4 of this part.
SECTION 3. All Other Funds.
The following five funds are hereby established which shall be funded by the Receiving Fund established in Section
2 in the manner and at all times specified in this section.
a. Operation and Maintenance Fund. Out of the revenues in the Receiving Fund there shall be first set aside at
least quarterly and paid into a depository account, designated OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND,
a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the current expenses of administration and operation of the
system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in
good repair and working order. If any revenues are borrowed from any of the mentioned funds in this
ordinance to pay any operation, maintenance and replacement charges an appropriate action will be taken to
prevent a reoccurrence.
b. Contract Payment Fund. There shall be established and maintained a depository account to be designated
CONTRACT PAYMENT FUND, which shall be used solely for the payment of the Township’s obligations to
the County of Marquette. There shall be deposited in said fund at least quarterly, after requirements of the
Operation and Maintenance Fund have been met, such sums as shall be necessary to pay said contractual
obligations when due. Should the revenues of the system prove insufficient for this purpose, such revenues
may be supplemented by other funds of the Township legally available for such purpose.
c. Replacement Fund. There shall next be established and maintained a depository account, designated
REPLACEMENT FUND, which shall be solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacements to
the system if needed. There shall be set aside into the fund, after provision has been made for the Operation
and Maintenance Fund and the Contract Payment Fund, such revenues as the Township Board shall deem
necessary for this purpose.
d. Improvement Fund. There shall next be established and maintained an IMPROVEMENT FUND for the
purpose of making improvements, extensions and enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited into
said fund, after providing for the foregoing funds, such revenues as the Township Board shall determine.
e. Surplus Moneys. Money remaining in the Receiving Fund as the end of any operating year, after full
satisfaction of the requirements of the foregoing funds, may, at the option of the Township Board, be
transferred to the Improvement Fund or used in connection with any other project of the Township reasonable
related to purposes of this system.
In the event the moneys in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the
Operation and Maintenance Fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the system, except sums in the
Contract Payment Fund derived from tax levies and special assessment, shall be transferred to the Operation and
Maintenance Fund to the extent of any deficit therein.
Revised July 1, 1991
38
SECTION 4. Deposit/Investments.
All monies in all funds established in this part shall be kept in a depository account or accounts in an authorized
banking institution. Completed records of the exact amounts in each fund and of all deposits, transfers, and
investments shall be kept and a report shall be made to the Township Board at least quarterly or at the Board’s
request.
Moneys in any fund or account established by the provisions of this Ordinance may be invested in obligations
provided in Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. In the event such investments are made, the
securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund
or funds from which such purchase was made. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the
fund from which said investments were made.
Revised July 1, 1991
39
PART SIX: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, PUBLICATIONS,
SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE.
SECTION 1. Conflicting Ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any provision of the Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 2. Severability.
The various parts, sections and clauses of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 3. Amendment.
This Ordinance may be amended by the Board from time to time by the same ordinance adoption procedure
followed in the adoption of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. Publication.
Within thirty days after the adoption of this Ordinance, this Ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of
general circulation in Marquette Township.
SECTION 5. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall become effective on July 1, 1991.
Revised July 1, 1991
40
ADOPTED DECEMBER 19, 2017 AND
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2018 BILLING
WASTEWATER SCHEDULE A
Charges, Rates, Fees, and Penalties
I. USER CHARGES
A. Monthly Fixed Service Charge:
Meter size Service Charge
Unverified, 5/8 inch, 3/4 inch $9.00
1 inch $22.50
1-1/2 inch $45.00
2 inch $72.00
3 inch $144.00
4 inch $225.00
6 inch $450.00
8 inch $990.00
B. Volume Rate:
$11.83 per thousand gallons
C. Debt Retirement:
Debt Retirement
Wastewater Debt Retirement
Meter Size Debt Service Charge
Unverified, 5/8 inch, 3/4 inch $6.60
1 inch $16.50
1-1/2 inch $33.00
2 inch $52.80
3 inch $105.60
4 inch $165.00
6 inch $330.00
8 inch $726.00
II. CONNECTION FEE
A. Tap-In Fee:
1. Single Family Dwelling:
a. With Prepaid Tap $ 500.00
b. Without Prepaid Tap $ 5,000.00
Revised July 1, 1991
41
2. All Other Properties:
a. With Prepaid Tap:
$500.00 for first factor.
$200.00 for each factor thereinafter.
b. Without Prepaid Tap:
$5,000.00 for first factor.
$200.00 for each factor thereinafter.
Equivalent Use Factor Table:
OCCUPATION USE UNITS UNIT FACTOR
Single Family Residence 1.0 Per Residence
Auto Dealers – New and/or
Used
2.0
Per premise plus 0.25 per 1,000 sq. ft.
of building, including service area
Auto Repair/Collision 2.0
Per premise plus 0.25 per 1,000 ft. of
building, including service area.
Auto Wash (Coin Operated
Do-It-Yourself 10 gal. or Less
Per Car)
2.0 Per stall.
Auto Wash (Mechanical –
Over 10 gal. Per Car – Not
Recycled)
20.0
Per stall or production line, including
approach and drying time.
Auto Wash (Mechanical –
Over 10 gal. Per Car –
Recycled
10.0
Per stall or production line, including
approach and drying time.
Barber Shop 2.0 Per shop plus 0.1 per chair.
Bar 8.0
First 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1.0 each 1,000
sq. ft. over the first 1,000 sq. ft.
Beauty Shop 2.0 Per shop plus 0.1 per booth
Bowling Alley (No Bar) 2.0 Per premise plus 0.2 per alley.
Churches 0.50 Per 1,000 sq. ft. minimum 1 unit.
Cleaners (Cleaning & Pressing
Facilities)
2.0 Per premise plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Clinics (Medical or Dental) 2.0 Per premise plus 2.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Convalescent or Boarding 2.0 Per premise plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Revised July 1, 1991
42
Homes
Convents 2.0 Per premise plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Country Clubs & Athletic
Clubs
2.0
Per 1,000 sq. ft. of clubhouse plus
restaurant & bar.
Drug Stores 2.0 Per premise plus 1,000 sq. ft.
Factories (For Sanitary Wastes
Only)
1.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Funeral Home 2.0
Per 1,000 sq. ft., plus residence to be
computed separately.
Grocery Stores &
Supermarkets
2.0 Per premise plus 0.8 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Hospitals 2.2 Per bed.
Hotels and Motels 0.50 Per bedroom plus restaurant & bar.
Laundry (Self-Serve) 2.0 Per premise plus 3.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Two Family Residential 2.0 Per unit.
Mobile Homes (Free Standing) 2.0 Per unit.
Mobile Homes (Parks &
Subdivisions)
2.0
Year round – per pad or site at indirect
connection rate plus laundry
community buildings and office to be
computed separately per schedule.
Mobile Homes (Seasonal) 1.0 Per paid or site.
Multiple Family residence
Duplex or Row Homes
2.0 Per dwelling unit.
Apartments 2.0 Per dwelling unit.
Fraternity or Sorority House 2.0 Per unit dwelling.
Professional Office 1.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft. – Minimum One (1)
Public Institutions 1.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Revised July 1, 1991
43
Restaurant (Meals Only) 5.0
Per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq.
ft., after first 1,000 sq. ft.
Schools 2.0 Per classroom.
Service Stations 0.50
Per pump plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
building area.
Snack Bars, Drive-In, Etc. 5.0
Per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq.
ft. over first 1,000 sq. ft.
Retail Stores (Other Than
Listed)
2.0 Per premises plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Theaters (Drive-In) 0.08 Per car space.
Theaters 0.04 Per seat.
Post Office 2.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Warehouse and Storage 0.2 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Veterinary Facility 2.0 Per facility plus 0.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Veterinary Facility with
Kennel
2.0 Per facility plus 0.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.
B. Expansion/Change Charge:
$100.00 for each factor.
III. CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE
A. Review Fee:
A fee equal to 2% of the estimated cost of improvements.
B. Inspection Fee:
Construction Cost Inspection Fee
$0 - $2,500 $150
$2,500 - $7,500 8% but not less than $300
$7,500 - $15,000 6% but not less than $600
$15,000 - $30,000 4% but not less than $900
Over $30,000 3% but not less than $1,200
Revised July 1, 1991
44
IV. SERVICE CHARGES/FEES
A. Wastewater Turn-Off:
1. During regular business hours, $40.00 for each turn-off.
2. During non-business hours, $65.00 for each turn-off.
B. Wastewater Turn-On:
1. During regular business hours, $40.00 for each turn-on.
2. During non-business hours, $65.00 for each turn-on.
V. DEPOSITS
No service shall be rendered to a premise until a deposit is made as security for payment of
charges. The interest rate earned on township general checking account will be applied as a credit
once a year, effective on deposits as of March 19, 2003. The security deposit charges are:
Single-Family Residential: $50.00
Other Charges: One month estimated bill for User Charge Fees.
VI. OTHER CHARGES/RATES/FEES/PENALTIES
A. Non-Sufficient Funds:
$30.00 for each returned check.
B. Special Billing Request:
$10.00 for each special billing procedure requested by customer.
C. Door Hanger Shut Off Notice:
$ 20.00
Revised July 1,1991
1
ORDINANCE 060491-2
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE WATER
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, EXPANSION AND
FINANCING OF THE WATER SYSTEM WITHIN THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF
MARQUETTE, FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND RATES THEREFORE, AND FOR
AMENDMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE, IN THE INTEREST OF THE HEALTH, SAFETY AND
WELFARE OF THE RESIDENTS OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE.
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF MARQUETTE ORDAINS:
PART ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SECTION 1. Authority.
This Ordinance is adopted in accordance with the powers vested in Marquette Township pursuant to the Revenue
Bond Act, Act 94 P.A. 1933, the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 P.A. 1978, and the general ordinance
powers of the Charter Township, MCLA 41.181 et. seq.
SECTION 2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to provide all applicable ordinance provisions regarding the water system in the
Charter Township of Marquette in the interests of the public health, safety, and welfare.
SECTION 3. Short Title.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Charter Township of Marquette Water Distribution System
Ordinance.
SECTION 4. Definitions.
1. Administrator is defined in Part Two, Section 2 of this Ordinance.
2. Backflow means water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminates entering a public water supply
system due to a reversal of flow.
3. Board means the elected governing body of the Charter Township of Marquette.
4. City means City of Marquette.
5. Commercial means any User classified as commercial under the Township Zoning Ordinance.
6. Contaminate means a physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter in water.
7. Cross Connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow
could occur.
Revised July 1,1991
2
8. Department means the Marquette County Department of Public Health.
9. Industrial means any User classified as industrial under the Township Zoning Ordinance.
10. Manager shall mean the Marquette Township Manager.
11. Design Standards shall mean the Ten State Standards and Township Public Works Department Standards.
12. Person means an individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, any governmental subdivision or
agency, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns.
13. Plans and Specifications shall mean a true description or representation of the water mains and appurtenances
thereof to be constructed, and shall include a location map and a legal description of the easements wherein the
water mains are to be constructed and a survey drawing prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the
location of the improvements.
14. Public Water System shall mean a system of pipes, conduits, fire hydrants and appurtenances owned,
operated, or controlled by the Township through which water is obtained and distributed.
15. State Drinking Water Standards means quality standards setting limits for contaminant levels or establishing
treatment techniques to meet state standards necessary to protect public health.
16. System means the Public Water System within the Charter Township of Marquette.
17. Township means the Charter Township of Marquette.
18. Township Utility Department Standards shall mean the Standard Water Main and Sanitary Sewer
Construction Specifications.
19. User means any person who is connected to the Township Water System.
20. User Charge means a charge levied on Users for the cost of operation and maintenance of the system including
the cost of replacement and/or improvement of the system and debt service.
Revised July 1,1991
3
PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION.
SECTION 1. Powers of the Board.
The Board shall determine or supervise all aspects of administration in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. The Board may employ or contract with such persons as it deems necessary to fulfill the needs or
duties arising from the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2. Administrator.
The Township Board shall appoint an Administrator to implement this Ordinance. Duties shall include the receipt
of plans and permit requests and the determination of permit grant or denial.
SECTION 3. Variances/Exceptions.
The Administrator shall administer and enforce all provisions of this Ordinance and shall not waive any provision
or make any exceptions to the requirements contained herein. If it is determined that a proposal fails to meet the
requirements of this Ordinance, the person making the proposal may request a variance from this Ordinance. All
variance requests shall be heard and determined by the Township Board. No variances may be granted which
would violate any provision of the Michigan Public Health Code or Safe Drinking Water Act or the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
SECTION 4. Variance Procedure.
In the event of a variance request, a public hearing shall be held by the Board to determine the merits of the
variance request. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the public
hearing. Notice shall contain the date, time and place of the meeting, a description of the property involved and of
the request. All decisions of the Board shall be final. The provisions in this section are subject to the provisions for
disconnection and emergency situations which shall have precedence over the variance procedure set out herein. A
request for variance shall not stay disconnection or other emergency measures undertaken by the Township.
Revised July 1,1991
4
PART THREE: SYSTEM CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS.
SECTION 1. Permits Required.
Before any Township permit may be issued or work commenced toward any alteration or modification of the
Public Water System, the person making the proposal shall obtain either written approval for the proposal from the
Administrator, or a written statement that the proposal has been reviewed by the Administrator and does not
require his approval under law.
There are hereby established two Township permits to be known as:
1. Water Connection Permit for tapping a building service line into the Public Water System.
2. Water Construction Permit for constructing extensions to the Public Water System.
SECTION 2. Water Construction Permit Requirements.
2.1 Design Standards are adopted by the Township Board to provide a reasonable and proper basis for the
design and construction of engineering improvements in Marquette Township. They are written for
engineers and applicants, and provide procedures and criteria for water system improvements.
Design Standards are minimum requirements for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety
and the general welfare of the Township. These standards are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any manner interfere with existing regulations or ordinances of the Township nor conflict with any statutes
of the State of Michigan or Marquette County ordinances except that these standards impose a greater
restriction than is provided by existing statues, laws, or regulations.
2.2 An application for a permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications for the work, a site plan, a
location map and a survey drawing. Plans and specifications shall conform to design standards. All plans
for system improvements, alterations or modifications and all site plans shall be submitted on 24-inch by
36-inch white prints having blue or black lines, and shall be neatly and accurately prepared and contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
a. Title block showing name and description of property; registered land surveyor or engineer drawn by:
Date, scale, etc.
b. North arrow.
c. Bench marks (USGS datum).
d. Engineer’s stamp or seal.
e. Existing contour lines.
f. Proposed contour lines.
g. Off-site elevations (100 feet on each side of parcel).
h. Existing utilities – proposed future utilities.
i. Street names and R.O.W. width.
j. Easements.
k. Lot numbers and dimensions of acreage or tract.
l. Stationing.
m. Names of adjacent plat or subdivisions.
n. Tie from nearest cross street or section corner.
o. Location of proposed building on property.
p. Sewer and water services (location, inverts, and size).
q. Location and elevations of ditches, culverts, and county drains.
Revised July 1,1991
5
2.3 Easements shall be prepared by the applicant and granted to the Township when required by the
Administrator. Minimum requirements are as follows:
a. All public utilities require easements.
b. Minimum width shall be 20 feet.
c. Utilities in easements shall be at least two (2) feet from side or rear lot lines.
d. Developments traversed by a water course or containing a water area shall provide a storm drain
easement or other means of access for public maintenance of flow.
e. Public walkway easements, not less than 10 feet wide, shall be provided and constructed where
requested.
f. Easements shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall include both a metes and bounds
description and a survey drawing.
2.4 As-built plans shall be submitted upon completion of the development and be certified by a licensed
engineer or land surveyor.
SECTION 3. Water Connection Permit.
3.1 Service Line. An applicant for water service shall furnish, lay and install at his expense all that portion of
the service not provided by the Township, subject to supervision and inspection by the Township. The fee
for such inspection is set forth in Part Five of this Ordinance.
3.2 Water Connection. No person shall, without first securing a permit from the Administrator, tap any water
main or distribution pipe of the water system, or insert therein any corporation cock, stop cock, or any other
fixture or appliance, or alter or disturb any service pipe, corporation stop, curb stop, gate valve, hydrant,
water meter or any other attachment of the system; nor install any water service pipe or connect or
disconnect any service pipe with the water mains or distribution pipes of the system, or with any other
service pipe connected with the system; nor make any repairs, additions to, or alteration of any service pipe
tap, stop kick, or any other attachment connected with any service pipe, or connect to the system after
having been disconnected.
3.3 Sub-connection. The owner or occupant of any building or premises entitled to use of water from the
system, shall not supply water to any other building, structure, or property, except upon written permission
from the Board.
3.4 Disconnection. Premises may be disconnected from the distribution pipes of the water system and the
supply of water withheld from such premises upon violation by the owner or occupant of any provision of
this Ordinance, violation of any provision of the Ordinance for wastewater or wastewater collection, or
violation of any rule or regulation of the Board. A disconnect fee shall be imposed as set forth in Part Five
of this Ordinance.
3.5 Turn-on Charge. Whenever water service for any premises has been turned off because of any violation,
water service shall not be turned on again until the owner or occupant shall have paid to the Township a
turn-on charge as set forth in Part Five of this Ordinance.
3.6 Reconnect and Voluntary Disconnect Fees. If a customer desires to voluntarily disconnect from the
water system, the customer shall pay a fee for a temporary shut off and also a fee for a turn-on. These fees
are set forth in Part Five of this Ordinance.
Revised July 1,1991
6
SECTION 4. Water Construction Permit.
4.1 The construction of any main which is designed or intended to serve a fire hydrant, sprinkler system, or one
or more separate buildings, dwellings or mobile homes, by connection to the public water system, shall not
be constructed by any person before filing with the Administrator the plans and specifications therefore,
and obtaining from the Administrator a permit for such construction.
Any person, or the agent of any person, applying for such a permit shall file with the Administrator an
application therefore on a form furnished by the Administrator giving:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of each contractor who will be involved in construction of
the improvement;
b. The correct names and addresses of all owners of land, and a legal description of the respective parcels
wherein the improvement is to be made;
c. Evidence that all permits as required by law have been or will be issued;
d. The plans and specification for the improvement;
e. The estimated cost of the work set forth in the plans as estimated by the engineer preparing the plan;
f. The appropriate fees as set forth in Part Five of this Ordinance;
g. Other information deemed necessary by the Administrator.
4.2 Submittal Requirements. All water main plans and profiles shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch
white prints having blue or black lines, and shall be neatly accurately prepared by a registered engineer and
contain, at a minimum, the following information:
a. Water main location and type.
b. Cover (minimum of 6 feet).
c. Bedding (Class “B” minimum).
d. Compaction of trenches across roadways, driveways, sidewalks, and parking lots (Class II granular
backfill at 95% compaction).
e. Hydrant locations.
f. Gate valve and well locations.
g. Existing utilities on profile, crossing proposed water main.
The applicant shall submit five (5) sets of final plans and specifications to the Administrator. The
Administrator will insure proper submittal to the Michigan Department of Public Health for its issuance of
a construction permit.
4.3 Design Standards. Water mains shall be designed according to Ten State Standards and Township Public
Works Department Standards.
SECTION 5. General Provisions – Water.
5.1 Opening Curb Valve. No person shall turn on the water from any main or distribution pipe into any
service pipe without a permit in writing from the Administrator.
Revised July 1,1991
7
5.2 Inspection. All service pipes and connections to the water system shall be inspected by the Administrator
before being covered or backfilled. No water service shall be turned on for any premises until inspection
and approval of the installation by the Administrator or his authorized representative.
5.3 Stoppage. The Township shall not be liable under any circumstances for any failure or deficiency in the
supply of water to any person.
5.4 Water Meters. The cost of repair for damage to a water meter installed upon any premises shall be
charged to the building owner or tenant. Water consumers shall not tamper with or remove a meter from
service, or interfere with the reading thereof by Township personnel.
5.5 Access to Premises. The Township shall have the right at all reasonable hours to enter upon premises
where water is furnished, to read meters or inspect pipes and fixtures connected with the water system, and
it shall have the right to require any defective pipes or fixtures to be repaired, removed or replaced, and any
person refusing or neglecting to make such repairs when so ordered within the time specified, shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Ordinance.
5.6 Water Use Restriction. The restrictions on the use of water for sprinkling lawns, gardens, swimming
pools, car washing and similar non-essential uses, and the hours of such may be prescribed from time to
time by the Administrator when conditions warrant. A notice of such restriction shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation. No water shall be used in violation of such determination.
5.7 Private Fire Protection Systems. The properties of manufacturing institution, lumber yards, warehouses,
elevators, stores, hotels, schools and other public buildings wishing to install large pipes with hydrant, hose
couplings, and/or sprinkler heads, to be used in case of fire, will be permitted to connect with the street
main at their own expense, upon application to the Administrator and under his direction and supervision.
5.8 Meter Installation and Account. Each separate meter installation shall be considered for purposes of the
rate schedules as a separate customer account.
5.9 Protection from Damage. No person shall maliciously, willfully, negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, tamper or interfere with the operation of any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the Public Water System.
5.10 Inspectors. The Administrator and other duly authorized employees of the Township bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
5.11 Fire Hydrants. No person shall place anything in, on, or around any public fire hydrant which is part of
the system. This section shall also prohibit any person from committing any act which will render a public
fire hydrant inaccessible, such as plowing or piling snow against, around, or over a public fire hydrant.
5.12 Introduction of Materials. No person shall introduce any material of any kind, whether solid, liquid, or
gaseous, into the Public Water System.
Revised July 1,1991
8
PART FOUR:
CROSS CONNECTIONS/INSPECTIONS/VIOLATIONS/PENALTIES
SECTION 1: Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Administrator to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the Public
Water System. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards shall be
established by the Administrator.
SECTION 2: Entry Into Premises.
The Administrator or his representatives shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by
a connection to the Public Water System for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems thereof for cross
connections. On request, the owner, the lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
Administrator any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal to
furnish such information regarding the service or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the
presence of a cross connection.
SECTION 3. Disconnection.
The Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any
property wherein any connection in violation of Public Act 399, 1976 or of this Ordinance exists, and to take such
other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public system.
Service to such property shall not be restored until the violation has been eliminated in compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. Contamination.
The potable water supply made available to properties served by the Public Water System shall be protected from
possible contamination as specified by this Ordinance and by the State Plumbing Code. Any water outlet which
could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in
a conspicuous manner as: WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING.
SECTION 5. State Plumbing Code.
This Ordinance does not supersede the State Plumbing Code but is supplemental to it.
SECTION 6. Cross Connection.
The Township adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of
Public Health, being R 325.431 and R 325.440 of the Michigan Administrative Code and said rules are incorporated
herein by reference and are made a part of this Ordinance.
SECTION 7. Penalties and Enforcement.
Any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall result in Township action to request that the violation be
discontinued or corrective measures be undertaken to cease violation, or the Township itself may take such action
as necessary to protect the integrity of the system and the public health. The Township may take whatever civil or
criminal action, or both, as it deems necessary to enforce this Ordinance including suit of damages. Any violation
of any provision of this Ordinance constitutes a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 a day for
Revised July 1,1991
9
each day in violation or confinement in the Marquette County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
SECTION 8. Violation Procedure.
Any person found to be violating any provision of Part Four of this Ordinance shall be served by the Township
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
Revised July 1,1991
10
PART FIVE: SYSTEM CHARGES AND RATES.
SECTION 1. Establishment of Rates and Charges.
The rates and charges established for Users of the Public Water System are based upon the Township’s best
estimate of the proportionate cost of providing the services to different types of Users. The Board shall review all
rates and charges at least once every two years to assure that all contractual payments and fund requirements shall
be met and that the rates and charges remain in proportion to the costs of providing services to different types of
Users of the system.
SECTION 2. Equivalent Use Factors.
2.1 The Township Does Hereby Adopt a Table of Equivalent Use Factors. This table may be modified
or amended from time to time by resolution of the Board. This table is located in Schedule A of this
Ordinance.
2.2 Rules for Interpreting Table.
a. The minimum equivalent use factor for a commercial or industrial User is 1.0 unit.
b. Equivalent units not covered by the Table of Equivalent Factors shall be established by resolution of the
Township Board.
c. Where multiple businesses exist at one location, the various businesses may be combined for
determining the equivalent units of such location, depending upon equivalent User formulas.
2.3 Revision or Modification of Equivalent Use Factors.
a. Annual Review of the Equivalent Units of Users Having an Equivalent Unit Factor of More
Than One. Users shall be reviewed by the Township at least once every two years, unless the
equivalent unit factor of such User is changed by resolution of the Board prior to the commencement of
the system’s fiscal year.
b. Annual Review of Industrial Users with Meters. Where the industrial User has been required by this
Ordinance to install a meter in the absence of metered municipal water supply to register flow, the
equivalent unit factor for purposes of determining the service charge of such User shall be reviewed and
adjusted yearly to assure that the equivalent unit factor assigned said User is accurate.
SECTION 3. System Fees, Charges and Rates.
3.1 Connection Permit Fee (Tap-in Fee).
a. Single-Family Dwellings. The connection charge for a single family dwelling connecting to the
system is set forth in Schedule A of this Ordinance.
b. All Other Properties or Units. The connection permit fee for all other property owners connecting to
the system, including but not limited to, single-family residential units with home occupancy privileges,
multiple-family residential units, commercial and industrial units shall be as follows: Number of
equivalent Users derived from Equivalent User Factor Table multiplied by the appropriate tap-in fee as
set forth by II A. (2) of Schedule A = connection permit fee provided, however, that the minimum
connection permit fee shall be same as the single-family dwelling connection permit fee.
Revised July 1,1991
11
3.2 Lateral Benefit Charge. A lateral benefit charge for property abutting or benefiting from the Public Water
System shall be paid for any premises making a direct connection to any public water line of the system.
The benefit charge is set forth on Schedule A of this Ordinance.
3.3 Expansion or Change Charge. There shall be paid on behalf of each premises connected to the system,
at time of any change or expansion of use, for any change of use of any non-single family residence
premises, the sum of the single-family dwelling connection permit fee multiplied by the appropriate factor
provided for in the equivalent Use Factor Table in Schedule A.
3.4 Construction Permit Fees.
a. Review Fee. A fee equal to 2% of the estimated cost of the improvement will be paid at the time of
initial plan submittal as outlined in Part Three, Sections 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 of this Ordinance.
b. Inspection Fee. The fee as set forth in Schedule A of this Ordinance will be paid prior to the issuance
of a construction permit by the Administrator.
3.5 Service Charges. Those charges set forth in Schedule A at subparagraph IV will be billed periodically in
accordance with this Ordinance and are separate from, and in addition to, the User charges. The specific
charge is set forth in Schedule A of this Ordinance.
3.6 Water Use Charges. There shall be charged to all premises connected to the system for water service a
monthly fixed service charge, based upon meter size and water consumption as set forth in Schedule A of
this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. Billing Procedure.
All billings shall be rendered monthly and shall be due on the 20th day of the month during the month the bills are
sent out. A 5% late payment charge shall be assessed for every bill paid after the due date.
SECTION 5. Enforcement and Property Liens.
All fees or charges which under the provisions of Section 21, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended
(The Revenue Bond Act of 1933) may be a lien on all premises served thereby are hereby declared to be a lien upon
all such premises served, and those charges delinquent for six (6) months or more shall be certified annually, on
November 15 of each year, by the Township Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer to the Township Tax Assessor,
whereupon the lien shall be entered upon the next tax roll by the Tax Assessor, against the premises to which the
services shall have been rendered, and the charges shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same
manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for the taxes.
In addition to the foregoing, the Township shall have the right to shut off water and/or sewer service to any
premises for which charges for water service are more than thirty (30) days delinquent, and any such service shut off
shall not be restored until all delinquent charges and penalties and a turn-on charge, as set forth in Schedule A, have
been paid. The enforcement of payment of delinquent water and sewer bills by shutting off service as hereinabove
provided shall be in addition to any other enforcement methods which the Township may have, shall be cumulative
thereto, and may be pursued by the Township in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies which the
Township may have to collect the debt or to require compliance with this Ordinance.
Revised July 1,1991
12
PART SIX: FINANCING OF THE SYSTEM.
SECTION 1: Fiscal Year.
The water system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year that coincides with the Township’s fiscal year.
SECTION 2. Receiving Fund.
There is hereby established a Marquette Township Water System Receiving Fund into which all revenues of the
system, after being set aside as collected, shall be deposited. Funds shall be deposited and shall be transferred from
the Receiving Fund only in accordance with Sections 3 and 4 of this part.
SECTION 3. All Other Funds.
The following five funds are hereby established which shall be funded by the Receiving Fund established in Section
2 in the manner and at all times specified in this Section.
a. Operation and Maintenance Fund.
Out of the revenues in the Receiving Fund there shall be first set aside at least quarterly and paid into a
depository account, designated OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUND, a sum sufficient to provide for
the payment of the current expenses of administration and operation of the system and such current expenses
for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. If any
revenues are borrowed from any of the mentioned funds in this Ordinance to pay any operation, maintenance
and replacement charges an appropriate action will be taken to prevent a reoccurrence.
b. Contract Payment Fund.
There shall be established and maintained a depository account to be designated CONTRACT PAYMENT
FUND, which shall be used solely for the payment of the Township’s obligations to the County of Marquette.
There shall be deposited in said fund at least quarterly, after requirements of the Operation and Maintenance
Fund have been met, such sums as shall be necessary to pay said contractual obligations when due. Should the
revenues of the system prove insufficient for this purpose, such revenues may be supplemented by any other
funds of the Township legally available for such purpose.
c. Replacement Fund.
There shall next be established and maintained a depository account, designated REPLACEMENT FUND,
which shall be used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacements to the system if needed.
There shall be set aside into the fund, after provision has been made for the Operation and Maintenance Fund
and the Contract Payment Fund, such revenues as the Board shall deem necessary for this purpose.
d. Improvement Fund.
There shall next be established and maintained an IMPROVEMENT FUND for the purpose of making
improvements, extensions and enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited into said fund, after
providing for the foregoing funds, such revenues as the Township Board shall determine.
Revised July 1,1991
13
e. Surplus Moneys.
Money remaining in the Receiving Fund at the end of any operating year, after full satisfaction of the
requirements of the foregoing funds, may, at the option of the Board, be transferred to the Improvements Fund
or used in connection with any other project of the Township reasonably related to purposes of this system.
In the event the monies in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the
Operation and Maintenance Fund, any monies or securities in other funds of the system, except sums in the
Contract Payment Fund derived from tax levies and special assessment, shall be transferred to the Operation
and Maintenance Fund to the extent of any deficit therein.
SECTION 4. Deposit/Investments.
All monies in all funds established in this Part shall be kept in a depository account or accounts in an authorized
banking institution. Complete records of the exact amounts in each fund and of all deposits, transfers, and
investments shall be kept and a report thereof shall be made to the Board at least quarterly, or at the Board’s
request.
Monies in any fund or account established by the provisions of this Ordinance may be invested in obligations
provided in Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. In the event such investments are made, the
securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund
or funds from which such purchase was made. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the
fund from which said investments were made.
Revised July 1,1991
14
PART SEVEN: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, PUBLICATIONS,
SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE.
SECTION 1. Conflicting Ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 2. Severability.
The various parts, sections, and clauses of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 3. Amendment.
This Ordinance may be amended by the Board from time to time by the same ordinance adoption procedure
followed in the adoption of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4. Publication.
Within thirty days after the adoption of this Ordinance, this Ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of
general circulation in Marquette Township.
SECTION 5. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall become effective on July 1, 1991.
Revised July 1,1991
15
ADOPTED DECEMBER 19, 2017 AND
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2018 BILLING
WATER SCHEDULE A
Charges, Rates, Fees, and Penalties
I. USER CHARGES
A. Monthly Fixed Service Charge:
Meter size Service Charge
Unverified, 5/8 inch, 3/4 inch $7.00
1 inch $17.50
1-1/2 inch $35.00
2 inch $56.00
3 inch $112.00
4 inch $175.00
6 inch $350.00
8 inch $770.00
B. Volume Rate:
$ 8.66/Thousand gallons.
C. Lawn Meter Monthly Service Charge:
Meter Size Service Charge
5/8 inch or 3/4 inch $2.00
1 inch $4.50
1-1/2 inch $9.00
2 inch $14.00
D. Debt Retirement:
Water Debt Retirement
Line Size Debt Service Charge
3/4 inch, 1 inch $15.00
1-1/2 inch $30.00
2 inch $60.00
4 inch $240.00
6 inch $525.00
8 inch $945.00
10 inch $1,470.00
Revised July 1,1991
16
II. CONNECTION FEE
A. Tap-In Fee:
1. Single Family Dwelling:
a. With Prepaid Tap $500.00
b. Without Prepaid Tap $3,000.00
2. All Other Properties:
a. With Prepaid Tap: $500.00 for first factor.
$200.00 for each factor thereinafter.
b. Without Prepaid Tap: $3,000.00 for first factor.
$200.00 for each factor thereinafter.
Revised July 1,1991
17
Equivalent Use Factor Table
OCCUPATION USE UNITS UNIT FACTOR
Single Family Residence 1.0 Per Residence
Auto Dealers – New and/or Used 2.0 Per premise plus 0.25 per 1,000 sq. ft. of building,
including service area
Auto Repair/Collision 2.0 Per premise plus 0.25 per 1,000 ft. of building, including
service area.
Auto Wash (Coin Operated Do-It-
Yourself 10 gal. Or Less Per Car)
2.0 Per stall.
Auto Wash (Mechanical - Over 10 Gal.
Per Car - Not Recycled)
20.0 Per stall or production line, including approach and
drying time.
Auto Wash (Mechanical - Over 10 Gal.
Per Car – Recycled)
10.0 Per stall or production line, including approach and
drying time.
Barber Shop 2.0 Per shop plus 0.1 per chair.
Bar 8.0 First 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1.0 each 1,000 sq. ft. over the first
1,000 sq. ft.
Beauty Shop 2.0 Per shop plus 0.1 per booth
Bowling Alley (No Bar) 2.0 Per premise plus 0.2 per alley.
Churches 0.50 Per 1,000 sq. ft. minimum 1 unit.
Cleaners (Cleaning & Pressing Facilities) 2.0 Per premise plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Clinics (Medical or Dental) 2.0 Per premise plus 2.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Convalescent or Boarding Homes 2.0 Per premise plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Convents 2.0 Per premise plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Country Clubs & Athletic Clubs 2.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft. of clubhouse plus restaurant & bar.
Drug Stores 2.0 Per premise plus 1,000 sq. ft.
Factories (For Sanitary Wastes Only) 1.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Revised July 1,1991
18
Funeral Home 2.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft., plus residence to be computed
separately.
Grocery Stores & Supermarkets 2.0 Per premise plus 0.8 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Hospitals 1.1 Per bed.
Hotels and Motels 0.50 Per bedroom plus restaurant & bar.
Laundry (Self-Serve) 2.0 Per premise plus 3.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Two Family Residential 2.0 Per unit.
Mobile Homes (Free Standing) 2.0 Per unit.
Mobile Homes (Parks & Subdivisions) 2.0 Year round - per pad or site at indirect connection rate
plus laundry community buildings and office to be
computed separately per schedule.
Mobile Homes (Seasonal) 1.0 Per paid or site.
Multiple Family Residence Duplex or
Row Homes
2.0 Per dwelling unit.
Apartments 2.0 Per dwelling unit.
Fraternity or Sorority House 2.0 Per unit dwelling.
Professional Office 1.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft. - Minimum One (1)
Public Institutions 1.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Restaurant (Meals Only) 5.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft., after first 1,000
sq. ft.
Schools 2.0 Per classroom.
Service Stations 0.50 Per pump plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. of building area.
Snack Bars, Drive-Ins, Etc. 5.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. over first 1,000
sq. ft.
Revised July 1,1991
19
OCCUPATION UNITS UNIT FACTOR
Retail Stores (Other Than Listed) 2.0 Per premises plus 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Theaters (Drive-In) 0.08 Per car space.
Theaters 0.04 Per seat.
Post Office 2.0 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Warehouse and Storage 0.2 Per 1,000 sq. ft.
Veterinary Facility 2.0 Per facility plus 0.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Veterinary Facility with Kennel 2.0 Per facility plus 0.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.
B. Lawn Meter Permit Fee:
Meter Size Permit Fee
5/8 inch or 3/4 inch $140.00
1 inch $260.00
1-1/2 inch $1,175.00
2 inch Disk $1,325.00
C. Meter Replacement Charge:
Meter Size Charge
5/8 inch or 3/4 inch $140.00
1 inch $260.00
1-1/2 inch $1,175.00
2 inch Disk $1,375.00
2 inch Compound $1850.00
3 inch Compound $2250.00
Revised July 1,1991
20
D. Lateral Benefit Charge:
Water: As used in this Ordinance, the term "Lateral benefit Charge" shall mean the cost of a six inch (6")
water main as determined on the most recent special assessment roll for construction at the time of
application, provided such cost has been established within the previous twelve (12) months; (if not within
the previous twelve (12) months, current cost shall be determined by the Township's engineering
consultants). The charge shall be determined by taking one-half the cost, as determined above, times the
assessable frontage of the property being served, as determined by the Township Assessor.
No Lateral Benefit Charge is applied to those connecting to any water main installed by the Downtown
Development Authority/Tax Incremental Financing District.
No Lateral Benefit Charge is applied to those connecting to any water main installed by the AB
Enterprises in Bishop Woods Subdivision No. 1.
No Benefit Charge is applied to those connecting to any water main installed in Bishop Woods
Subdivision No. 1 and No. 2.
No Lateral Benefit Charge is applied to any water main installed in Huron Woods Subdivision No. 1 and
No. 2.
E. Expansion/Change Charge:
$100.00 for each factor.
III. CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE
A. Review Fee:
A fee equal to 2% of the estimated cost of improvements as determined by the design engineer.
B. Inspection Fee:
Construction Cost Inspection Fee
$0 - $2,500 $150
$2,500 - $7,500 8% but not less than $300
$7,500 - $15,000 6% but not less than $600
$15,000 -$30,000 4% but not less than $900
Over $30,000 3% but not less than $1,200
Revised July 1,1991
21
IV. SERVICE CHARGES
A. Thawing Water Lines:
1. During regular business hours: $85.00 per hour
2. During non-business hours: $127.50 per hour
(There is a minimum charge of $115.00)
B. Water Service Turn-On:
1. During regular business hours: $40.00 each turn-on
2. During non-business hours: $65.00 each turn-on
C. Water Service Shut-Off (Disconnect Fee for Voluntary or Involuntary Disconnect):
1. During regular business hours: $40.00 each shut off
2. During non-business hours: $65.00 each shut-off
V. DEPOSITS
No service shall be rendered to a premise until a deposit is made as security for payment of charges.
The interest rate earned on township general checking account will be applied as a credit once a year,
effective on deposits as of March 19, 2003. The security deposit charges are:
Single Family Residential $40.00
Other Services: One month estimated bill for User Charge Fees.
VI. OTHER CHARGES/FEES/PENALTIES/RATES
A. Fire Protection:
1. Private:
Size of Connection Per Month
2 inch $10.00
3 inch $17.00
4 inch $27.00
6 inch $51.75
8 inch $92.00
10 inch $132.25
12 inch $184.00
2. Public: $20,000 per year
3. Hydrant Rental Fee: $51.75 per month or any portion thereof.
Revised July 1,1991
22
B. Non-sufficient funds:
$30.00 for each returned check.
C. Special Billing Request:
$10.00 for each special billing procedure requested by customer.
D. Door Hangar Shut Off Notice:
$ 20.00